
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12050/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th November 2019                        |On 18th November 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     MAW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M Biggs, Counsel instructed by Diplock
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT"), and no application is made before me, as this a
      protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
      and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies amongst others to all
      parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
      of court proceedings.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge NMK Lawrence promulgated on 27th August 2019.  The underlying
      decision that was the subject of the appeal before FtT was the
      decision of the respondent dated 6th November 2017 to refuse the
      appellant's claim for international protection.


   3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He arrived in the UK on
      14th November 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) student with leave to enter
      valid until 31st December 2011.  He remained in the UK unlawfully when
      his leave to enter expired, and in May 2016, he was arrested by police
      in Scotland on route to Northern Ireland.  On 29th June 2016 he
      claimed asylum.  The claim was refused for the reasons set out in the
      respondent's decision of 6 November 2017.


   4. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection
      is summarised at paragraphs [8] and [9] of the decision of FtT Judge
      Lawrence and it serves no purpose to repeat the claim in this
      decision.  The Judge referred to a number of documents relied upon by
      the appellant in support of his claim, and to a document verification
      report, relied upon by the respondent. The Judge also referred to the
      evidence of two witnesses that gave evidence before the Tribunal
      regarding the appellant's activities in the UK.  The Judge's findings
      and conclusions in respect of the claim for international protection
      are set out at paragraphs [10] to [42] of the decision.


   5. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant claims that the judge focused
      upon the FIR's, and the evidence regarding proceedings against the
      appellant in Bangladesh, but failed to make findings in relation to
      material matters, including the appellant's support for Jamaat-e-
      Islami, the level of his involvement, and the account relied upon by
      the appellant regarding the threats and harassment directed towards
      the appellant's family. Furthermore, the appellant claims that the
      judge failed to make any clear findings regarding the attacks upon the
      appellant by the Awami League in 2004 and 2009, and in respect of the
      appellant's sur place activities in the UK, all of which were relevant
      to a proper assessment of the risk upon return.


   6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated FtT Judge Macdonald on
      3rd October 2019.  In granting permission, the judge noted that while
      the judge did make a clear finding on the documents presented, it is
      arguable that further findings were required upon the matters set out
      in the grounds.


   7. Before me, Ms Cunha confirmed that having had the opportunity of
      considering the decision of the FtT Judge, it is accepted by the
      respondent that the FtT Judge erred in failing to make findings in
      relation to the core of the appellant's account, and that failure
      impacts upon the assessment of the risk upon return.


   8. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge, I am
      satisfied that the FtT Judge fell into a legal error in the appraisal
      of the evidence.  The Judge plainly focused upon the documents that
      were relied upon by the appellant and failed to make any proper
      findings regarding the core of the appellant's account.


   9. Ms Cunha concedes, rightly in my judgment, that in the circumstances,
      the decision of the FtT cannot stand.  She concedes that the decision
      of the FtT contains a material error of law and should be set aside.
      She accepts that none of the findings made by the FtT judge can be
      preserved, and the matter should be heard de-novo.


  10. As the Judge failed to adequately address the core of the appellant's
      claim, the matter will need to be heard afresh with no findings
      preserved.   I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
      appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered paragraph
      7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September
      2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and extent of
      any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  11. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  12. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge NMK Lawrence
      promulgated on 27th August 2019, is set aside.


  13. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


  14. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date          13th November 2019


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                13th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





