
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12962/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 18th June 2019                   |On: 21st June 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     HBN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     M , Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on  the  9th  July  1992.   He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Malik) to dismiss his appeal against a decision to refuse him leave  on
    protection grounds.

 2. The single ground of appeal in this appeal is that  the  Appellant  has
    been deprived of an opportunity to put his case before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and so has suffered a procedural unfairness. The position,  in
    short summary, is that when the appeal was called on before Judge Malik
    there was no appearance by the Appellant.    Having  satisfied  herself
    that the notice of hearing had been properly served, Judge Malik  heard
    submissions from Mr Sadiq who appeared on the  Appellant's  behalf.  Mr
    Sadiq  informed  the  Tribunal  that  he  had  been  receiving  regular
    instructions from the Appellant who had recently attended at his office
    and assured him that he would be  at  court.  Mr  Sadiq  had  tried  to
    contact the Appellant but to no avail.  He  found  his  absence  to  be
    "inexplicable".  Judge Malik proceeded in the Appellant's  absence  and
    dismissed the appeal, finding the account of Kurdish political activity
    to be contrived for the purpose of claiming asylum.

 3. The grounds assert that there was simply a  mix  up  on  the  day.  The
    Appellant had in fact been at court at the appointed time, but had  for
    whatever reason not 'signed in' at reception and not been  called  into
    court. This came to Mr Sadiq's attention as he left  the  building  for
    the day, and he banged into the Appellant on the way out.  Court  staff
    confirmed that the Appellant had been in the waiting  room  since  well
    before 10.00am.

 4. I am satisfied that it would be appropriate to  remit  this  matter  so
    that the appeal can be heard de novo in the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    the Appellant having an opportunity to give  his  evidence  on  matters
    crucial to his case.   As Mr Sadiq rightly observed, the Appellant  had
    until that point pursued his protection claim with diligence, and  this
    Tribunal  is  well  aware  that  Mr  Sadiq  is  a  very  competent  and
    experienced representative who would not intentionally leave his client
    sitting in reception for no good reason.  I find  that  the  procedural
    irregularity in this case is of the kind discussed in MM (unfairness; E
    & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC): that is to say that it is  nobody's
    fault, and certainly not that of the judge, but  fairness  nevertheless
    requires that the decision be set aside.




    Decisions

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error of law and it is set aside.

 6. The decision in the appeal will be remade following de novo hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal by a judge other than Judge Malik.

 7. This is a live protection claim. I therefore consider it appropriate to
    make an order for anonymity in the following terms:

 8. "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings"






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               18th June 2019
