
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12310/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Justice Centre            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2017                          |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     ab
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by GMIAU, Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This appeal relates to a protection claim. An anonymity direction  is
       therefore made.




    2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Alty sitting at Manchester whereby his protection
       claim and human rights claim had been dismissed.




    3. The Appellant's claim related to possession  of  a  book  called  "23
       Years" by Ali Dashti. It was a book banned in  Iran  and  related  to
       demystifying the prophet Mohammed and Islam. The author rejected  the
       notion that the prophet Mohammed was a religious or holy person.  The
       Appellant fled Iran when the authorities undertook a  search  of  his
       home and found the book. The Appellant said he had been in touch with
       his family in  Iran  since  he  fled  and  they  told  him  that  the
       authorities had returned to his home and had  threatened  his  father
       with arrest.




    4. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant's account  was  credible.
       The Judge noted the background evidence included a  report  from  the
       Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada which  stated  that  searches
       for banned books are no  longer  carried  out  in  Iran  due  to  the
       requirement to obtain a search warrant first. No warrant was provided
       in this case and indeed despite  subsequent  claimed  visits  by  the
       authorities, there was no documentary evidence  of  the  authorities'
       efforts to enter the property provided by the  Appellant.  The  Judge
       said although the difficulties in obtaining documentary  evidence  in
       asylum claims are manifest, adverse inferences  can  be  drawn  where
       documentary evidence can reasonably have been  expected  but  is  not
       provided.




    5. At paragraph 35 the Judge said after taking all matters into  account
       holistically  she  was  not  satisfied   that   the   Appellant   had
       substantiated his claim to be of interest to the Iranian  authorities
       due his connections to a political activist or ownership of the book,
       23 Years.




    6. In his submissions Mr  Schwenk  said  that  the  Judge's  credibility
       findings were unsafe. In effect, the Judge had made a mistake because
       the search warrant was nothing to do with a banned book, but  was  in
       respect of the missing judo instructor. It was during the search that
       they discovered the banned book. This was explained at  paragraph  36
       of the witness statement. The issue of seeing search warrants had not
       been raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter or during the  hearing.
       It was submitted that no adverse inference could be drawn. The search
       warrant was a  search  for  someone  else.  Secondly,  there  was  no
       evidence that the Iranian authorities are in the habit  of  providing
       copies of search warrants. It was an unsafe assumption to think  Iran
       operated the same way as the authorities did in the UK. The remaining
       grounds spoke for themselves.




    7. Mr Bates said that he had looked at the minutes of  the  hearing  and
       the Presenting Officer notes referred to whether there was an  arrest
       warrant, but the Judge had referred to a search warrant. In any event
       though, there was no supporting evidence or documentary  evidence  of
       the subsequent visits by the authorities to the Appellant's  home  in
       Iran. The Judge expected more supporting evidence. It was  a  rounded
       determination.  There wasn't any documentary evidence  so  the  Judge
       was entitled to have regard to that.  As  to  the  reference  to  the
       standard of proof and the reference to  "convince"  it  is  something
       commonly said and is still  engages  the  lower  standard  of  proof.
       Paragraph 31 needed to be read alongside the decision as a whole.  As
       the Rule 24 Response had indicated,  all  of  the  factors  had  been
       considered  in  the  round  by  the  Judge.  If  I  was  against  the
       submissions, then the matter ought to be remitted to the  First  Tier
       Tribunal for a hearing de novo.




    8. In my judgment, there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       decision. I have some sympathy with the  Judge  because  this  was  a
       relatively easy-to-make up claim about a banned book  but  there  was
       nothing to support the Appellant's claims. However,  the  Appellant's
       claim was as submitted by Mr Schwenk,  namely  that  the  authorities
       were searching for the judo  instructor  and  happened  to  find  the
       banned book in the Appellant's home. There would therefore  not  have
       been a search warrant as referred to in the background material which
       the Judge had referred to. Similarly, it was not safe to assume  that
       the authorities in Iran would have provided search warrant  documents
       for the subsequent visits that they made to the Appellant's  home  in
       Iran. Coupled with the fact that it does not appear that the issue of
       a search warrant was raised in the Respondent's  Reason  for  Refusal
       Letter nor clearly raised during the hearing means that it was unsafe
       for the Judge  to  conclude  the  failure  to  provide  corroborative
       evidence was fatal to the claim.




    9. I therefore conclude that there is a material error  of  law  in  the
       Judge's decision. There shall  be  a  re-hearing  at  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on all issues. None of the current findings shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision contains a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal on all issues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed. A Mahmood      23 12 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
