
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12621/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 April 2018                       |On 17th April 2018                  |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |F M                                               |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Joshi, of Solomon Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

 1. The issues in this appeal are:

    (i)    whether Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese (hereafter the
         "judge" unless otherwise indicated)  materially  erred  in  law  in
         reaching his conclusion that the  appellant's  evidence  about  the
         basis of her asylum claim was incredible. The grounds  contend,  in
         summary, that the judge  misapprehended  the  evidence,  overlooked
         relevant evidence, and otherwise erred in law in his assessment  of
         credibility; and


    (ii)   whether the judge materially erred in law in assessing the  risk
         of persecution following the appellant's return to Zimbabwe.


 2. The appellant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a
    decision of the respondent of 13 April 2017 to refuse her asylum claim.
    Her claim was also refused on humanitarian protection  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 3.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and (in relation  to  Article  3)  on  human  rights
    grounds. Article 8 of the ECHR was not argued before the judge.

 4. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on [ ] 1990.

Basis of asylum claim

 5. The appellant said that she was politically  involved  with  the  MDC-T
    party in Zimbabwe, having joined the party in  2013.  She  was  elected
    into the Youth Assembly as an Executive Committee Member in 2014.

 6. The appellant said that she participated in a nationwide  demonstration
    on 6 July 2016 in Mufakose. She was attacked by Zanu-PF supporters  and
    then handed over to the police. The police detained her for  one  week,
    during which period she was verbally assaulted and  tortured.  She  was
    then released and told to sign on every week at the police  station  in
    Marimba. On 2 September 2016, she was told that there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence and the case was closed.

 7. Subsequently, Zanu-PF supporters came to her house  on  three  separate
    occasions, the first time being in October before December 2016. On all
    three occasions she was not at home.

 8. The appellant was granted a visa to enter the UK on 14 November 2016 as
    a visitor until 14 may 2017. She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  8
    December 2016.

 9. On 27 December 2016, she received a message from her husband  informing
    her that Zanu-PF and the  police  had  gone  to  her  house.  She  also
    received a text message from her uncle informing her that  Zanu-PF  had
    returned looking for her in December 2016. Her husband fled Zimbabwe on
    30 December 2016 to South Africa leaving  their  son  behind  with  the
    appellant's maternal grandmother.

10. The appellant claimed to have been involved in  sur  place  activities,
    including attending MDC meetings in London and vigils. Her  photographs
    are on the Zimvigil Flickr website. She  says  her  surname  is  shown.
    There have  been  many  views  of  her  photographs.  Zanu-PF  and  the
    Zimbabwean authorities know what she looks like due to  her  activities
    in Zimbabwe.

11. The appellant submitted documentary evidence in support of  her  asylum
    claim, including a letter from the MDC in Zimbabwe and  two  membership
    cards, photographs of her attendance at Zimvigil vigils in  London  and
    evidence of her photographs on Flickr.

The judge's decision

12. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and an  uncle  in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. In relation to the membership cards (para 38), the judge noted that one
    was issued for the period 2013 and the other had expired because it had
    an expiry date of December 2016. He noted that one was a MDC  card  and
    not an MDC-T  card  which  he  considered  was  inconsistent  with  the
    appellant's evidence. He also considered it lacking in credibility that
    the appellant at her interview did not appear to know that her card had
    expired even though she claimed that she had paid her monthly fee.

14. In relation to the letter from the MDC (para 39), the judge  said  that
    the appellant had not provided proof of posting of the letter to her.

15. At para 41, the judge noted that the appellant had  not  mentioned  the
    text message  at  her  screening  interview.  He  did  not  accept  her
    explanation, that the reason for not mentioning  it  at  her  screening
    interview was that she was told at the interview to  keep  her  answers
    brief.

16. In relation to the photographs on Flickr (para 43), the judge said that
    the photographs do not have any name or details and that, in his  view,
    there was no evidence that the appellant would be identified  from  the
    photographs.

17. At para  43,  the  judge  said  that  he  did  not  find  credible  the
    appellant's evidence that  she  had  been  arrested  and  verbally  and
    physically abused in Zimbabwe because she had not mentioned this at her
    screening interview.

18. At para 44, the judge  said  that  he  did  not  find  the  appellant's
    evidence that she had worked with  a  local  MP  credible  because  she
    subsequently changed her evidence and said that he was not a  local  MP
    but a Councillor and she could not recall his full name. He  also  took
    into account the fact that, during the course of her interview, she was
    unable to name the person who founded the MDC or recite the  core  aims
    and values of the party.

19. In assessing the future risk of persecution, the judge  considered  the
    country guidance in CM (EM Country  guidance  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2013] UKUT 59. He found that the appellant did not have a profile such
    as would lead her to be on a list of targeted people or such  that  she
    would be recognised at the airport or be at real  risk  of  persecution
    thereafter.

20. The judge's reasoning is set out at paras 36-46 which read:

         "36.     I now refer to the objective evidence in this appeal.  The
             appellant provided objective material at pages 81-339 of their
             bundle. The appellant  at  pages  81-196  provides  background
             evidence which provides information on a variety of  political
             events leading up to the  recent  change  of  leader  in  that
             country. The suggestion from the reports is  that  there  will
             not be any changes in respect of the conduct of Zanu-PF.


         37.      The appellant at pages  197-214  provides  information  on
             Zimvigil which was launched in 2002 and provides a  forum  for
             people to meet every Saturday. The group have  made  it  clear
             that despite the change of leader  they  will  continue  until
             there is a democratic Zimbabwe. The appellant is named at page
             218 of the objective material as having attended a vigil it is
             the case of the appellant that the mention of her name in  the
             public domain puts  her  at  real  risk  if  she  were  to  be
             returned.  The  appellant  claims  also  that  based  on   the
             information provided at pages 227-235 that all the  Zimbabwean
             authorities  do  have  the  capacity   to   monitor   diaspora
             opposition in this country.


         38.       I  have  considered  all  of  the  subjective,  objective
             evidence and submissions and make the following findings. I do
             not find the appellant  credible  in  relation  to  his  [sic]
             membership of the MDC-T because  the  appellant  provided  two
             membership cards and  a  letter  from  the  MDC.  One  of  the
             membership cards is for the period 2013 and the other is dated
             with an expiry date of December 2016. The first card indicates
             membership of [sic] MDC and not  MDC-T  in  my  view  this  is
             inconsistent with the appellant [sic] claim that she has  been
             a member of MDC-T  since  2103.  It  was  also  noted  by  the
             respondent that the membership card did not have a start  date
             and the appellant at the interview did not  realise  that  the
             card had indeed expired even though the  appellant  maintained
             that she pays her monthly fee. There [sic]  difficulties  with
             the evidence of the appellant in that the documents do support
             the contention that she has been a member of MDC-T since  2013
             and she also should have been aware that the card had expired.
             Following on from [sic] I do not find it credible that Zanu-PF
             were looking for the appellant on 27 December  2016  when  she
             had a valid card as at the interview she thought that the card
             was valid.


         39.      I also find that the letter from the MDC does not  support
             the  appellant's  contention  that  she  has  had   continuous
             membership of the party because the letter does  not  indicate
             the date which the appellant joined the party. The letter does
             provide her national identification number. The appellant  has
             not been able to provide proof of posting of the letter to her
             and she indicated that this would be available at the  hearing
             of the appeal. The letter also predates the application of the
             appellant for asylum and it tends to support a view  that  she
             should not return to Zimbabwe. The appellant  however,  states
             that she had not yet made a decision whether she was going  to
             return. I considered the letter and the  membership  cards  in
             line with the principles enunciated in Tanveer Ahmed  2002  in
             that it is for the appellant to show that  any  documents  the
             appellant intends to rely on are reliable. I have  not  looked
             at the documents in isolation but alongside  the  totality  of
             the evidence.


         40.      I do not accept the appellant's claim  that  Zanu-PF  were
             indeed looking for her in March 2017 and that this was because
             of her having been active in the MDC where she held a position
             and that she had been wrongly associated  with  events  on  27
             March 2017 where MDC members had been attacked by  Zanu-PF  in
             Mbare.


         41.      I also find that the text messages sent to  the  appellant
             [sic] is not reliable for  the  following  reasons.  The  text
             messages are at pages D3 and D4 of the respondents bundle. The
             appellant claims that the authorities did not believe that she
             was in the UK and they were trying to instil fear in  her  and
             her family. The appellant however, did not  mention  the  text
             messages in her screening interview and I  did  not  find  her
             explanation that she was told at the  interview  to  keep  her
             answers brief plausible as she was given ample opportunity  to
             elaborate on her case. I find that the appellant has  provided
             the letter from MDC in order to bolster her asylum claim.


         42.      I also did not find the evidence of the appellant's  uncle
             to be plausible because she was provided with the  opportunity
             during the course of the screening interview and she  did  not
             do so. When the appellant was asked to explain at the  hearing
             she stated that her uncle was not  a  part  of  her  immediate
             family. The appellant's uncle's role forms a core part of  the
             appellant [sic] as she claims that it was he who told her that
             Zanu-PF had returned again looking for her.


         43.      I also find that the appellant became involved in the  MDC
             activities in this country  again  in  order  to  bolster  her
             asylum application. The  photographs  and  the  attendance  of
             vigils/meetings and protest etc  have  all  in  my  view  been
             obtained by the appellant in order to bolster her  application
             for asylum. The photographs have been uploaded on flicker, the
             pictures do not have any names or details and there is  in  my
             view no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  would  be
             identified  from  the  photos.  The  appellant  also  has  not
             persuaded me that the  authorities  would  be  monitoring  the
             activities on the website. I do not accept the evidence of the
             appellant that she would  face  charges  if  she  were  to  be
             returned to her country because the charge  sheet  shows  that
             the charges have been dropped. I do not find it plausible that
             the authorities based on the evidence would in  this  instance
             have renewed their interest in the appellant. I  also  do  not
             find that the appellant is credible in respect of her evidence
             that she was  arrested  and  verbally  and  physically  abused
             because she did not mention this at  her  screening  interview
             and this would have been the opportunity for her  to  describe
             the incident.


         44.      I also do not find it  credible  that  the  appellant  was
             working with a local MP. The  appellant  subsequently  changes
             her position  to  indicate  that  he  was  not  an  MP  but  a
             Councillor. This is compounded by the fact that she could  not
             recall his full name. I do not accept her explanation that the
             reason why she could not remember his full name is because she
             always referred to him by his surname. The appellant also  was
             not able during the course of the interview to name the person
             who found MDC or recite the core aims and values of the  party
             this in  my  view  further  damages  the  credibility  of  the
             appellant.


         45.      I considered the position in respect of risk on return and
             the case of CM (EM Country guidance  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG
             2013 UKUT 59  where it was stated that: "As a general  matter,
             there is significantly less politically motivated violence  in
             Zimbabwe, compared with the situation considered by the AIT in
             RN. In particular, the evidence  does  not  show  that,  as  a
             general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from  the
             United Kingdom,  having  no  significant  MDC  profile,  would
             result in  that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
             demonstrate loyalty to the Zanu-PF". The position is different
             for a returnee with no Zanu-PF connections who is returning to
             a rural part of the  country,  such  a  person  is  likely  to
             receive adverse  attention.  The  appellant  is  however  from
             Harare and not from the rural parts of  the  country.  It  was
             also  stated  a  returnee  to  Harare  is  unlikely  to   face
             significant difficulties if a person is returning to a low  or
             medium density area. The appellant does not in my view have  a
             [sic] such a high profile that would still lead her to  be  on
             the list of targeted people. I am also of the  view  that  the
             appellant does not have such a high profile  that  they  [sic]
             are  likely  to  recognised  at  the  airport.  The  objective
             evidence does not suggest that a person  with  no  significant
             MDC profile who is a failed asylum seeker would result in them
             being at risk on return at the airport.


         46.      The objective evidence provided by the appellant does show
             that Zimbabwe is still  going  through  a  period  of  turmoil
             politically, however, I am not of the view that the  appellant
             according to the objective [sic] could not  be  returned.  The
             appellant is named in one of the  articles  as  a  person  who
             attended an activity organised by the MDC in London  and  also
             that photographs  taken  at  some  of  the  events  have  been
             uploaded on to the internet. However, looking at the  totality
             of the subjective and  objective  evidence  the  appellant  is
             [sic] not shown that they [sic] have a fear of persecution  on
             the basis of their [sic] political opinion. I have  found  the
             core of the appellant's account not to be credible in  respect
             of their  [sic]  political  activities  in  this  country  and
             Zimbabwe. I also find that the appellant is a person who could
             relocate internally in their [sic] own country."


21. Although the judge refers to text messages (in the plural) at pages D3-
    D4 of the respondent's bundle, there is only one text message at  pages
    D3-D4.

The grounds and the appellant's skeleton argument

22. In relation to the judge's assessment of credibility, the  grounds  and
    the appellant's skeleton argument contend:

    (i)    The judge erred, at para 44, in holding  against  the  appellant
         that she could not name the person who founded the  MDC  or  recite
         the core aims and values of the party, in that, he failed  to  take
         into account that the background evidence shows that the person who
         founded both the MDC and the MDC-T are one  and  the  same  person,
         i.e. Morgan Tsangirai.


         It is contended that this error led the judge to take into  account
         against the appellant, at para 38, that "The first  card  indicates
         membership  of  [sic]  MDC  and  not  MDC-T  in  my  view  this  is
         inconsistent with the appellant claim [sic] that  she  has  been  a
         member of MDC-T since 2103."


    (ii)   The judge erred, at para 39, in holding  against  the  appellant
         that she had not provided the original proof of posting in relation
         to the letter from the MDC because the appellant had provided  such
         proof at the hearing before the judge.


    (iii)  The judge erred, at para 41, in holding  against  the  appellant
         that she had not mentioned at  her  screening  interview  the  text
         message from her uncle because the text message  was  in  existence
         before the screening interview and therefore would "evidently" have
         formed part of her claim.


    (iv)   The  judge  erred  at  para  42  in  his  consideration  of  the
         appellant's explanation as to why she had not mentioned  her  uncle
         at her screening interview. She had explained that this was because
         he was not part of her immediate family.


    (v)    In her skeleton argument, Ms Joshi argues that the  judge  erred
         in holding against the appellant the fact that one membership  card
         had expired. She says: "It is worth acknowledging  that  a  country
         going "through political turmoil" does not harbour activists  group
         [sic]  who  routinely  check  the  expiry  dates  of  its  member's
         membership card" and that membership  cards  alone  are  sufficient
         evidence of the appellant's involvement. It was "unduly harsh"  for
         the judge to place weight on the fact that the membership card  had
         expired.


    (v)    The skeleton argument also  argues,  inter  alia,  that  it  was
         "unduly harsh" for the judge to place weight on the fact  that  the
         appellant had not mentioned  the  text  message  at  her  screening
         interview or her arrest and verbal and physical abuse.


23. In relation to the assessment of the appellant's sur place  activities,
    the grounds contend that the judge had failed to properly  engage  with
    the appellant's evidence and/or erred as follows:

    (i)    The judge erred at para 46 when he said that the  appellant  "is
         named in one of the articles as a person who attended  an  activity
         organized by the MDC in London", whereas various news  articles  on
         the internet, at pages 215 to 226 of the appellant's  bundle,  link
         her specifically by name to Zimvigil. Furthermore, the publications
         indicate that the appellant was named over the  course  of  several
         dates as associated with Zimvigil.  At  para  15  of  her   witness
         statement, the appellant said that not only  were  her  photographs
         shown on the relevant Zimvigil website but a search of her forename
         and surname on the "Google" search engine throws up  results  which
         link her with Zimvigil. For example, in March 2017, May 2017,  July
         2017 and December 2017. The information in the public domain states
         that she arrived early at the vigils along with others  and  helped
         set up and pack at the end.


    (ii)   The judge erred at para 43 when he said that the photographs  of
         the appellant on Flickr do not have any names or details  and  that
         there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  would  be
         identified from the photographs.


    (iii)  The judge  further  erred,  at  para  43,  in  saying  that  the
         appellant had not persuaded  him  that  the  authorities  would  be
         monitoring the activities on the website by failing to engage  with
         the relevant background evidence.


    (iv)   At para 15 of her statement, the appellant said that a search on
         Zimvigil Flickr would show photographs of her and that, as soon  as
         one clicks on the "About" section of the Zimvigil  Flickr  website,
         she  is  shown  wearing  a  black  T-shirt  displaying  the   word:
         "#Tajamuka" with the Zimbabwean flag  tied  round  her  waist.  The
         "About" section shows the website has had 10.4  million  views  and
         her photograph of 8 July 2017 had had 139 views as at the  date  of
         her witness statement in relation to just one  of  her  photographs
         pictures. The photograph shows her surname below it.  It  would  be
         known by reference to her photographs who she is. There are several
         other photographs of her on the Zimvigil Flickr  website.  ZANU(PF)
         youths and the authorities would know what she looks  like  because
         she is known in her area.


    (v)    Pages D6-D10 are minutes of two MDC  meetings  in  London,  held
         (respectively) on 1 April 2017 and 3 June 2017, that the  appellant
         attended. She is named by her first name and  her  surname  in  the
         list of those present.


24. In his assessment of the future risk, the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the background evidence concerning Zimvigil which  has  been  a
    critic  of  the  Zimbabwean  regime  both  during  Mugabe's  time   and
    currently. He also erred in failing to apply YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008]
    EWCA Civ 360 and BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).

Submissions

25. In relation to the expired membership card,  Ms  Joshi  submitted  that
    activists in Zimbabwe would not focus on  the  expiry  dates  of  their
    membership cards, given the  political  turmoil.  The  judge  therefore
    placed weight on  an  immaterial  matter.  Furthermore,  the  appellant
    thought that her membership card was valid.

26. I noted that the judge recorded, in his Record of Proceedings  ("ROP"),
    that the original of the proof of posting in relation to the MDC letter
    was produced at the hearing. It was common ground before  me  that  the
    appellant's bundle contained a copy.

27. Ms Joshi submitted that it was unduly harsh for the judge to take  into
    account the appellant's failure to mention  the  arrest  and  the  text
    message at her screening interview.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence of her arrest and  abuse  at  question
    159 of her substantive interview.

28. I was taken to the photographs on Flickr in the appellant's bundle  and
    shown the appellant's name (pages 52 and 53 of the bundle).

29. In making his finding,  at  para  43,  that  he  did  not  accept  that
    appellant would face charges if returned to Zimbabwe, the judge  failed
    to take into account that the appellant had already come to the adverse
    attention of the authorities in Zimbabwe.

30. I was taken to pages D6, D9 and D10 of the respondent's  bundle.  These
    are minutes of two MDC meetings in London. The  list  of  attendees  at
    pages D6 and D9 include the appellant. The record  of  the  meeting  at
    page  D10  states  that  the  appellant  had  suggested  the  idea   of
    campaigning by spreading a message (i.e. a message  of  Vice  President
    Khupe  about  devolution  of  power)  to  rural  areas  through  flying
    helicopters distributing 'flyers'.

31. In relation to the future  risk,  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's role in sur place activities and the role she had played in
    Zimbabwe.

32. I heard briefly from Mr Kotas who made helpful submissions which I will
    deal with in the course of my assessment below.

Assessment

33. The judge noted the guidance in the country guidance case of  CM  which
    said that a person with no significant MDC  profile  was  not  at  real
    risk. Accordingly, the key issue  before  the  judge  was  whether  the
    profile that the appellant had (if any) in relation  to  her  political
    activities was such as to expose her to a real risk of  persecution  in
    Zimbabwe, i.e. whether she had a significant MDC profile. It  is  clear
    that he found that the appellant did not have an MDC  profile  such  as
    would place her at real risk of persecution.

34. In relation to  the  appellant's  account  of  the  alleged  events  in
    Zimbabwe, I do not accept Ms Joshi's  submission  that  the  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant was a member of the MDC-T. In this  regard,
    Ms Joshi relied upon the  sentence  in  para  38  that  reads:  "...the
    documents do support the contention that she has been a member of MDC-T
    since 2013..". However, in my view, the judge was merely  recording  at
    this point what the documents state and not what finding he was making.
    When the judge's decision is read as a whole, it is clear that  he  did
    not accept that she was a member of the MDC-T in Zimbabwe or  that  she
    was arrested and detained or that Zanu-PF members visited her  home  at
    all.

35. In relation to the appellant's sur place activities, the  judge  found,
    inter alia, that there  was  nothing  to  link  the  appellant  to  the
    photographs on Flickr as, in his view, there was no name or any details
    on the photographs and nothing to suggest that the appellant  would  be
    identified from the photographs.

36. Having explained what the  judge  found,  findings  which  are  plainly
    implicit from his reasoning, I shall turn to consider  the  appellant's
    submissions  that  he  erred  in  his  reasoning,  beginning  with  his
    reasoning in relation to the appellant's  evidence  about  her  alleged
    political activities in Zimbabwe  and  the  events  which  she  alleged
    happened in Zimbabwe.

37. I accept that the judge erred in law by overlooking  relevant  evidence
    when he said that the appellant had not provided the  original  of  the
    proof of posting in relation to the MDC letter. He recorded in his  ROP
    that the original was shown in court. However,  the  issue  is  whether
    this was a material error. I will return to this after considering  the
    remainder of the challenges to the judge's assessment of credibility.

38. The judge did not consider it  credible  that  the  appellant  did  not
    mention at her screening interview that she had been arrested, detained
    and abused in detention and that she did not mention the text  message.
    He considered her explanation, that she was told to  keep  her  answers
    brief, but he did not accept the explanation.

39. It is correct that the appellant was told at her  screening  interview:
    "Please briefly explain all of the reasons why  you  cannot  return  to
    your home country" (question 4.1). A person is  not  expected  to  give
    every minute detail but one can reasonably be expected  to  mention  an
    important aspect of one's case. On the  appellant's  account,  she  was
    only ever arrested and detained once. She said she  had  been  tortured
    during that detention (question 159 of her substantive  interview).  On
    her  account,  the  text  message  from  her  uncle  showed  that   the
    authorities were looking for her in Zimbabwe.

40. In my view, these alleged events were the core of her case in  relation
    to what she said had happened in Zimbabwe and why  she  claimed  asylum
    when she did. In my judgment, the judge was entitled, on any reasonable
    view, to take the view that the appellant could reasonably be  expected
    to have mentioned her alleged arrest and detention and the alleged text
    message at her screening interview and that the fact that she  had  not
    done so materially undermined her credibility.  He  plainly  took  into
    account her explanation. He was entitled to reject her explanation.  Ms
    Joshi submitted that it was "unduly harsh" for the  judge  to  hold  it
    against the appellant that she had not mentioned these matters  at  her
    screening interview. In my view, Ms Joshi is merely trying to  re-argue
    the appellant's case in making this submission.

41. Ms Joshi submitted that the judge had failed to take into  account  the
    fact  that  the  appellant  had  mentioned  at  question  159  of   her
    substantive interview that she had been arrested, detained and tortured
    in Zimbabwe in reaching his adverse view of  her  credibility  on  this
    aspect of her evidence. This submission is without substance. The point
    the judge was making was that the appellant's failure  to  mention  the
    arrest, detention and ill-treatment at  her  screening  interview  goes
    against her. In other words, late disclosure, i.e. at  her  substantive
    interview, went against her. This being the point, it is of no help  to
    say that the judge failed to take into account her answer  to  question
    159 of her substantive interview. In any event, there is no  reason  to
    suppose that the judge was not aware that the appellant  had  mentioned
    her arrest, detention and ill-treatment at her  substantive  interview.
    It is plain that  he  had  taken  into  account  her  evidence  at  her
    substantive interview, since he  mentioned  her  substantive  interview
    several times (paras 9, 34, twice at para 38 and para 44).

42. There is no substance in the contention in the grounds  that  the  mere
    fact that the text message was in existence  as  at  the  date  of  the
    appellant's screening interview means that it was "evidently"  part  of
    her claim. This simply ignores the point the judge made, i.e. that  her
    failure to mention the text message at  her  screening  interview  went
    against her credibility.

43. The appellant's explanation that she had not mentioned her uncle at her
    screening interview because he was not part  of  her  immediate  family
    makes no sense in the context of the credibility issue relied  upon  by
    the judge, i.e. that her failure  to  mention  the  text  message  goes
    against her. The judge was entitled to reject  that  explanation  (para
    42).

44. In the appellant's skeleton argument, it is said that the  judge  erred
    in holding against the appellant the fact that her membership card  had
    expired because  "It  is  worth  acknowledging  that  a  country  going
    "through political turmoil" does not harbour activists group [sic]  who
    routinely check the expiry dates of its member's membership  card"  and
    it was "unduly harsh" for the judge to place weight on  the  fact  that
    the membership card had expired. These arguments   amount  to  no  more
    than an attempt to re-argue the evidence.

45. In my judgment, the judge was fully entitled to reject the  appellant's
    account of her alleged activities and experiences in Zimbabwe, for  the
    reasons he gave. The appellant  had  not  mentioned  at  her  screening
    interview the core events, i.e. that she had  been  arrested,  detained
    and tortured and that she had received a text message telling her  that
    the Zimbabwean authorities were looking for her. In addition, the judge
    was entitled to consider that it went against her credibility that  her
    evidence that she had worked with a local MP was inconsistent with  her
    subsequent evidence that he was a Councillor and  that  she  could  not
    remember his full name (para 44).

46. Before dealing with the challenge to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's sur place activities, it is  important  to  note  that  the
    judge's summary of the appellant's evidence at paras 20-30 and 36-37 is
    very detailed, as Mr Kotas submitted.  The  appellant's  attendance  at
    Zimvigil demonstrations and her MDC activities in London are  mentioned
    more than once, i.e. at paras 22, 24, 27, 28, 29 and 37. He  summarised
    the submissions of the appellant's representative at paras 33-35, again
    mentioning, at para 35, that her photographs are on Flickr.

47. I therefore agree with Mr Kotas that it is clear  that  the  judge  was
    plainly aware of the appellant's case,  that  her  photographs  are  on
    Flickr and she can be identified from them.

48. Ms Joshi helpfully took me through the material on  the  internet  that
    was relied upon in support of the submission that the appellant's  name
    is on the internet in  a  way  which  associates  her  with  sur  place
    activities against the Zimbabwean government, as follows:

    (i)    On Zimvigil's website,  there  are  four  articles,  posted  (in
         chronological order) on the following dates: 13 March  2017  (pages
         224-225 of the appellant's bundle), 8 May 2017 (pages  221-223),  9
         July 2017 (pages 219-220) and 11  December  2017  (pages  216-218).
         These articles relate to Zimvigil demonstrations  that  it  appears
         took place on the dates in question. At the end  of  each  article,
         individuals who gave assistance at the demonstration by helping  to
         set things up or pack up at the end of the demonstration are  named
         and thanked. This  shows  a  varying  number  of  people  who  gave
         assistance on the four occasions,  from  9  to  30.  The  appellant
         (whose first name and surname is stated) is stated to have  arrived
         early to help set up things on all four occasions. In addition,  on
         one occasion (11 December 2017, page 218), she helped at the  front
         table. On another occasion (9 July 2017, page 220), she handed  out
         flyers and sold wristbands.


    (ii)   If the appellant's name  is  searched  on  the  "Google"  search
         engine, this throws up 5 results that show  her  name  (i.e.  first
         name and surname), four of which correspond with the four  Zimvigil
         articles mentioned at (i) above. The fifth result also relates to a
         similar (undated) article about a vigil on the Zimvigil website.


    (iii)  Pages 52 and 53 are photographs of  the  appellant  on  Zimvigil
         Flickr, as follows:


         (a)      Page 52 is a photograph of the appellant on her  own.  The
             appellant is shown wearing [ ].


             Underneath this photograph and outside the  black  frame,  the
             following  appear:  "Zimbabwevigil   +   Follow     139   view
             [illegible] Taken [ ] � All rights reserved".


             Below this, two names appear next to a star, one of  which  is
             the appellant's surname.


         (b)      Page 53 is a photograph of the appellant in the  forefront
             and four persons in the rear.


             The same information appears outside the black box except that
             the number of views is 113 and there is only  one  name,  i.e.
             the appellant's surname.


    (iv)   The appellant's evidence at para 15  of  her  witness  statement
         that the "About" section of the website has had 10.4 million  views
         and that her photograph of 8 July 2017 had had  139  views  at  the
         date of the witness statement.


49. I shall deal first with the photographs.

50. The judge said (para 43 of his decision) that the  photographs  do  not
    have any names or details and that there is no evidence to suggest that
    the appellant can be identified from them.

51. I have concluded that the judge did not misapprehend this evidence, for
    the following reasons:

    (i)    In the first place, both photographs only show  the  appellant's
         surname, although I accept that, given the evidence referred to  at
         my paras 48(i) and (ii) above, it  may  be  possible  to  link  the
         person whose surname appears on  these  two  photographs  with  the
         appellant whose first name and surname  appears  in  the  documents
         referred to at my paras 48(i) and (ii) above.


    (ii)   The names on pages 52 and 53 appear outside  the  black  box.  I
         agree with Mr Kotas that it is not clear that  the  names  actually
         appear on the Zimvigil Flickr website,  as  opposed  to  being  the
         names of the person or persons whose accounts  are  being  used  to
         view the photograph on the Flickr website.


    (iii)  However, even leaving aside (i) and (ii) above, two names appear
         on the photograph at page 52 of the  appellant  on  her  own.   The
         names cannot therefore have been intended to identify the person in
         the photograph since two names are given for a  photograph  of  one
         person, nor would anyone viewing the photograph  conceivably  think
         that the two names were intended to identify the one  person  shown
         in the photograph.


         At page 53, only one name is given, i.e. the  appellant's  surname.
         However, whilst the appellant is prominently in  the  forefront  of
         the photograph, there are five people in total who are  visible  in
         the photograph. There was no evidence before  the  judge  that  the
         number of people in Zimbabwe with the appellant's surname  were  so
         few that it is reasonably likely that anyone seeing this photograph
         would be able to make the link to the appellant, given that, on the
         judge's findings, she had not come to the adverse attention of  the
         Zimbabwean authorities when she was in Zimbabwe.


52. Accordingly, in my judgement, the evidence that is relied upon which is
    said to link the appellant on the internet  to  Zimvigil  is  extremely
    weak. In my judgment, on this  evidence,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant cannot be identified from the  photographs.
    It is clear that he had this evidence sufficiently  in  mind.  I  agree
    with Mr Kotas that the appellant is in fact attempting  to  re-litigate
    this evidence.

53. I turn to the evidence referred to at my paras 48(i) above. It is plain
    that the judge considered this evidence. He referred to it specifically
    when giving a summary of the appellant's evidence, for  example,  paras
    22 and 28 and in summarising the submissions on the appellant's behalf,
    at para 35. At para 36, he said: "I now refer to the objective evidence
    in this appeal". At para 37, he referred specifically to  the  evidence
    about  Zimvigil  and,  importantly,  specifically  mentioned  that  the
    appellant was named at page 218. This is the article dated 11  December
    2017, i.e. one of the four articles referred to at my para 48(i) above.



54. Whilst I acknowledge that the judge only specifically mentioned one  of
    the four articles relied upon, the fact is that there is  no  need  for
    judges to refer to every piece of the evidence before  them.  The  fact
    that he mentioned in terms one of the four articles relied upon,  taken
    together with his earlier summary of the evidence and  the  submissions
    on the appellant's behalf, is sufficient to show that he  had  in  mind
    the full extent of the evidence relied upon  in  this  respect  on  the
    appellant's behalf. Again, I agree with Mr Kotas that the appellant  is
    in reality seeking to re-argue this aspect of her evidence.

55. Turning to the evidence referred to at my para 48(ii) above, i.e.  that
    the result of a "Google" search of the appellant's  name  reveals  five
    results, this evidence does not add anything to the  evidence  referred
    to at my para 48(i) above. It is, in effect, the same  evidence.  There
    was no need for the judge to refer to it specifically.

56. Next, the grounds contend that the  judge  erred  at  para  46  of  his
    decision when he said that the appellant,  "is  named  in  one  of  the
    articles as a person who attended an activity organized by the  MDC  in
    London". However, what is relied upon in this  respect  (which  I  have
    summarised at my para 23 above,  relates  to  the  evidence  concerning
    Zimvigil and which I have summarised at my para 48 and dealt with at my
    paras 49-55 above. I was not taken to any  material  showing  that  the
    appellant had been named in more than one MDC article as a  person  who
    attended an activity organised by the MDC in London.

57. Next, Ms Joshi relied upon the fact that the evidence showed  that  the
    appellant had attended MDC meetings in London. I was taken to pages D6-
    D10 of the respondent's bundle. As summarised at my para  23(v)  above,
    these are minutes of two MDC meetings (held on 1 April 2017 and 3  June
    2017 respectively) which show the appellant as one  of  those  present.
    However, it is plain that the judge was fully aware of the  appellant's
    evidence that she had attended meetings  of  the  MDC  in  London  and,
    importantly, that he was aware  that  there  was  documentary  evidence
    submitted in support of that evidence. Again, in my view, the appellant
    is attempting to re-argue her case.

58. Finally, it is said that the  judge  erred,  at  para  44,  in  holding
    against the appellant that she could not name the  person  who  founded
    the MDC or recite the core aims and values of the  party.  It  is  said
    that the judge failed to take into account that the background evidence
    shows that the person who founded both the MDC and the  MDC-T  are  one
    and the same person, i.e. Morgan Tsangirai. This ignores the fact  that
    the judge said that the appellant could not name the founder of the MDC
    or recite its core aims and values.

59. Given that  no  other  error  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility, I am satisfied that the mistake he made when
    he said that the appellant had not produced the original of  the  proof
    of posting in relation to the MDC  letter,  was  not  material  to  his
    assessment of credibility. It was one of many reasons he gave  for  his
    adverse credibility assessment.

60. I have therefore concluded that the judge did not materially err in law
    in assessing the appellant's credibility and in assessing her  evidence
    about her sur place activities.

61. Finally, I turn to the challenge  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    future risk.

62. In my judgment, it is plain  that  the  judge  considered  whether  the
    appellant's sur place activities, as shown by the online  material  and
    her attendance at demonstrations and meetings, was such as to have come
    to the adverse attention of the Zimbabwean authorities. I have examined
    the Zimvigil Flickr  photographs  and  concluded  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant could not  be  identified  from
    it. The judge concluded that the appellant's  profile,  seen  from  the
    online material and from her attendance at Zimvigil demonstrations  and
    MDC meetings in London, was not such as would expose to a real risk  of
    persecution. In my judgment, he was entitled to reach that  conclusion,
    having referred to CM in terms. The Tribunal in  CM  would  have  taken
    into account the judgments in YB and BA in formulating its guidance. It
    is inconceivable that, if it had not done so, this would not have  been
    challenged to the Court of Appeal. There was therefore no need for  the
    judge to refer to YB and BA specifically.

63. Accordingly, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err  in  law  in
    assessing the risk on return.

64. I therefore dismiss this appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Decision

    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese did  not  materially  err  in
    law.   His  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal's  appeal   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights (Article 3) grounds stands.


[pic]

Signed      Date: 14 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
