
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12301/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 November 2018                |On 3 December 2018                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                    [S L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Popal, Counsel instructed by Nag Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

      1. I have considered the documentation provided by  the  appellant  to
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The  references  I  make  in  square
         brackets are the page numbers  extracted  from  the  Index  to  the
         Appellant's Bundle.

      2. The centrepiece of the appellant's claim was that he was a  witness
         to the abduction of Mr Abdul Majeed  on  28  December  2008.  On  6
         January 2010 some years prior to the appellant's asylum claim on 19
         May 2017, the appellant swore an Affidavit [13-14] directed to  the
         Commission of Inquiry on Lessons Learnt in which he  gave  evidence
         to the Commission of the  abduction.  The  Commission  acknowledged
         receipt of the complaint by letter dated 14 January 2011 [15].

      3. By letter dated 16 November 2017, the appellant's  solicitors,  Nag
         Law, wrote to an Attorney-at-Law in Sri Lanka. This was  solicitor-
         to-solicitor correspondence.  Nag  Law  continue  to  act  for  the
         appellant and there is no  suggestion  this  letter  [16-17]  is  a
         fabrication.

      4. The Sri Lankan Attorney responded on 7 December 2017 [18] in  which
         the Attorney provided certified copies  of  court  documents  which
         included  a  warrant  for  the  appellant's  arrest.  The  Attorney
         confirmed that he had no objection to the appellant submitting  the
         documents to the Immigration Tribunal in the  United  Kingdom.  The
         Attorney included in  his  documentation  his  accreditation  as  a
         member of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka. The documents submitted
         also included the information  report  provided  by  the  appellant
         himself on 28 December 2008 to the police station in Maradana [21].
         This was a witness statement recounting the abduction of Mr Majeed.



      5. The arrest  warrant  issued  by  the  Magistrate  was,  apparently,
         supported by information from an officer in charge of the  Criminal
         Investigation Department in Colombo alleging that the appellant was
         actively working for the LTTE.

      6.  In  her  determination,  the  judge  refers  to  the   bundle   of
         documentation by reciting its presence before her but no more,  see
         paragraph 21 of the determination. She attached no  weight  to  it,
         see paragraph 25 of her determination. She did so, in part, because
         she did not accept the Sri Lankan authorities would issue an arrest
         warrant for the appellant 7 to 8 years after the incident  in  2008
         and after five years of inactivity  relating  to  the  case  of  Mr
         Majeed and five years after the appellant had left  Sri  Lanka.  No
         doubt these are proper considerations to have been in  the  judge's
         mind. However, this  does  not  address  the  provenance  of  these
         documents. Assuming that  this  was  indeed  solicitor-to-solicitor
         correspondence initiated by Nag Law, an Attorney in Sri  Lanka  has
         written to solicitors in the United Kingdom with a response to  his
         enquiries in the knowledge that this material will be placed before
         the Tribunal in the United Kingdom. In other words, the  provenance
         of the documentation falls into a different category by  reason  of
         its being sought by, and produced  to,  solicitors  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

      7. It was necessary for the judge to make findings about  whether  Nag
         Law wrote the letter in the terms appearing in the bundle. If  they
         did, it would be necessary  to  consider  whether  the  Sri  Lankan
         response is a carefully  contrived  fabrication  by  the  Attorney,
         presumably prompted in some clandestine fashion by  the  appellant:
         how else would the Attorney have been able to concoct a  fabricated
         account consistent with the appellant's fabricated claim? The judge
         was required to make appropriate findings upon this.

      8.  It  was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  place  no  weight  on  the
         documentation unless and until he had made suitable findings as  to
         its provenance. This was an integral part of his  consideration  of
         whether it was likely that the Sri Lankan authorities would show  a
         continuing interest in the  appellant  after  so  many  years  have
         elapsed since the  abduction  of  Mr  Majeed  and  the  appellant's
         departure from Sri Lanka.

      9. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  reveals  a  material
         error of law and I set it aside.

     10. Since the re-making this  decision  will  require  a  thoroughgoing
         reassessment  of  all  the  material,  including,  of  course,  the
         material to which I have referred in this decision, this  can  only
         properly be achieved by the appeal being remitted to the First-tier
         Tribunal for re-making.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                            28 November 2018
