

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12724/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre            Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 11th September 2018                              On 25 September 2018

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  AHMED [M]
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mc Veety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Wood, Counsel, instructed by IAS (Manchester)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. Mr [M], a non-Arab Darfuri, sought asylum. His asylum claim was
            refused by the respondent for reasons set  out  in  a  decision
            dated 17th November 2017. He appealed that decision  and  in  a
            determination promulgated on  18th  January  2018  following  a
            hearing on 17th January 2018, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd
            allowed his appeal.


         2. The First-tier Tribunal judge found Mr  [M]'s  account  of  his
            arrest  and  detention  credible  and   consistent   with   the
            "background" information before him. The judge  considered  the
            findings in the context of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation)
            Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan  CG  [2015]
            UKUT 10 (IAC). The judge refers  to  the  COI  brought  to  his
            attention by the presenting officer and states

                  The new COI relies on two reports to depart  form  country
                  guidance. These were not provided at the hearing.  I  find
                  the [SSHD] has not provided me  with  cogent  evidence  in
                  support of the position taken in the  Refusal  letter  and
                  the decision to depart from country  guidance  cases.  The
                  evidence produced by the appellant's representative in the
                  appeal bundle at pages 15-112, persuades me that there  is
                  no evidence to depart from country guidance.  For  example
                  the Foreign and Commonwealth Office confirms in  a  report
                  dated 19 July 2017 on  pages  96-97,  that  there  was  no
                  improvement in human rights in Sudan during 2016.

         3. The SSHD sought and was granted permission on the grounds  that
            the judge  had  failed  properly  to  consider  the  background
            material relied upon by the respondent in the August 2017  CPIN
            that  the  position   of   non-Arab   Darfuris   has   improved
            sufficiently to justify a departure from the CG decisions of AA
            and MM.


         4. The SSHD had not, as acknowledged  by  Mr  McVeety,  sought  to
            appeal the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  judge  that  Mr
            [M] had been arrested, interrogated about  his  work,  detained
            for about a month,  accused  of  being  in  opposition  to  the
            Government, released on conditions which included reporting  to
            a police station every two weeks with information he had failed
            to provide during his detention and that he would be killed  if
            he did not comply. His fingerprints and photograph were taken.

         5. Although the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal judge for
            not departing from the CG cases may be  considered  lacking  in
            depth and detail, that evidence only seeks to depart  from  the
            guidance that those who are not perceived to be  in  opposition
            to the government  were  at  risk.  In  this  case,  there  are
            unchallenged findings that Mr Mohammed had  been  arrested  and
            detained for perceived opposition to  the  government,  despite
            his continued denials of such activity. He  did  not  therefore
            fall within the category of those individuals who may no longer
            be at risk if the evidence of the CPIN is considered to be such
            as to justify departure from the CG cases. Mr  [M]  remains  an
            individual who, as a non-Arab Darfuri is  perceived  to  be  in
            opposition to the Sudanese government.

         6. There is no material error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
            judge. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  of  the
            First-tier Tribunal stands.

     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands. The successful appeal of Mr [M] against the refusal of
    his asylum claim stands.

                                    Date 14th September 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
