
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/12837/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 September 2017                     |   On 13 October 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                   mr bam
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq and was born on 1 January 1997.  He
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on or around 29/31  May  2016.
    He was detected, served with notice of his liability  to  removal,  and
    claimed asylum on the basis that he fears persecution from  ISIS  as  a
    Kurd and because his father had been a member of the Baath party.  Also
    he claimed to be at risk from family and the Kurdish community  because
    of his father's activities and because his father had killed 2  cousins
    in a land dispute.  The appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the
    respondent on 4 November 2016.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In a decision promulgated on 13th  February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P-J S White dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that whilst satisfied that the appellant's return is not
    feasible his claim to international protection could not succeed.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 9 June  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macdonald refused the appellant  permission  to  appeal.
    The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and on 1 August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge has confused the question of
    whether in light of the risk of serious  harm  that  exists  in  Kirkuk
    relocation to the IKR  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  with
    whether there is a risk of serious harm solely on the basis of lack  of
    documentation.  The confusion has arisen from the issue of  feasibility
    of return. Reference is made to the case of AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKUT 00119.  It is asserted that the appellant is not relying solely on
    the lack of documentation to demonstrate a risk of serious  harm.   The
    risk of serious of harm in Kirkuk is accepted and is not  born  out  of
    the documentation issue but by the level  of  indiscriminate  violence.
    The appellant would not be able to obtain the  civil  ID  document  and
    therefore this renders his relocation to the IKR unreasonable or unduly
    harsh because without such a document the appellant would not  be  able
    to enter the region.  There is the difference between the documentation
    issues in relation to feasibility of return, which hypothetically would
    place a person in a place of safety and able to live a reasonable life,
    and  the  documentation  issues  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation.  Reference is made to  the  case
    of AA (Iraq) headnote at D - internal  relocation  within  Iraq  (other
    than the IKR).  It is submitted that having accepted that relocation to
    Baghdad is unreasonable and that without  documentation  the  appellant
    would not be able to enter IKR, in light of the risk that exists in his
    home area of Kirkuk the judge ought to have concluded  that  relocation
    to IKR is also unreasonable and the appellant's humanitarian protection
    claim made out.

 6. The second ground of appeal was that the judge erred in his  conclusion
    on paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  However, at the start of
    the hearing Mr Palmer indicated that they were  no  longer  relying  on
    paragraph 276ADE.

 7. Mr Palmer referred to the decision of AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
    944.  He submitted that the Court of Appeal  has  now  found  that  the
    Upper Tribunal decision in the country guidance case of AA (Iraq) is in
    error and  had  substituted  paragraphs  amending  that  decision.   He
    submitted the judge had made sufficient findings to  allow  the  appeal
    outright.  He referred to four paragraphs of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision - paragraphs 13, 16, 21 and 22.  These  amount  to  a  finding
    that the appellant has 15(c) risks in Kirkuk.  He referred to paragraph
    22  where  the  judge  asked  the  correct  question   about   internal
    relocation.   The  judge  was  correct  that  the  task  was  to   make
    appropriate findings on returning without a passport  in  paragraph  23
    and in paragraph 24 made a finding that there was no ID document in the
    UK.  He submitted the crucial findings at paragraphs 25 and 26 make  it
    absolutely clear that the judge was saying that the appellant could not
    internally relocate in Baghdad.  At paragraph 27 the  judge  fell  into
    error which was understandable as the judge did not have the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in  AA  (Iraq).   The  judge  made  findings  that  the
    appellant was not able to get a CSID.  The guidance in AA (Iraq) [2017]
    sets out that the appellant would have to get this document to be  able
    to travel to the IKR.  In relation  to  paragraph  8  of  the  original
    grounds the findings of the judge at paragraph 27 regarding  relocation
    to Baghdad were correct but the analysis is now wrong  because  of  the
    court of appeal's decision in AA (Iraq).  He referred to the  court  of
    appeal's  decision  at  paragraphs  36  and  39.   He   submitted   the
    quintessential importance of the CSID was not taken into account by the
    judge.  The judge found that the appellant cannot get that document and
    he cannot obtain it in a reasonable time.

 8. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge, at paragraph 24, found the Appellant
    did have an ID though not in his country.  This will make  it  possible
    for him to obtain a CSID.  The Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)  held  that
    if you have family members then you would not be at risk (paragraph  10
    of Part C of the amended CG.) The appellant should be  able  to  get  a
    document even if there is no passport.  If  the  appellant  has  family
    members it follows from a proper reading of AA Iraq (as  amended)  that
    the appellant would be able to obtain a document.  The question to  ask
    is does he have family  members.   His  mother  is  alive  on  his  own
    evidence.  At paragraph 8 the judge makes a finding that the mother can
    support him and he can obtain family details.  He referred to paragraph
    7 of AA (Iraq), if P's return is not feasible it cannot equate  to  him
    being at risk.  The appellant will  be  returned  to  Baghdad  and  can
    secure entry to IKR.  If he goes to IKR there is no known case that the
    IKR expel Kurds.  If there are any errors of law they are not material.
    The country guidance  case  as  now  promulgated  must  amount  to  the
    appellant not being at risk.

 9. Mr Palmer in reply said that the judge found that the  appellant  would
    not be able to return to Baghdad because it is unduly harsh to for  him
    to relocate to Baghdad.  With regard to the respondent's assertion that
    there are no known cases of people being expelled there is no  evidence
    that if the appellant were returned to Baghdad he could then go to IKR.
     The appellant in his evidence has stated that he was  not  in  contact
    with his mother.  The judge looked at whether the  appellant  could  be
    vouched for in Baghdad.  He submitted that it cannot be said that it is
    possible for the appellant to obtain a CSID - the judge found that that
    is not the case.  He submitted that the appellant would need to have ID
    documents to travel through to IKR and there are no documents to obtain
    entrance.

Discussion

10. The issue on appeal is narrow. Did the judge err in the approach to and
    conclusions reached on the reasonableness of relocation  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region ('IKR'). The appellant's asylum claim was dismissed  and
    there is no appeal against that element  of  the  decision.  The  judge
    found (and  which  had  been  accepted  by  the  respondent)  that  the
    appellant could not return to his home area of Kirkuk as it would be  a
    breach of article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The  remaining
    issue was whether or not the appellant could relocate. The judge  found
    that it was not reasonable for him to relocate to  Baghdad  (which  was
    also accepted by the respondent). The only issue was whether  he  could
    relocate to the IKR. The judge found:

         27.  I have noted earlier in the grounds  given  in  AA  about  the
         feasibility of relocation to IKR for Kurds  who  do  not  originate
         from there.  An issue may sometimes  arise  about  the  ability  to
         travel safely from Baghdad to Erbil, but there  is  no  suggestion,
         still less evidence, that this appellant could not travel safely to
         the IKR if returned to Baghdad.  Ms Daykin's  submissions  focussed
         on two points.  One was her submission that there was no reason  to
         suppose that this appellant could find a job within the  timescales
         suggested by the guidance, so that he would not able to  stay.   As
         to that I note that the guidance expressly refers to  the  lack  of
         evidence of proactive removal of those who are unable to find  work
         within the timescales and thus extend their permits.  In any  event
         it seems to me that the suggestion that he would be unable to  find
         work is simply speculative.  The other  submission  made  was  that
         without some form of appropriate  documentation,  which  Ms  Daykin
         submitted the appellant did not have, he would be  unable  even  to
         enter the IKR.  She directed me to some passages in  the  2016  CIG
         report which indicate the need for some form of  identification  in
         order to gain entry.  I accept that that may well be  correct,  but
         two points arise.  The first is that this aspect of the appellant's
         claim turns on his inability to relocate because of an  absence  of
         documentation, which is a significant factor in the  light  of  the
         decision in AA.  The second is that in my  judgment  an  artificial
         submission.  I am dealing, ex hypothesi, with the case  of  a  Kurd
         who does not originate from the IKR, and who will therefore have to
         be returned first to Baghdad.  It is beyond doubt that without some
         form of identification it is  not  feasible  to  return  anyone  to
         Baghdad.  To be in a position to try to relocate  from  Baghdad  to
         the IKR such a person must have obtained sufficient  identification
         documentation already.   If  a  stage  is  reached  at  which  this
         appellant can be returned to Baghdad it seems to  me  therefore  to
         follow, in the state of the current guidance,  that he  could  also
         transfer from Baghdad to the IKR and relocate there.

         28.  That question, however,  only  arises  once  the  Tribunal  is
         satisfied that the appellant's return to Iraq is feasible.  That is
         expressly set out at paragraph 8 in section C of  the  headnote  in
         AA.  It is further said at  paragraph  7  in  section  B,  that  an
         international protection claim cannot succeed by reference  to  any
         alleged  risk  of  harm  arising   from   an   absence   of   Iraqi
         identification  documentation  if  the  tribunal  finds  that   the
         appellant's return is not currently feasible, given what  is  known
         about the state of  his  documentation.   As  Ms  Daykin  correctly
         pointed out, the Tribunal went on  to  hold  that  there  might  be
         cases, where the risk did not arise, or not solely, from a lack  of
         documentation, where the claim should  be  determined  even  though
         return was not currently feasible, and the appellant in AA has  now
         been given permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  that
         specific aspect of the Tribunal's decision, essentially  seeking  a
         ruling that the protection claim should be determined on its merits
         even where return is not feasible.  That appeal has  not  yet  been
         heard, and in the nature of things it is unknown what the  decision
         will be, and I am satisfied that at present I am bound by  the  law
         as stated by the Upper Tribunal in AA.

         29   The respondent has not, notwithstanding  the  guidance  given,
         set out a clear position on whether or not the  appellant's  return
         is said to be feasible, and she has certainly not set out her  case
         on how she proposes  to  remove  the  appellant  or  what  sort  of
         documentation is expected to lead to the issue of either a passport
         or a laissez passer.  The appellant's evidence is that he does  not
         have identification documents, and  while  I  have  indicated  some
         reasons to view his evidence with reserve that is  not  sufficient,
         in the absence of any positive case, to enable me to conclude  that
         he has  such  documentation  as  will  make  his  return  feasible.
         Accordingly I am not satisfied that his return is feasible.   I  am
         satisfied that his claim to be unable to relocate to the IKR,  that
         being effectively the only basis on which the respondent says  that
         he can go back to Iraq, is mainly if not wholly  dependent  on  his
         claim to lack the necessary documentation.  In  the  light  of  the
         current state of the law I am satisfied that while  his  return  is
         not feasible his claim to international protection, on the basis on
         which it is advanced, cannot succeed.  That conclusion  applies  to
         the asylum claim, but  also  to  the  humanitarian  protection  and
         Article 3 claims."



11. The judge did not have the benefit of the court of appeal's decision on
    the country guidance provided by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AA  (Article
    15(c))Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC). The court of  appeal  held  that
    the Upper Tribunal in AA (Iraq) had erred  in  equating  a  CSID  to  a
    return document. It is not merely to be considered as a document  which
    can be used to achieve entry but may be an essential document for  life
    in Iraq. The court held that regardless of the feasibility of return it
    is necessary to decide whether an appellant has a CSID or will be  able
    to obtain one. The court of appeal corrected the  country  guidance  by
    appending to the judgment a  complete  revised  country  guidance  with
    amended paragraphs in bold. The court of appeal decision  was  released
    in July 2017 some 4 months after the First-tier Tribunal  decision  was
    promulgated in this appeal. In OM(AA Wrong in  Law)  Zimbabwe  CG  2006
    UKAIT 00077 it was held that where a CG case is  found  to  be  legally
    flawed, the reasons for so finding will have existed  both  before  and
    after its notification.  The error is  effectively  replicated  in  the
    decision which followed it and so there would be an  error  of  law  in
    that decision too.

12. The judge (understandably) did not adopt the approach as now set out in
    the amended CG case of AA (Iraq). He followed  the  Upper  Tribunal  CG
    case as then promulgated as he was bound to do. However, as  the  Upper
    Tribunal CG on the issue of the CSID was legally flawed  the  judge  in
    this case erred in law by essentially stopping at  the  feasibility  of
    return issue, although he does consider that logically the appellant if
    returned would have to have some form of identity document  that  would
    enable him to travel to and enter the IKR.

13. The grounds of appeal argue that the appellant would  not  be  able  to
    obtain the CSID document and therefore this renders his  relocation  to
    the IKR unreasonable or unduly harsh because without  such  a  document
    the appellant would not be able to enter the region and that there is a
    difference between the documentation issues in relation to  feasibility
    and return and the documentation issues relevant to the  assessment  of
    the reasonableness of internal relocation.  It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge made a finding that the appellant does not have a CSID and  could
    not obtain one in a reasonable period of time.

14. The judge records the appellant's evidence regarding his CSID and  made
    the following relevant findings:

      1. 'he did have an identity document with his  name,  his  photograph,
         his stated place of birth and the details of his parents, but  that
         he had left it with his mother when he left the country and did not
         know where it was now'.

      2. 'he said everyone had to have a  civil  identity  document  and  an
         Iraqi nationality and  identity  document  in  order  to  obtain  a
         passport and that the only document he had was the  civil  identity
         document'.

      3. He then agreed that after the invasion of Garal he and  his  mother
         had moved to Tovelha for 1� years, and it was in  Tovelha  that  he
         claimed to have left his identity card. '

      4. 'he had left the document behind when he fled Iraq...[because] this
         was a document which was only useful inside the country'

      5. I have no doubt, in the light of the evidence,  that  he  did  have
         some form of Iraqi identity document when he left the country,  but
         that is not the same as evidence that he still had it with  him  in
         the United Kingdom.  There could be a variety of  reasons,  ranging
         from accidental loss to deliberate disposal, why he would not still
         have it.

15. I do not accept that the judge made a finding that  the  appellant  did
    not have a CSID or could not obtain one in a reasonable time. It  seems
    clear that the appellant was describing a CSID  in  his  evidence.  His
    evidence was that he left it behind in Iraq. The issue that  the  judge
    considered was whether he had identity documents in the UK.  The  judge
    concluded essentially that he did not have it with him in the  UK.  The
    judge also indicated that there could be reasons why he would not still
    have it but that does not equate to a finding that in fact he does  not
    have the document albeit that it is not with him in the UK. There  were
    no findings on the time it might take for the  appellant  to  obtain  a
    CSID. The judge has not made a  specific  finding  as  to  whether  the
    appellant still has family in Iraq. There is no criticism of the  judge
    because on the basis of the flawed CG there was no need to do so. There
    is therefore no basis upon which  the  appeal  can  be  simply  allowed
    outright. Further fact finding is required.

16. There was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision.
    I  set  that  decision  aside  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

17. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered that further fact finding is required and it  would  not  be
    appropriate in this case for me to re-make the decision. This is a case
    where there is no challenge to the essential findings of fact  made  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  findings  on   the   issue   on
    reasonableness of relocation to the IKR arising out  of  the  incorrect
    approach. The findings of fact made throughout the decision up  to  and
    including paragraph 26 can be preserved. It is appropriate in this case
    for the matter to be remitted to be heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    P-J S White to re-consider and decide, in light of the amended CG in AA
    (Iraq), whether it  is  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  internally
    relocate to the IKR.

18. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Hatton  Cross  before  Judge  P-J  S  White
    pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA.  A  new  hearing
    will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.  The
matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the  limited  issue  as  to
whether or not it is reasonable for the appellant  to  relocate  to  IKR  in
light of the amended CG in AA (Iraq).









Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 12 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
