
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/12940/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2020                  |On 3 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    Q D N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Farrelly,
    promulgated on 15  October  2019.   The  grounds  are  set  out  in  an
    application dated 23 October 2019:

    [1]    Mibanga point - at [25],  making  adverse  credibility  findings
    prior to assessing the psychological report and country expert  report,
    which were capable of explaining why there were  discrepancies  and  of
    supporting plausibility.

    [2]    country expert report - reaching unclear findings or failing  to
    give adequate reasons, including when dealing with the  expert's  views
    that  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation  are   not
    available.

    [3]    psychological report - (i) failing to assess whether it explains
    inconsistencies  and  (ii)  error  in  saying  there  might  be   other
    explanations for the appellant's presentation.

    [4]    miscellaneous errors - at [59], misapplying the law "as there is
    no requirement that the appellant be singled out".

 2. The FtT granted permission on 22 November 2019.

 3. The SSHD filed a response dated 12 December 2019, along the lines  that
    the decision as a whole made it clear that it  was  based  on  all  the
    evidence, and the grounds amounted to no more than disagreement.

 4. The principal points which I noted from the submissions  by  Mr  Caskie
    were these:

      i) The appellant admitted to lying about his age, which he had no need
         to do.  It was perverse at [26] to  say  that  he  was  "an  astute
         individual who will say what he believes is most to his advantage",
         having noted a statement he made to the contrary.

     ii) At [30] the judge noted that the appellant's explanation for  lying
         about his date  of  entry  to  the  UK  made  no  sense,  and  then
         postulated a likely motive for pretending to be a child.  There was
         a "disconnect" there, because one point did  not  derive  from  the
         other.

    iii) At [47 - 48] the judge relied on  passages  from  the  respondent's
         background notes which contained policy rather than  evidence,  and
         were not  referenced,  and  failed  to  recognise  the  distinction
         between information and policy.

     iv) Also at [47 - 48], the judge failed to  evaluate  the  respondent's
         position by way of "comparing and contrasting" with the appellant's
         country expert report.

      v) At [51] the judge found that the appellant had been coached to give
         his account, but  failed  to  recognise  that  helped  rather  than
         hindered his claim to have  been  trafficked.   The  expert  report
         confirmed that traffickers engaged in coaching.

     vi) At [52] the judge found the appellant to have contradicted  himself
         over whether his mother was in Edinburgh or Vietnam, but failed  to
         recognise that the record produced was not contemporary,  was  made
         in course of an investigation for other  purposes,  and  overlooked
         that the appellant denied from the outset saying  that  his  mother
         was in Edinburgh.

    vii) At [56] the judge referred  to  factors  which  might  explain  the
         appellant's presentation to the author of the medical  report,  but
         overlooked that all those matters would be equally obvious  to  the
         author.  The judge took it upon himself to  substitute  a  clinical
         assessment which he was not equipped to make.

   viii) At [57] the judge gave some weight to the  negative  evaluation  of
         the trafficking claim, but that was conducted  on  the  balance  of
         probability, and therefore irrelevant to assessment of real risk.

     ix) At [58] the judge found that coaching was not to further  the  aims
         of traffickers but to facilitate a protection claim, but there  was
         no contradiction between the two,  as  traffickers  would  wish  to
         facilitate a claim.

      x) Although the judge purported at [24] and [58] to consider  all  the
         evidence before reaching a decision,  in  reality  he  reached  his
         decision before looking at the totality of the evidence.

     xi) The judge referred at [58] to there being "just too  many  issues",
         and at first sight the decision appeared to be based on  a  rounded
         assessment; but on fuller analysis several reasons could not stand,
         the decision as a whole was inadequate,  and  the  case  should  be
         remitted for fresh hearing.

 5. Mr Clark replied:

      i) The full decision left the reader in no doubt why the appellant had
         been found not to be a reliable witness.

     ii)  The  appellant  now  made  selective  criticisms,  which  did  not
         undermine the overall reasoning.

    iii) The evidence was taken in the round.  The decision did not pay only
         lip service to that principle.

     iv) Close attention was paid both to the country expert report, at  [36
         -44], and to the medical report, at [45 - 47].

      v) It did not follow from the appellant being  coached  on  the  claim
         that he had been trafficked (in the sense of being exploited).

     vi) Apart from his age, the appellant  had  not  "come  clean"  on  his
         deceits until challenged by contrary evidence.

    vii) None of the 4  grounds  were  made  out.   They  amounted  only  to
         disagreements.

   viii) The criticisms advanced in submissions were not in the grounds.

     ix) No points were advanced which undermined the decision.

 6. Mr Caskie in response said:

      i) The grounds, read with the grant of permission, were wide enough to
         cover "general inadequacy of reasoning".

     ii) 14 of the 61 paragraphs of the decision had been challenged.

    iii) Although comprehensive at first sight, the  flaws  identified  were
         cumulatively  such  that  the  decision  did  not   survive   close
         examination.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. Ground [1] does not show that  the  judge's  conclusions  were  reached
    without considering all the evidence.  Nothing in the decision suggests
    that the judge did not apply the approach he stated at [24] and [58].

 9. Ground [2] does not show that the judge's conclusions about the country
    expert report were either unclear or unreasoned.

10. In any event, sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation  were
    beside the point, unless  the  appellant  established  his  account  as
    credible.

11. On ground [3], the judge did consider whether the medical report  might
    explain away inconsistencies.  No doubt it would  be  apparent  to  the
    author that there might  be  other  explanations  for  the  appellant's
    presentation, but that does not undermine the judge's observation.

12. Having examined the underlying evidence in course  of  submissions,  it
    was plainly open to the judge to hold that it showed that the appellant
    firstly claimed to be looking for his mother when encountered at a nail
    bar in Edinburgh, before later conceding that she was in Vietnam.

13. It is difficult to see that the evidence on that issue  might  sensibly
    be interpreted otherwise.

14. Ground [4] is cryptic, and adds nothing.

15. The judge at [26] notes that the appellant owned up about his age,  and
    then continues, "However, as set out below,  I  find  [him]  to  be  an
    astute individual who  will  say  what  he  believes  is  most  to  his
    advantage...".  The finding is made after explicitly allowing  for  the
    instance of honest disclosure.

16. There is no connection between the two observations made at  [30];  but
    they are both significant points against credibility.

17. The fact that the trafficking assessment was made on a higher  standard
    of proof lessened its weight against the appellant, did not require  it
    to be treated as entirely irrelevant.

18. The proposition of overall inadequacy of reasoning is not  foreshadowed
    by the grounds.  The submissions  on  that  matter  probe  acutely  for
    selective  disagreement  on  the  facts,  but  they  do  not   disclose
    substantial error on any individual point, and do not show the decision
    to be wrong in point of law.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained.


      [pic]
      14 February 2020
      UT Judge Macleman
