
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/12138/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 February 2018                     |     On 09 April 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     mM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, counsel instructed by DH Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iraq, date of birth  [  ]  1980,  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision of  16  October  2016  to  refuse  an
    asylum and Humanitarian Protection based claim to  remain  in  the  UK.
    His claim also included Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR  together  with  a
    claim based around his private life.


2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge I Burnett  who,  on  4
    July 2017 dismissed the appeal on Refugee Convention  grounds  and  the
    generality of the protection claims otherwise raised.  It does not seem
    that there was particular argument raised over and  above  the  Refugee
    Convention ground but it may well be that it was dealt with as of  one.
    Ultimately the  Judge  made  a  decision  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    generality of the claims to need protection.


3.    Grounds seeking permission to appeal was settled  by  Mr  Burrett  who
    did not appear before the  Judge  and  who  has  been  careful  not  to
    criticise the Judge with reference to evidence before the  Judge  which
    was not taken into account or matters which  were  taken  into  account
    that should not have been.  Essentially, the principal line  of  attack
    is that the Judge did not, despite referring to the case of AA (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 properly consider the issues  of  return
    and in particular return to the IKR or Kurdish areas of Iraq.


4.   The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he was at  risk  of  honour
    killing due to his membership of a particular social group as a  result
    of his marriage to his wife and dependant, [KO], who was from a wealthy
    and powerful family.   It  was  asserted  that  her  family  were  well
    connected with the government and  police  in  Iraq,  and  particularly
    Peshmerga armed forces, such that on a  return  to  the  home  area  or
    elsewhere he faced a real risk of death at the hands of her family  who
    wished that serious harm should befall him as much as his  own  family,
    it seems, who wished him to divorce his wife.  It was said  essentially
    that there was not adequate protection to which he could have  recourse
    either from the Appellant's brother-in-law or his wife's family members
    connected with  Peshmerga  armed  forces.   He  could  not  find  state
    protection.  Internal relocation was for that reason said not to be  an
    option and internal relocation within the IKR was not a  viable  option
    either.  Thus, on return, he faced a real risk of physical  and  mental
    ill-treatment.


5.   So far as the Appellant's wife was  concerned,  the  issue  was  raised
    before the Judge that she had her own mental health problems associated
    with severe depression and that that was a  further  consideration,  at
    least in terms of her vulnerability in giving evidence.  It seems it is
    difficult to tell if it was specifically raised as a ground  of  appeal
    before the Judge but in a side wind to other submissions Mr Burrett has
    pointed me to the evidence that was before the Judge  relating  to  the
    health of the Appellant's wife.


6.   As a result of permission being granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  M
    Davies on 2 October 2017 the Respondent wrote a Rule 24 response  on  8
    November 2017 in which the Respondent generally opposed the appeal  and
    stated this:


         "3.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  all  the
             evidence and  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
             Appellant and his wife were not credible  witnesses  and  that
             their claims were not credible.


         4.   However, the Respondent accepts that the Judge of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the
             issue of relocation to Baghdad or the IKR in line with country
             guidance (i.e. AA).


         5.   The Tribunal is invited to preserve  the  adverse  credibility
             findings  in  the  determination  of  Judge  Burnett  and   to
             determine the appeal with a fresh oral  (continuance)  hearing
             to  consider  the  issues  of   documentation   and   internal
             relocation in line with Country Guidance...".


    In other words, with reference to AA (Iraq) CG which I note in  passing
    is presently the subject of further hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    connection with risk on return to Iraq but I proceed on the basis  that
    AA is, and remains, good law at the present.


7.   In the light of the Rule 24 response, Mr Burrett  has  argued  that  by
    reference to the Judge's decision and accepting as he does the  adverse
    credibility findings that were made, that nevertheless in order  to  do
    the exercise of considering this matter by reference to AA (Iraq),  the
    exercise would be significantly fettered in its  effectiveness  by  the
    adverse findings that were made and therefore, on the remaking of  this
    matter, the findings should not stand.


8.   Mr Burrett pointed to the submissions which he drafted in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  Essentially, attacking criticisms the Judge made of  expert
    evidence of Dr S Laizer and the lack  of  adequate  reasoning  why  the
    Judge was rejecting the credibility of the  Appellant  and  his  wife's
    evidence concerning what she did or  did  not  know  about  her  family
    circumstances as well as the reservations the Judge had, in  the  light
    of the findings  about  the  assessment  of  risk  on  return  for  the
    Appellant and his wife.


 9.  For my part it seemed to me that the realities for a  First-tier  Judge
    looking at the matter of AA (Iraq) and assessing the extent of risk  is
    to a degree almost inevitably dependent upon the findings of  fact  and
    the credibility findings that had been made. In order to  do  that  job
    properly it seemed to me it would not be helpful  for  a  Judge  to  be
    constrained by those findings, not least when there  is  a  measure  of
    arguability about some of the points,  which  had  been  raised  by  Mr
    Burrett, over the depth to which the  Judge  was  either  addressed  or
    dealt with the criticisms that were  made  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter and in the advocacy before  the  Judge  when
    hearing the case.


10.  For those reasons, reluctant as  I  am  to  set  aside  findings  which
    appear on their face to be cogent, the fact is that remaking this  case
    is the important issue in fairness to the Appellant. I  find  that  the
    Respondent's position is preserved to the extent that it is open to the
    Respondent to raise criticisms previously raised  as  well  as  further
    criticisms developed as a result of the matter being looked  at  again.
    Therefore the extent to which  there  is  a  measure  of  prejudice  or
    disadvantage  to  the  Respondent  seemed  to  me  to  be  sufficiently
    protected by the likely competence of a Presenting Officer to  properly
    pursue and address those matters.  Accordingly,  I  find  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision does not stand and the matter should be  remade  in
    the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham.


    Notice of Decision


11.  The appeal is allowed to the extent the matter is to be remade  in  the
    FtT in accordance with the law.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

