
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12240/2019
                                                               PA/12239/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 4 August 2021                     |On 14 September 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SS
                                     GA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms S Khan instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellants, citizens of Turkey, born on 11 August 1981 (SS) and
        28 September 1983 (GA), respectively  appealed  with  permission  a
        decision of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed  their
        appeals.
     2. In a decision dated 18 February 2021 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
        found material error of  law  and  set  that  decision  aside.  The
        relevant paragraphs of Judge Rintoul's decision being:

        "11.      The First-tier Tribunal's decision is not easy to follow,
             not least as the judge does not appear to have directed himself
             in line with HJ (Iran). Further, there are no express  findings
             as to the nature of the attacks  on  the  first  appellant,  or
             findings about how (and why) they lived their lives in  Turkey.
             Further, there is no analysis of how a  finding  of  subjective
             fear or of past persecution is to be viewed through the lens of
             HJ  (Iran).  Not  doing  so  means  that  there  is  no  proper
             consideration at paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules; there
             is no proper finding whether there had been prior persecution.


        12.  It is worrying that insofar as the judge did direct himself as
             to the law [10], he did so by reference to a CPIN  rather  than
             relevant case law, or statute but that is not an error of law.


        13.  Where the judge erred in law is in having concluded that there
             was no  effective  state  protection,  he  failed  properly  to
             consider all the relevant  evidence  of  the  difficulties  the
             appellants had faced, as set out in  detail  in  their  witness
             statements.  There  is   no   proper   consideration   of   the
             difficulties that they would face on return.  Rather,  at  [13]
             there is an analysis which does not properly take into  account
             the difficulties they said they would face  or  why,  from  the
             population in general, given what had happened to them  in  the
             past in terms of the need to dress and behave in the workplace,
             in a manner in which is not  just  discrete  but  bordering  on
             having to adopt a false identity.  Similarly  the  analysis  at
             [27] is lacking in proper detail.


        14.  Further, the analysis based  on  HJ  (Iran)  is  flawed  [28],
             absent proper findings as to what had occurred in the past. For
             these reasons alone, I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law  and
             I set it aside.


        15.  In addition, I am satisfied that the analysis of  the  ability
             of family to trace the appellants is flawed, given the  binding
             decision in IK. That aspect of  the  appeal  will  need  to  be
             considered again.


        16.   The  findings  of  credibility  are  preserved.  It  will  be
             necessary on remaking to make findings as to the nature of  the
             attack or attacks on the first appellant by his family and  any
             other harassment directed  at  either  appellant.  It  will  be
             necessary also to make findings about the ability of family, if
             motivated, to find either appellant.


        17.  It will also be necessary to make finding so far as  relevant,
             the extent to which the appellants  are  at  risk  from  family
             elsewhere in Turkey, whether there will  be  a  sufficiency  of
             protection for them. Equally, it will be necessary  to  address
             the test set out in HJ (Iran), albeit that it is accepted  that
             the appellants are gay."

     3. Following the making of a Transfer Order on 22 June 2021 the appeal
        comes before me, to enable  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

Preliminary issue - Expert evidence

     4. The First-tier Tribunal had available to it a report written by  of
        Dr Hasan Hafidh dated 31 January 2020. Dr Hafidh in the section  of
        the report headed "EXPERTISE" writes:


          1. I am a Visiting Research Fellow at Kings College London  and  a
             Senior Teaching  Fellow  at  the  School  of  Oriental  African
             Studies (SOAS) London. I am an interdisciplinary researcher and
             my area of specialism is situated between Comparative Politics,
             International Relations and Middle Eastern Studies.  I  am  not
             affiliated to organisations which could affect  my  objectivity
             as an Expert Witness. I have  also  worked  as  a  Geopolitical
             Analyst on the Middle East  Region  for  Wikistrat  Consultancy
             producing reports and executive briefings for clients  on  some
             of the most pressing and timely topics in the region.
          2. I have worked on several expert witness reports in the  UK  and
             also acquired expertise working with immigration legal firms in
             the US  for  asylum  cases.  My  expertise  ranges  from  Inter
             Communal/Sectarian relations in the Middle East,  International
             and State Societal Relations, to extensive  experience  and  on
             the ground fieldwork with NGOs and Civil Society and the  Gulf,
             Islamist Movements, Militia Groups and Radicalisation, Conflict
             and Peacebuilding, Ethnic Minorities, Geopolitical  Trends  and
             Regional Security, Diaspora and Refugees, Human  Rights  issues
             and modes of governance in the Middle East.
          3. I hold a PhD in Comparative Politics of the  Gulf  States  from
             the University of Leeds.  My  PhD  thesis  is  entitled:  'From
             Diwanniyyat to Youth Societies: Informal Political  Spaces  and
             Contentious Politics in Kuwait and Bahrain.' In the context  of
             the Gulf  region,  I  research  the  intersectional  role  that
             identified politics and faith play in the formation of communal
             identities,   particularly   when   it   comes   to   religious
             denominations. This focuses on the agency of sectarian identity
             and how political mobilisation based  on  denomination  has  an
             impact on the dynamic of state-societal  relations  within  the
             Gulf region. I chose to explore this through the  case  studies
             of Bahrain and Kuwait, which have gained increasing  attraction
             within media, academic  and  policy-making  circles  in  recent
             years.  In  a  post-Arab  Spring  context,  I  will  take   the
             scholarship forward by focusing on the socio-political activism
             of Bahraini and Saudi diaspora residing in the UK. This project
             will examine the  contested  visions  of  democracy  and  human
             rights between  Gulf  diaspora  activists  and  foreign  policy
             objectives as set out by the UK government.
          4. This has led  to  working  alongside  leading  scholars  for  a
             publication on "Civic Space and  Sectarianism  in  GCC  States:
             Dynamics of 'Informal' Civic  Society  in  Kuwait  and  Bahrain
             beyond State Institutions," which is published  in  Studies  of
             Ethnicity and Nationalism (SEN) Vol 19, Issue 1  (April  2019).
             This is in  addition  to  my  latest  journal  article  on  the
             processes of Securitisation and Othering of the Shia  community
             in  Bahrain  and  Pakistan,  as  well  as  the  fast   teaching
             experience I have accumulated through my positions as a  Senior
             Teaching  Fellow  at  SOAS,  Kings  College  London   and   the
             University  of  Leeds.  My  book  proposal  has  been  accepted
             following keen interest from  the  series  editor  at  Syracuse
             University Press (Professor Fred Lawson)  to  develop  my  book
             manuscript on  "Informal  Civic  Society  and  Sectarianism  in
             Bahrain and Kuwait'.


     5. At [5] DR Hafidh sets out a full list of the lectures and  seminars
        and  course  topics  pertaining  to  Middle  Eastern  studies   and
        comparative politics.
     6. The First-tier Tribunal examined what weight could be given to this
        evidence, between [14 - 24] of the original  decision,  writing  in
        that final paragraph:

        24.  Taking all of the above into account: I am not persuaded  that
             Dr Hafidh has the requisite expertise to give an expert opinion
             on the position of  gay  men  in  Turkey  and  I  conclude  his
             methodology is flawed, leading to flawed conclusions. There are
             concerns about the way  the  underlying  sources  and  societal
             issues have been assessed. Therefore, I attach  limited  weight
             to the expert evidence. The report fails to rebut  the  related
             issues in the refusal. At its highest, the report is of limited
             assistance to the appellants.

     7. To no doubt deal with these findings the appellant sought a  report
        from a different expert, Volkan Yilmaz, PhD who in relation to  his
        qualifications writes:

          1. Qualifications.





             In the last six years, I worked as an  Associate  Professor  of
             Social Policy and the Director of Social Policy Forum  Research
             Centre at Bogazici University (Istanbul,  Turkey).  I  took  my
             undergraduate degrees  in  Political  Science  &  International
             Relations and Sociology and completed  my  Master's  degree  in
             Modern Turkish History from Bogazici University. I hold  a  PhD
             in Politics from the University of Leeds. My mother  tongue  is
             Turkish. My areas of expertise  include,  as  evidenced  in  my
             academic  publications  seen  below,  discrimination  based  on
             sexual orientation and gender identity and human rights with  a
             particular focus on Turkey. With Dr Ipek Gocmen of  Max  Planck
             Institute for the Study of  Societies  (Cologne,  Germany),  we
             conducted the first nationwide online survey with a  sample  of
             2,875  participants  and  focus  group  interviews   with   139
             participants living in  10  provinces  to  examine  social  and
             economic problems lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT)
             persons face in Turkey. Results of this comprehensive  research
             were published  in  prestigious  scientific  journals  and  are
             available  in  English.  Below  you  may   find   my   relevant
             publications in English:
             ...


     8. A point taken by Mr Diwnycz is that Volkan Yilmaz, PhD  is  not  an
        expert in the field in which he purports to be able to  provide  an
        expert report which is relevant to the weight that  can  be  placed
        upon the document.
     9. In MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (Rev 1)  (CG)  [2014]  UKUT  442
        (IAC) (3 October 2014) at [23-27] it is written:

        The duties of the expert witness


        23.       We consider it appropriate  to  draw  attention  to  this
           subject, given the prevalence and importance of expert  evidence
           in Country Guidance cases. Mindful that  substantial  quantities
           of judicial ink have been spilled on this  subject,  we  confine
           ourselves to highlighting and emphasising what appear to  us  to
           be amongst  the  most  important  considerations.   The  general
           principles are of some vintage. In National Justice CIA Naviera
           SA v  Prudential  Assurance  Company  Limited [1993]  2  Lloyds
           Reports 68, Cresswell J stated, at pp 81 - 82:


           "The duties and responsibilities of expert  witnesses  in  civil
           cases include the following:


           1. Expert evidence presented to the court should be, and  should
                be seen  to  be,  the  independent  product  of  the  expert
                uninfluenced as to form or  content  by  the  exigencies  of
                litigation ....


           2. An expert witness should provide  independent  assistance  to
                the Court by way of objective unbiased opinion  in  relation
                to matters within his expertise ....


                       An expert witness in the  High  Court  should  never
                assume the role of an advocate ...


           3. An expert witness should state the facts or  assumption  upon
                which his opinion is based.  He should not omit to  consider
                material  facts  which  could  detract  from  his  concluded
                opinion. ....


           4. An expert witness should make  it  clear  when  a  particular
                question or issue falls outside his expertise.


           5. If an expert's opinion is not properly researched because  he
                considers that insufficient data  is  available,  then  this
                must be stated with an indication that  the  opinion  is  no
                more than a provisional  one.   In  cases  where  an  expert
                witness who has prepared a report could not assert that  the
                report contained the truth, the whole truth and nothing  but
                the truth without  some  qualification,  that  qualification
                should be stated in the report ....


           6. If, after exchange of reports, an expert witness changes  his
                view on a material  matter  having  read  the  other  side's
                expert's report, or for any other  reason,  such  change  of
                view should be communicated (through legal  representatives)
                to the other side without delay and when appropriate to  the
                Court."


           This code was duly approved by the Court of Appeal: see [1995] 1
           Lloyds Reports 455, at p496. It has been considered in a  series
           of subsequent report cases: see, for example, Vernon v  Bosley
           (No 2) [1997] 1 All ER 577, at page 601.  In the  latter  case,
           Evans LJ stated, at page 603:


           "....  Expert witnesses are armed with the court's readiness  to
           receive the expert evidence which it needs in order to  reach  a
           fully informed decision, whatever the nature of  the  topic  may
           be.  But their evidence ceases to be useful, and it  may  become
           counter-productive, when it is not marshalled  by  reference  to
           the issues in the particular case and kept within the limits  so
           fixed."


           Judicial condemnation of an expert who does not  appreciate  his
           responsibilities is far from uncommon: see, for example, Stevens
           v Gullis [2000] 1 All ER 527, where Lord Woolf MR at pp.532-533
           stated that the expert in question had:


           -


           "... demonstrated by his conduct that he had  no  conception  of
           the requirements placed upon an expert under the CPR .....


           It is now clear from the rules that, in  addition  to  the  duty
           which an expert owes to a party, he is also under a duty to  the
           court."


        24. The requirements of CPR 31 also featured in Lucas  v  Barking
           Hospitals NHS Trust [2003] EWCA Civ 1102, where the emphasis was
           on CPR 31 and CPR 35.  These provide (inter alia) that:


           (i)    a party may apply for an  order  for  inspection  of  any
           document mentioned in an expert's report which has  not  already
           been disclosed,


           (ii)   every expert's report must state  the  substance  of  all
           material instructions, whether written or oral, on the basis  of
           which the report was written, and


           (iii)  such instructions are not privileged against disclosure.


           Laws LJ made the following noteworthy observation:


           "[42]      As it seems to me the key to this case  ....  Is  the
           imperative of transparency, a general theme of the CPR but  here
           specifically applied to  the  deployment  of  experts'  reports.
           Thus the aim of rule 35.10(3) and (4) is broadly to ensure  that
           the factual basis on which the expert has prepared his report is
           patent."


        25.   Thus in the contemporary era the subject of  expert  evidence
           and experts' reports is  heavily    regulated.  The  principles,
           rules and criteria highlighted above are of general application.
           They apply to experts giving evidence at every tier of the legal
           system.  In  the  specific  sphere   of   the   Upper   Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), these standards  apply  fully,
           without any qualification.  They are  reflected  in  the  Senior
           President's Practice Direction No 10 (2010) which, in  paragraph
           10, lays particular emphasis on a series of duties. We summarise
           these duties thus:


           (i)      to   provide   information   and    express    opinions
           independently, uninfluenced by the litigation;


           (ii)   to consider all material  facts,  including  those  which
           might detract from the expert witness' opinion ;


           (iii)  to be objective and unbiased;


           (iv)   to  avoid  trespass  into  the  prohibited  territory  of
           advocacy;


           (v)    to be fully informed;


           (vi)   to act within the  confines  of  the  witness's  area  of
           expertise; and


           (vii) to modify, or abandon one's view, where appropriate.


        26.   In the realm of expert testimony, important duties  are  also
           imposed  on  legal  practitioners.  These  too  feature  in  the
           aforementioned  Practice  Direction.    These  duties   may   be
           summarised thus:


           (i)    to ensure that the expert is equipped with  all  relevant
           information and materials, which will  include  information  and
           materials adverse to the client's case;


           (ii)   to vouchsafe that the  expert  is  fully  versed  in  the
           duties rehearsed above;


           (iii)  to communicate, promptly, any alterations in the expert's
           opinion to the other parties and the Tribunal, and


           (iv)    to  ensure  full  compliance  with  the   aforementioned
           Practice Statement, any other relevant Practice  Statement,  any
           relevant Guidance Note, all material requirements of  the  Rules
           and all case management directions and orders of the Tribunal.


           These duties, also unqualified in nature, are  a  reflection  of
           the  bond  between  Bench  and  Representatives  which  features
           throughout the common law world.


        27.  The interface between the role of the expert witness  and  the
           duty of the Court or Tribunal features in the following  passage
           in the judgment of Wilson J in Mibanga v Secretary of State for
           the Home Department [2005], EWHC 367:


           "[24]  It seems to me to be axiomatic that a  fact  finder  must
                 not reach his or her conclusion before  surveying  all  the
                 evidence relevant thereto....


                 The Secretary of State argues  that  decisions  as  to  the
                 credibility of an account are to be taken by  the  judicial
                 fact finder and that, in their reports, experts, whether in
                 relation to medical matters or in  relation  to  in-country
                 circumstances, cannot usurp the fact finder's  function  in
                 assessing credibility. I agree.  What,  however,  they  can
                 offer is a factual context in which it may be necessary for
                 the fact finder to survey  the  allegations  placed  before
                 him; and such context  may  prove  a  crucial  aid  to  the
                 decision whether or not to accept the truth of them. ......


                 It seems to me that a proper fact finding enquiry  involves
                 explanation as to the reason for which an  expert  view  is
                 rejected and indeed placed beyond  the  spectrum  of  views
                 which could reasonably be held."


           To this we would add that, as the hearing of the present appeals
           demonstrated, this Tribunal will always pay close  attention  to
           the expert's research; the availability  of  empirical  data  or
           other information bearing on the expert's views; the quality and
           reliability of such material; whether the expert has taken  such
           material into account; the expert's  willingness  to  modify  or
           withdraw certain views or conclusions where other  evidence,  or
           expert opinion, suggests  that  this  is  appropriate;  and  the
           attitude of the expert, which will include  his  willingness  to
           engage with the  Tribunal.   This  is  not  designed  to  be  an
           exhaustive list.

    10. In PP (female headed household; expert  duties)  Sri  Lanka  [2017]
        UKUT 117 (IAC) (06 February 2017) it was found,  inter  alai,  that
        experts' reports and evidence must comply fully and  strictly  with
        the Senior President of Tribunal's Practice Direction and that  the
        methodology of every expert witness should always be patent on  the
        face of the report.
    11. Paragraph  10  of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Practice
        Direction reads:

        10. Expert evidence


        10.1. A party who  instructs  an  expert  must  provide  clear  and
        precise instructions to the  expert,  together  with  all  relevant
        information  concerning  the  nature  of  the   appellant's   case,
        including the appellant's immigration history, the reasons why  the
        appellant's claim or application has been refused by the respondent
        and copies of any relevant previous reports prepared in respect  of
        the appellant.


        10.2. It is the duty of an expert to help the Tribunal  on  matters
        within the expert's own  expertise.  This  duty  is  paramount  and
        overrides any obligation to the person from  whom  the  expert  has
        received instructions or by whom the expert is paid.


        10.3. Expert evidence should be  the  independent  product  of  the
        expert uninfluenced by the pressures of litigation.


        10.4. An expert should assist the Tribunal by providing  objective,
        unbiased opinion on matters within his or her expertise, and should
        not assume the role of an advocate.


        10.5. An expert should consider all material facts, including those
        which might detract from his or her opinion.


        10.6. An expert should make it clear:


             (a)  when  a  question  or  issue  falls  outside  his  or  her
             expertise; and


             (b) when the expert is not able to reach  a  definite  opinion,
             for example because of insufficient information.


        10.7. If, after producing a report, an expert changes  his  or  her
        view on  any  material  matter,  that  change  of  view  should  be
        communicated to the parties without delay, and when appropriate  to
        the Tribunal.


        10.8. An expert's report should be addressed to  the  Tribunal  and
        not to the party from whom the expert has received instructions.


        10.9. An expert's report must:


             (a) give details of the expert's qualifications;


             (b) give details of any literature or other material which  the
             expert has relied on in making the report;


             (c) contain a statement setting out the substance of all  facts
             and instructions given to the expert which are material to  the
             opinions expressed in the report or upon which  those  opinions
             are based;


             (d) make clear which of the facts  stated  in  the  report  are
             within the expert's own knowledge;


             (e) say who carried out any examination, measurement  or  other
             procedure which the expert has used for the  report,  give  the
             qualifications of that person,  and  say  whether  or  not  the
             procedure has been carried out under the expert's supervision;


             (f) where there is a range of opinion on the matters dealt with
             in the report: (i) summarise the range of opinion,  so  far  as
             reasonably practicable, and (ii) give reasons for the  expert's
             own opinion;


             (g) contain a summary of the conclusions reached;


             (h) if the expert is  not  able  to  give  an  opinion  without
             qualification, state  the  qualification;  and  (i)  contain  a
             statement that the expert understands his or her  duty  to  the
             Tribunal, and has complied and will  continue  to  comply  with
             that duty.


        10.10. An expert's report must be verified by a Statement of  Truth
        as well as containing the statements required in paragraph  10.9(h)
        and (i).


        10.11. The form of the Statement of Truth is as follows: "I confirm
        that insofar as the facts stated in my report  are  within  my  own
        knowledge I have made clear which they are and I believe them to be
        true, and that the opinions I have expressed represent my true  and
        complete professional opinion".


        10.12. The instructions referred to in paragraph  10.9(c)  are  not
        protected by privilege but cross-examination of the expert  on  the
        contents of  the  instructions  will  not  be  allowed  unless  the
        Tribunal permits it (or unless the party who gave the  instructions
        consents to it). Before it gives permission, the Tribunal  must  be
        satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to  consider  that  the
        statement in the report or the substance  of  the  instructions  is
        inaccurate or incomplete. If the Tribunal is so satisfied, it  will
        allow the cross-examination where it appears to be in the interests
        of justice to do so.


        10.13. In this Practice Direction: "appellant" means the party  who
        is or  was  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  and
        "respondent" means the party who is or was  the  respondent  before
        the First-tier Tribunal.

    12.  The  report  from  Volkan   Yilmaz   contains   details   of   his
        qualifications  and  as  noted  above,  the   documents   provided,
        questions asked, the expert's opinion  by  reference  to  footnotes
        referring to relevant  texts,  a  summary  of  the  conclusions,  a
        heading setting out in more detail the literature  relied  upon  in
        preparing the report, and the signed declaration in  the  following
        terms "I confirm that insofar as the facts stated in my report  are
        within my own knowledge, I have made clear which  they  are  and  I
        believe them to be true and that  the  opinions  I  have  expressed
        represent my true and complete professional opinion.". It is  noted
        that the report is not written to the Tribunal, but rather to those
        who provided the instructions,  i.e.  the  appellant's  solicitors,
        contrary to the Practice Direction.
    13. As the Tribunal were not drawn to any  other  specific  failure  to
        comply with the Practice Direction and I  find  that  even  if  the
        Secretary of State does not  recognise  Mr  Yilmaz  as  an  expert,
        partly by reference to the fact he had not been quoted in any other
        decisions to prove his expertise, that it is appropriate for weight
        to be placed upon his report submitted on the  appellant's  behalf.
        Mr Yalmaz has relevant expertise which is the  foundation  for  the
        view expressed in the report, clear knowledge of  and  exposure  to
        society within Turkey where he is based, and that it is appropriate
        to consider his opinion in  the  round,  together  with  the  other
        evidence made available to the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

    14. The single question in this appeal is: do  the  appellants  have  a
        well-founded fear of being persecuted if returned to Turkey  for  a
        reason specified in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.
    15. Article 1A(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention  as  amended  defines  a
        refugee as any person who:

        "... owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons  of
        race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
        group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
        nationality and is unable, or owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
        avail himself of the protection of that country..."

    16. Article 9 of Council Directive  2004/83/EC  of  29  April  2004  on
        minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country
        nationals or stateless  persons  as  refugees  or  as  persons  who
        otherwise need international protection  and  the  content  of  the
        protection granted ("the Directive")  defines  persecution  in  the
        following terms:

        "Article 9 Acts of persecution


        1.   Acts of persecution within the meaning of article 1 A of the
        Geneva Convention must:


           (a)    be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition as
                to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                under Article 15(2) of the European Convention for the
                Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


           (b)    be an accumulation of various measures, including
                violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                to affect an individual in a similar manner as mentioned in
                (a).


        2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter
        alia, take the form of:


           (a)    acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of
                sexual violence;


           (b)    legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures
                which are in themselves discriminatory or which are
                implemented in a discriminatory manner;


           (c)    prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
                discriminatory;


           (d)    denial of judicial redress resulting in a
                disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;


           (e)    prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military
                service in a conflict, where performing military service
                would include crimes or acts falling under the exclusion
                clauses as set out in Article 12(2);


           (f)     acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.

    17. There must be a connection between the reasons mentioned in Article
        10 and the acts of persecution.
     1. In HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31  the  Supreme  Court  recognised  a
        distinction between a situation where a gay man conceals his sexual
        orientation because, in part at least, he fears  that  he  will  be
        persecuted if he lives openly as a gay man and a situation where  a
        gay man chooses to live in a way that does not disclose his  sexual
        orientation. That requires the court or tribunal to ask why  a  gay
        man would conceal his sexual  orientation  on  his  return  to  his
        country of origin. If he were to do that in reaction to "family  or
        social pressures" (per  Lord  Hope  at  paragraph  22)  or  "social
        pressures" (per Lord Rodger at paragraph 82) that would not  amount
        to  persecution  and  the  Refugee  Convention  would   not   offer
        protection against return to the country of nationality.
     2. In the light of that, Lord Rodger gave the  following  guidance  to
        tribunals on the approach to be adopted  at  paragraph  82  of  his
        judgment in HJ (Iran):

        "The approach to be followed by tribunals


        82.  When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
        founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
        first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
        gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
        his country of nationality. If  so,  the  tribunal  must  then  ask
        itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
        people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
        applicant's country of nationality. If so, the tribunal must go  on
        to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
        returned to that country. If  the  applicant  would  in  fact  live
        openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
        he has a well-founded fear of persecution-even if  he  could  avoid
        the risk by  living  "discreetly".  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
        tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
        and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would
        do so. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to
        live discreetly simply because that was how he himself  would  wish
        to live, or because of  social  pressures,  e  g,  not  wanting  to
        distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
        should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
        persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
        them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
        persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
        that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is  gay.
        If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
        reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
        fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
        openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
        application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
        he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
        defeat the very right which the Convention  exists  to  protect-his
        right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
        persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
        freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
        receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
        applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
        country of nationality should have afforded him."

    18. As noted above, the first of the HJ (Iran) questions is answered in
        the positive.
    19. The second question requires an assessment of whether a gay  person
        who lived openly would be liable to persecution in Turkey.
    20.  The  appellant's  place  reliance  upon  a  number  of  documents,
        including a letter from a Member of the  Istanbul  Bar  Association
        dated 19 July 2021, in which it is written:

        "I have been working as  a  human  rights  lawyer  (LGBTI+  rights-
        focused) in Turkey for years. Human rights lawyers in  Turkey  must
        represent their clients against the State and society against their
        own families. Unfortunately, there is  no  law  to  protect  LGBTI+
        individuals against civilian attacks or hate crimes. Moreover,  the
        government has targeted the LGBTI+ community by  accusing  them  of
        deteriorating the Turkish  family  structure.  Recent  developments
        regarding the withdrawal from the Istanbul Convention, (the Council
        of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating  Violence  Against
        Women and Domestic Violence) has shown  the  government's  approach
        towards  the  LGBTI+  community.  For  instance,  Fahrettin  Altun,
        President Erdogan's communication director, delegated homosexuality
        as an 'ugliness'  and  argued  that  families  were  targeted  with
        propaganda promoting tolerance  for  LGBTI+  people.  The  Interior
        Minister, Suleyman Soylu, who  is  also  the  head  of  the  police
        department, committed hate speech by  saying  "LGBT  perverts"  and
        whose tweets were restricted, also said "LGBT is a perversion.  Are
        there things like LGBT in our past? Is there something that  we  do
        not know? These are things that happen in the West."


        For more than five  years,  being  an  LGBTI+  has  been  tried  to
        criminalise by the government itself, which is supposed to  protect
        sexual minorities under the international treaties Turkey ratified.
        However, the government, on the contrary, makes LGBTI+  individuals
        target by stigmatising us and committing hate speech towards LGBTI+
        people.


        There are recorded violent incidents,  including  honour  killings,
        showing families treatment  towards  their  LGBTI+  children.  Many
        LGBTI+ individuals were restricted to go out or meeting with  other
        people by their parents. Even though they were over 18  years  old,
        and there were crimes, the police did nothing since Law No. 6284 to
        Protect Family and Prevent Violence Against Women only  focused  on
        protecting the family. The law is not sufficient and efficient even
        against violence against women.


        As understood, homosexuality is widely a taboo subject  in  Turkey.
        Homophobia and transphobia are at high rates among Turkish society.
        According to a survey conducted by  the  Kadir  Has  University  in
        Istanbul in 2018, 55.3% of  people  would  not  want  a  homosexual
        neighbour.  Also, according to the 2020 Pew Research, only  25%  of
        the Turks said homosexuality should be accepted  by  society,  with
        57% opposing it. LGBTI+ people  face  beatings,  robberies,  police
        harassment and murder. According to A  transgender  Europe,  Turkey
        has the highest rate of hate murders.


        For those crimes committed against LGBTI+ people, the  response  by
        the authorities is far from being inadequate, since the police rely
        on their moral codes  instead  of  the  law  and  regulations  that
        already do not provide  shelter  for  LGBTI+  people.  The  Turkish
        State, which already endorses  homophobia  and  transphobia,  never
        protects the LGBTI+ community against attacks.


        While LGBTI+ individuals tried to  flee  from  their  hometown  and
        their parents, the police aided them  in  finding  their  children,
        although the children are under threat. Ahmet Yildiz,  one  of  the
        victims of honour killings, was found by  his  family  despite  his
        relocation. The defendant father, the murder of Ahmet  Yildaz,  has
        not been found for 13 years because he could leave  Turkey  despite
        the travel ban, which is impossible without the police help.


        A recent incident also showed this collaboration between the police
        and homophobic parents. One of the former soldiers  imprisoned  his
        son because he learnt he was gay. Despite all denunciation made  by
        CSO's and activists and complaints made by the gay son, the  police
        did nothing to save and liberate the gay adult. Still,  in  Turkey,
        if someone has  an  official  duty,  such  as  being  a  police  or
        soldiers, they have certain impunity and power. Since they have the
        authority to reach all people's  data,  they  can  reach  them  out
        quickly, even though it means misconduct in office.


        I sincerely  know  that  the  hazardous  circumstances  for  LGBTI+
        people,  especially  those  who  have  please   parents.   In   the
        circumstances, sending back someone to Turkey is not  safe  because
        of the genuine threat to LGBTI+ individuals.


        Sincerely yours"

    21. In relation to the question of whether the  appellants  can  safely
        relocate in Turkey Volkan Yilmaz writes:

        "The ability of your  clients  to  safely  relocate  in  Turkey  is
        uncertain for two reasons, namely the receipt of  repetitive  death
        threats and the absence of effective state protection,  which  must
        be considered in tandem with each other. First, it  is  evident  in
        the screenshots of the text messages that one of your  clients  (Mr
        SS) received from his father and his cousin include  death  threats
        (and the threat of "corrective" rape by the father).  Although  one
        could consider these threats as immediate and transitory  reactions
        that would unlikely lead to these  acts,  the  father's  repetitive
        mention of these threats in two different messages sent  five  days
        apart and the cousins assurance of each  threat  twice  eight  days
        apart increases the likelihood that such threats might  materialise
        if  your  clients  relocate  in  Turkey.  The   characteristic   of
        threateners in your client's case is in line with that of  landmark
        anti-gay hate crime cases of Ahmet Yildiz and  Rosin  Cicek,  which
        demonstrate that male family  members  are  joint  perpetrators  of
        these crimes.


        Second, and more importantly, there is no  reliable  evidence  that
        leads me to conclude that your clients could  effectively  rely  on
        state protection in the face of death threats originating  from  Mr
        SS  family  members,  should  they  relocate  to  Turkey.  This  is
        especially the case for two reasons: increasingly over hostility of
        the government towards gays and the erosion of the rule of law.


        Turkey has moved from being a country that is relatively  safe  for
        gays in the 2000s and early 2010s to one that lost  this  character
        due to government led  anti-gay  campaign  started  in  the  2020s.
        Concerning the political and legal context  in  the  2010s,  Turkey
        appeared a relatively safe place for gays in the first period as it
        stood out as a Muslim majority country where homosexuality is not a
        criminal offence and the flourishing gay rights advocacy started to
        raise awareness among the general public. In such context, with  Dr
        Ipek Gocmen, we conducted the most comprehensive research  in  2014
        on social and economic problems that LGBT persons facing Turkey  in
        the following domains: access  to  justice,  education,  education,
        employment,  healthcare  and  housing.  The  research  included   a
        quantitative  component-  a  nationwide  online  survey   of   2875
        participants  and  a  quantitative  component  -  14  focus   group
        interviews with 139 respondents in 10 cities. At the time, we found
        that LGBT's report systematic cases of perceived discrimination  in
        the above mentioned domains. However, the overwhelming majority  of
        respondents - nine out  of  ten  -  do  not  turn  these  cases  of
        perceived discrimination into a legal complaint. According  to  the
        survey results, only 16.5 per cent  of  those  who  filed  a  legal
        complaint reported that they had a  satisfactory  result  from  the
        legal process. Reasons for not filing a legal complaint include the
        following: (1) filing a complaint will not change anything (50.7%);
        (2) I am afraid of being outed  without  my  consent  (49.3%);  (3)
        these things happen all the time (36.9%); and (4) I  did  not  know
        where and to whom to file a complaint (27.5%).  We  concluded  that
        these results are sufficient to represent the culture  of  impunity
        in Turkey with respect to sexual orientation discrimination and the
        Turkish legal systems failure in effectively serving LGBT  persons.
        While  these  results  demonstrated  that  there   was   room   for
        improvement at the time, I would like to emphasise that the current
        situation is considerably  worse  for  gay  men  than  the  one  we
        previously examined.


        Turkey's gay rights record  has  never  been  perfect,  but  it  is
        deteriorating at a rapid pace in recent years and  openly  gay  men
        constitute a particularly vulnerable group  in  such  context.  The
        official position of the Turkish government provides clear evidence
        for this claim. Turkey's 2018 self assessment of its implementation
        of  the  Committee  of  Ministers'(of  the   Council   of   Europe)
        Recommendation on measures to combat discrimination on  grounds  of
        sexual orientation and gender identity  reports  that  the  country
        does not comply with four out of five indicators for tackling  hate
        crimes.


        As part of the same self-assessment,  Turkish  authorities  declare
        that the country does not take any official steps  to  combat  hate
        speech against LGBT persons. On the contrary, the President and the
        Minister of Interior  openly  target  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual  and
        transgender (LGBT) persons in their public speeches.  In  addition,
        the President of Religious Affairs openly accuses  gay  persons  of
        being a major threat to younger generations and the main  cause  of
        HIV prevalence. This high level anti-gay  rhetoric  with  religious
        references seems to reflect in the text messages  that  the  father
        sent to Mr SS when he wrote "God damn you! Indeed, God  cursed  you
        so that you became a faggot. I can't even go to the mosque  because
        of you. You disgrace to me. You deserve to be killed. I  will  kill
        you and become felicide." These statements go beyond common phrases
        used in Turkish to express confusion  and  a  transitory  state  of
        anger. Instead, they are statements that add up an expression of  a
        credible  threat  that  is  encouraged  by  a  politically  hostile
        environment. This dangerous coming together of late and high  level
        anti-gay rhetoric might be providing a breeding ground for anti-gay
        hate crimes.


        In a country where rule of law reigns, even the presence of a  high
        level  anti-gay  campaign  might  not  automatically   imply   that
        effective state protection  would  be  lacking  for  your  clients.
        Nevertheless, in the World  Justice  Project  Rule  of  Law  Index,
        Turkey's fundamental rights score decreased from 0.42  in  2010  to
        0.33. The current standing of Turkey in terms of fundamental rights
        places the country in 123rd place (just above Venezuela  and  below
        Bangladesh), I would like to note  that  this  score  is  estimated
        based on the following sub- factors: Equal treatment and absence of
        discrimination, the right to live and security  of  the  person  is
        effectively guaranteed, due process of the law and  rights  of  the
        accused,  freedom  of  opinion  and   expression   is   effectively
        guaranteed,  freedom  of  belief  and   religion   is   effectively
        guaranteed, freedom from arbitrary  interference  with  privacy  is
        effectively guaranteed, freedom  of  assembly  and  association  is
        effectively guaranteed, fundamental labour rights  are  effectively
        guaranteed. If these sub- factors would be adjusted to gay  persons
        in the current context, based on the  reasons  stated  in  previous
        paragraphs, I would expect that Turkey school would be lower.


        One evidence of the particular vulnerability  of  gay  men  in  the
        context of the erosion of the rule of law is the recent decision of
        the Turkish President to withdraw unilaterally from the Council  of
        Europe Convention on  preventing  and  combating  violence  against
        women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) that took  effect
        on  1  July  2021.  The  official  stated  reason  behind  Turkey's
        withdrawal  was  that  the  Convention  promotes  and   legitimises
        homosexuality, which is deemed in contradiction with Turkish family
        values. While the government tries to  assure  the  general  public
        that the withdrawal decision would not negatively impact  combating
        violence against (cisgender, and heterosexual)  women,  no  similar
        statement was made concerning LGBT  persons.  On  the  contrary,  a
        reference  to  sexual  orientation  in  Istanbul   Convention   was
        presented by government  authorities  as  a  sufficient  reason  to
        withdraw from it. The withdrawal decision and the stated rationale,
        therefore, shows that Turkish authorities have  a  strong  will  to
        relieve themselves from the positive  obligation  to  protect  LGBT
        persons from violence inflicted by non-state  actors.  This  strong
        official position on disregarding homophobic violence  casts  doubt
        on any possibility of the presence of  effective  state  protection
        for gays."

    22. In his summary at [5] of the report, the author writes:

        "Based on the overall assessment  I  provided  above,  this  report
        shows that in my professional opinion the current political,  legal
        and law enforcement environment  in  Turkey  does  not  allow  safe
        relocation of your  clients  in  Turkey.  I  have  no  evidence  to
        conclude  that  they  will  receive  effective  state   protection,
        especially in the face of death threats  from  Mr  SS'  father  and
        cousin. Having reviewed the case and relevant evidence,  I  contend
        that there are objective grounds for your clients  subjective  fear
        of persecution and the risk of ill-treatment is high had they  been
        relocated in Turkey."

    23. A number of news articles have  been  provided  by  the  appellants
        referring to police crackdowns on LGBT rallies,  such  as  that  in
        Istanbul in 2016, albeit one article indicates this was as a result
        of the state of emergency declared by the government at the time of
        the attempted coup which banned  public  gatherings,  but  also  an
        article headed Civil Rights Defenders (Sweden),  Turkey  bans  LGBT
        Activism to "Protect Public Security", 23 November 2017,  reporting
        that Turkey has banned all events organised by  LGBT  organisations
        in  Ankara,  citing  public  "sensitivities"  and  "security"   and
        labelling LGBT activism as a threat to the Turkish society and  its
        values. Other articles provided support the findings of the country
        expert in relation to attacks on members of the LGBT community  and
        lack of effective state protection.
    24. Problems having been experienced by the appellants, particularly SS
        the credibility of which has not been  challenged.  Copies  of  the
        text  messages  together  with  translations  were  provided  in  a
        supplementary bundle for the appeal hearing listed  on  5  February
        2020 before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  are  two  from  the
        appellant's father which read:

        25th January, Friday 23:59


        I would rather not have a son like  you.  God  damn  you.  God  has
        already damned you, so you became a fag. I cannot even  go  to  the
        mosque because of you. You disgrace me. You  deserve  death.  I  am
        going to kill you. I am going to be a filicide you son of a bitch.


        Your mother and I cannot go out in public. I am going to kill  you.
        I don't have a son like you.


        Son of a bitch. Fuck your mother and wife. Dishonoured fag who gets
        his ass fucked. I am going to fuck you first when I get you, fag.






        30th January Wednesday 20:51


        My god-damned fag son.


        I am going  to  kill  you  with  my  hands  when  I  get  you.  You
        dishonoured us, shit, son of a bitch.


        I would rather not have a son like you. You are going to make me  a
        father killer. If only I get you.

    25. There are then two messages said to be written by a cousin  in  the
        following terms:





        22nd January Tuesday 22:10


        [SS] what a disgrace and dishonour. What have you  done  man!!!  My
        uncle got mad. He says, "My son is a fag. I have fed a devil in  my
        house until now. I gave him my father's name. He disgraced us.  How
        will I go to the mosque and face them?" Be aware that what you have
        done will not be left without penalty. This is not a  joke.  Honour
        is everything. Of course you are going to come  here  fag.  We  are
        going to shoot on your brains out. You dishonoured dickhead.






        30th January Wednesday 20:59


        You cock knocker fag. Don't think that we have forgotten  you.  You
        have turned people upside down. Fuck your character, fag. My  uncle
        is not joking!

    26. There are two issues that arise from this evidence the first is the
        real risk of facing discrimination within society in Turkey if  the
        appellants are identified as  being  in  a  same-sex  relationship.
        Whether such discrimination is sufficient to amount to  persecution
        is a question of fact but persecution based upon discrimination  is
        a fundamental foundation of the Refugee Convention. The  report  of
        the expert reflects the deteriorating situation for members of  the
        LGBT community in Turkey, which appears, at this stage, to be  only
        heading  in  one  direction.  Whilst  the  statistics  indicate  an
        objection by some to having a LGBT neighbour does not apply to all,
        it does to a slight majority.
    27. There is also an issue raised in the country guidance  case  of  IK
        (Returnees Records, IFA) [2004] UKIAT 312 regarding  the  procedure
        on return. There is nothing to  indicate  either  appellant  is  of
        interest to the Turkish state, per se, but within the  decision  is
        his written at the end of [83] and [84]:

             If a person faces non-routine investigation what should he be
             expected to say when questioned and what further information
             is reasonably likely to be accessed in this process?


        84.  The CIPU Report at 6.242 describes the nature of the
             questioning at the airport police station as mostly involving:


             "Establishment or checking personal details; reasons and
             period of exit from Turkey; reason for the asylum application;
             reasons for any refusal of the asylum application; any
             criminal record and past record at home and abroad including
             drug offences; possible contact with illegal organisations
             abroad. However, if there are no suspicions, as a rule after
             an average of 6 to 9 hours they are released."

    28. In light of the attitude by the authorities, including  the  police
        to members of the LGBT community, it cannot be ruled out  that  the
        appellants may experience difficulties including  ill-treatment  at
        the hands of the authorities at the point of return. They cannot be
        expected to lie  about  the  reasons  they  claimed  asylum,  which
        reflects a genuinely held aspect of their personalities solely  for
        the purposes of avoiding any persecution. To do so for that reasons
        contravenes the HJ (Iran) principal.
    29. In addition to societal issues SS is also faced with  a  real  risk
        from his father and cousin, his father clearly viewing his  actions
        as having brought dishonour upon the family,  which  justifies  his
        murder. That such threats have been found to  be  credible  is  the
        unique feature of this case.
    30. At this stage it is also  necessary  to  consider  the  ability  of
        family members to locate SS if he is returned to Turkey.  It  is  a
        relevant factor in this appeal that the cousin is  a  policeman  in
        Turkey. SS also asserts that his father will  utilise  contacts  he
        has with the police to find him.
    31. SS also asserts that as they could not live in their home area they
        would have to relocate to a different area of Turkey, but  that  in
        order to rent an apartment, they must register themselves with  the
        local Muhtar and provide their national identity number, full  name
        and information, without which they could not obtain  rental,  gas,
        or  electricity.  SS  states   that   all   such   information   is
        automatically listed with the government  and  that  anybody  could
        access that information.
    32. Even though it was submitted by Mr Diwnycz that the appellants have
        passports and identity cards and will therefore not need  to  apply
        for further duplicates, this does not provide an answer to the fact
        that their personal details have to be provided as part of  day-to-
        day life within Turkey.
    33. So far as accessing such information is concerned, a further report
        provided  by  the  appellants  in  their  bundle  refers   to   the
        requirement under Civil  Service  Law  No.  5490  for  all  Turkish
        citizens to have an identity number which cannot be  changed.  That
        number  will  be  used  as  the  basis  for  all   processes   with
        institutions and other  legally  identities,  including  change  of
        dwelling, address, treatment in hospitals, tax transactions, etc. A
        system known as the Identity Sharing System,  Address  Registration
        System and Central Civil Administration System was created in order
        to carry out these processes online, via a central database.
    34. It was accepted by Mr Diwnycz that such evidence can be accessed by
        family members, especially those in the police, as noted above. The
        argument that there was no reason for such  enquiries  to  be  made
        fails  to  take  account  of  the  evidence  that  the  authorities
        themselves may advise SS and GA's parents of their return in  light
        of the strength of ill feeling expressed in the text  messages  and
        anti- LGBTI+ views or that an ad hoc enquiry could reveal that they
        have returned and their location. The degree of hatred expressed by
        SS' father and desire to take action to protect the  family  honour
        creates a credible risk that he will do what he can to find  SS  if
        at all possible.
    35. It is clear that what is proposed by SS' father and cousin  clearly
        crosses the threshold of  persecution  and  as  it  is  based  upon
        discovery of his sexual identity it will be for a Convention reason
        as a member of a Particular Social Group.
    36. I find that the appellants have established on  the  evidence  that
        the answer to the second question is that SS faces a real  risk  of
        persecution from family members sufficient to amount to persecution
        in Turkey and that both SS and GA  will  face  discrimination  that
        might cross the necessary threshold from others in society  at this
        present time as a result of  their  sexual  identity  as  gay  men,
        especially if they return to Turkey to live in same-sex  households
        with each other as they are entitled to do.
    37. As the threat from family relates to SS' home  area  they  will  be
        required to relocate elsewhere. The question as always  is  whether
        it is reasonable all the circumstances to expect  them  to  do  so.
        This gives rise to the third question set out in HJ (Iran).
    38. The third question requires the tribunal to consider what SS and GA
        would do if returned to Turkey. Their claim that they would have to
        go into hiding is credible. It is also clear that they may  not  be
        able to live their lives openly as members of the LGBT community in
        light of the risk attacks  and  open  discrimination  against  such
        members within Turkey, from which I find the Turkish  state  offers
        no protection on the specific facts of this appeal.
    39. An issue arose during the course of the hearing following an answer
        by the appellants that they do not live openly (although they share
        accommodation) in Oldham. Ms Khan referred to the fact that this is
        a  predominantly  Muslim  area,  which  may  in  part  explain  the
        reticence of SS and GA to live openly gay lives. It  must  also  be
        borne in mind that what they do in the UK,  where  they  would  not
        face state persecution or permitted discrimination, whilst a factor
        to be taken into account when  assessing  how  they  would  act  on
        return to Turkey, is not the determinative issue. The  evidence  of
        both appellants is that they would like to live normal lives  which
        would require them to live openly in Turkey  together.  In  the  UK
        they have lived as a gay  couple  which  the  expert  indicates  if
        duplicated in Turkey may of its own give rise to  a  real  risk  of
        harm on return from which the state will offer no protection.
    40. The position of the Secretary of State set out in the CPIN: Turkey,
        Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, June 2017, is summarised as
        being:

Policy summary


        3.1.1     Although same-sex sexual activity  is  legal  in  Turkey,
             there  have  been  reports  of  police  harassment,  occasional
             violence and interference in the lives of some LGBT  persons  -
             particularly sex workers - and LGBT organisations. LGBT persons
             may also face discrimination in accessing  services,  including
             health and education.


        3.1.2     However, not all members of the LGBT community experience
             the same level of ill-treatment by state actors. In general the
             treatment of LGBT persons by  the  state  is  not  sufficiently
             serious by its nature and repetition as to reach the  threshold
             of persecution or serious harm.


        3.1.3      Turkey  is  a  conservative  society  where   homophobic
             attitudes  persist.  LGBT  persons  may   experience   societal
             discrimination,  stigmatization,  intimidation  and  occasional
             violence  by  non-state  actors.  In  general  the   level   of
             discrimination is not such that it will reach the high level of
             being persecutory or otherwise inhuman or degrading  treatment.
             Personal circumstances may, however, place some LGBT persons at
             risk from non-state actors.


        3.1.4     State protection is likely to be  limited  as  there  are
             shortcomings in the way that such crimes are  investigated  and
             prosecuted.


        3.1.5     Internal relocation is likely  to  be  possible  where  a
             person experiences local hostility but will not be an option if
             it depends on the person concealing  their  sexual  orientation
             and/or gender identity in the proposed new location for fear of
             persecution.




    41. The first thing to notice this document is over four years old with
        a more up-to-date position being reflected in the evidence set  out
        above.
    42. I find the appellants claim that they would wish  to  live  openly,
        but that they would not feel able to do so if returned to Turkey as
        a result of the real risk they face of  persecution,  is  credible.
        Their past modifications in relation  to  the  need  to  dress  and
        behave in the workplace in a manner which is discrete would have to
        continue on return  which,  as  identified  by  Judge  Rintoul,  is
        bordering on having to  adopt  a  false  identity  solely  for  the
        purposes of avoiding persecution.
    43. I accept that societal pressures may not amount to persecution  per
        se and that lower levels of discrimination may not be sufficient to
        amount to persecution, but it is clear that there is an  increasing
        real risk  of  persecution  in  light  of  the  current  prevailing
        attitude in Turkey and a current credible real risk in light of the
        attitude of SS' family members amounting  to  conduct  sufficiently
        serious by its nature or  repetition  as  to  constitute  a  severe
        violation of the appellants basic human rights.
    44. I do not find in  this  case  that  it  is  made  out  that  living
        discretely is something SS and GA would choose to do due to  social
        pressures  or  for  reasons  that  would  not  engage  the  Refugee
        Convention.
    45. I therefore conclude on the basis of the evidence that it has  been
        established to lower standard that the appellants cannot return  to
        their home area as a result of a real risk of  persecution  through
        the killing of SS by his family members, and GA by association, for
        which there is no sufficiency of protection. I find it has not been
        shown to be reasonable in all the circumstances for the  appellants
        to relocate elsewhere within Turkey where they  will  have  to  act
        discreetly to avoid persecution in light of the expert evidence.  I
        make such finding applied lower standard applicable.
    46. In accordance with the HJ (Iran) principles and on  that  basis,  I
        allow the appeals of both appellants. It is not an  answer  to  the
        question to suggest that SS should be granted refugee status but GA
        returned, as the determinative factor is a threat to  SS  from  his
        family, as that will both be unreasonable and a breach of Article 8
        ECHR.

Decision

    47. I allow the appeals.

   Anonymity.

    48. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 11 August 2021

