
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12340/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th March 2019                   |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     BG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Nyawanza, Solicitor acting as an agent for CB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") did not make an anonymity order but  as
    the appeal is one that concerns a claim for  international  protection,
    it is appropriate for a direction to be made.  BG is granted  anonymity
    throughout these proceedings.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies  both  to
    the appellant and to  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought  for  contempt  of
    court.


 2. The appellant is a Somalian national.  He claims to have arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 16th April 2016  and  he  has  claimed  asylum.   The
    appellant's claim for asylum was refused  by  the  respondent  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision dated 17th November 2017.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") and his appeal was heard on
    20th April 2018 by FtT Judge Smith. The appeal was  dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 26th April  2018.   It  is
    that decision that is the subject of the appeal before me.


 3. In the decision of 17th November 2017,  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant is a national of Somalia.  The respondent did  not  challenge
    the appellant's claim that he is a member of the Ajuran (or  "Ujuuran")
    clan but  rejected  the  claim  that  that  is  a  minority  clan.  The
    respondent noted that the Ajuran are a "minority  within  a  majority",
    and the appellant is therefore a member of a  sub-clan  of  a  majority
    clan group.  The respondent noted the appellant's claim that  in  2012,
    he moved to Halgan, an area 30km from Booco  where  he  had  previously
    lived. The respondent accepted that the appellant had been targeted  by
    members of Al Shabaab in his local area because of perceived un-Islamic
    behaviour, and because he was suspected of working with  the  Ethiopian
    forces.  The respondent concluded that the appellant could relocate  to
    Mogadishu where he would be able to avoid the further attention  of  Al
    Shabaab.


 4. A summary of the events relied upon by the appellant in support of  his
    claim for international protection is set out at paragraphs [7] to  [8]
    of the decision of the FtT.  The findings and conclusions are  set  out
    at paragraphs [16] to [31] of the  decisin.      The  Judge  noted,  at
    [21], that it was accepted by the respondent  that  the  appellant  was
    targeted by Al Shabaab in his local area, but rejected the  appellant's
    account that he had been subjected to torture whilst in  detention,  or
    that he did not know that he was travelling to  the  UK.  At  paragraph
    [20], the FtT Judge stated:


         ".. Having listened carefully to the appellant I do not accept  his
         account of the events of his journey to the UK  not  least  in  the
         airport he flew from. I do not accept that he was in possession  of
         a photograph that showed another person and I do not accept that he
         remained in the airport for only 20 minutes. I do not  accept  that
         he was unaware of which airport he was in, and I do not  accept  he
         did not know the country  of  his  destination.  In  his  screening
         interview, which has not been disputed, the  appellant  (q3.2)  was
         asked why he came to the UK. He replied "I was  threatened  because
         my dad was killed they said that you are next so I fled all the way
         here so that I can claim asylum and help my siblings and mum". I am
         satisfied that it was the intention of the appellant to  travel  to
         the UK and claim asylum and therefore I am satisfied that section 8
         applies to him as a person who has tried to conceal the truth."


 5. The FtT Judge considered the issue between the parties  as  to  whether
    the appellant's tribe is part of the majority Hawiya tribe as contended
    by the respondent, or is a tribe that was formally part of  the  Hawiya
    tribe that had detached from them, in  the  late  17th  to  early  18th
    century.  Having considered the material relied upon by the parties, at
    paragraph [27], the FtT Judge concluded as follows:


         "I am satisfied that there is very little  difference  between  the
         document produced by Mr Petrzyn and the document relied upon by  Mr
         Kumar. I am satisfied that the only reading possible  is  that  the
         Ajuran Tribe are a minority clan of the majority clan, the  Hawiye,
         and whilst there may have been some divergence many years ago  they
         are identified even as late as August 2016, as the Ajuran  being  a
         sub-clan of the Hawiye. The burden of proof is upon  the  appellant
         and even taking into account the low burden,  I  am  satisfied  the
         appellant has not discharged the burden of  proof  and  established
         that the Ajuran Tribe is not regarded as part of the  major  Hawiye
         Tribe."


 6. The FtT Judge went on to address the risk  upon  return  in  two  short
    paragraphs. The FtT Judge stated:


         "28. ... In MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]
         UKUT 00442 (IAC) it was held that a person returning  to  Mogadishu
         will firstly look to his nuclear family and then his Tribe.


         29.  In his evidence to me the  appellant  said  that  he  had  not
         spoken to his mother and sisters since  leaving  however,  that  is
         inconsistent with the purpose of travelling to the UK which was  to
         seek safety for his mother and siblings  (see  screening  interview
         3.2). I do not accept that he does not know where they are  but  it
         does not follow that he will be able to seek assistance from  them.
         However, as a member of a majority Tribe which has  a  considerable
         presence in Mogadishu the appellant can seek their  protection  and
         assistance.


 7. The FtT Judge concluded that he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has discharged the burden of proof, and established that he  is  unable
    to return to Mogadishu.


Error of Law


 8. In the grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant it is  claimed  that
    the FtT Judge erred in his assessment of credibility and the risk posed
    by internal relocation.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Scott Baker on  4th  June
    2018.  In granting permission, FtT Judge Scott Baker noted it was  open
    to the FtT Judge to reject the claim that the appellant is a member  of
    a minority tribe and to find that the Ajuran Tribe is a sub clan of the
    majority Hawiye Tribe.  However,  the  FtT  Judge  arguably  failed  to
    correctly  apply  MOJ,  because  a  careful  assessment  of   all   his
    circumstances is required. The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
    whether or not the decision  of  the  FtT  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


10. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Nyawanza  accepted  that  on
    the evidence before the FtT, it was open to FtT Judge Smith to conclude
    that the Ajuran Tribe is a sub-clan of the Hawiye.  For  his  part,  Mr
    Clarke conceded on behalf of the respondent, that the FtT Judge did not
    undertake a proper assessment of the risk upon return to Mogadishu,  as
    required under the country guidance set out in MOJ.   He  accepts  that
    the reasons set out by the FtT Judge at paragraph [29] of the  decision
    are insufficient, noting in particular that the appellant had not  said
    that his family are in Mogadishu.


11. Having carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge for myself,  in  my
    judgement the concession made by Mr  Clarke  is  entirely  appropriate.
    The country guidance decision of MOJ & Others requires there  to  be  a
    careful  assessment  of  all  the  circumstances,  but   that   careful
    assessment is not apparent at paragraph [29] of the decision.   In  the
    circumstances, I have no hesitation in concluding that the decision  of
    FtT Judge is infected by a material error of law and must be set aside.
     I informed the parties of my decision to set aside the decision of FtT
    Judge Smith at the hearing before me, and informed the parties  that  I
    would remake the decision.


Re-making the decision


12. I pause at  this  juncture  to  record  that  following  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, directions were  issued  to
    the parties making it clear that there is a presumption  that,  in  the
    event of the Tribunal deciding that the decision of the FtT  is  to  be
    set aside as erroneous in law, the re-making of the decision will  take
    place at the same hearing.  The directions issued, make it  clear  that
    the fresh decision will normally be based on the  evidence  before  the
    FtT and any further  evidence  admitted,  together  with  the  parties'
    arguments.  The  parties  are  warned  that  they  must   be   prepared
    accordingly, and Rule 15(2A) is highlighted.  The directions issued  to
    the parties make it clear that a failure to  comply  with  Rule  15(2A)
    will be regarded as a serious matter and may result in fresh or further
    evidence not being considered by the Tribunal.  A timetable is set  out
    in the directions, again  making  it  clear  that  any  notice  by  the
    appellant pursuant to Rule 15(2A) must be sent ten working days  before
    the hearing of the appeal at the latest.


13. No Rule 15(2A) application has been made identifying the nature of  any
    further evidence to be adduced and explaining why it was not  submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.   No further witness statements or  hearing
    bundle has been prepared by the  appellant's  representatives.   I  did
    however hear submissions on behalf of the parties.


14. On behalf of the appellant Mr Nyawanza  submits  that  in  his  witness
    statement dated 11th April 2018, the appellant explains that he was  an
    easy target for bullying, and  that  the  whole  of  his  family  faced
    problems when they were living in an area called  Booco  in  the  Hiran
    region in Somalia. He claims that he cannot relocate to Mogadishu as Al
    Shabaab will pursue him there, just as they have done previously,  when
    he was in Somalia. He claims that he is a  target  of  Al  Shabaab  and
    wherever he goes, he will be killed by them as long as Al Shabaab has a
    presence in Somalia.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  was
    targeted by Al Shabaab in his home area. His clan, the Ajuran, does not
    have a significant presence in Mogadishu, and  he  does  not  have  any
    family in Mogadishu. His evidence is  that  he  would  not  be  offered
    support because he is not a member of the majority  clans,  and  not  a
    member of the Hawiya clan.  Mr Nyawanza submits that in  his  screening
    interview, at 4.1, the appellant explained that he is the eldest in his
    family. His father was killed in 2009, and he was threatened so he  had
    to flee.


15. Mr Nyawanza submits that applying  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ  and
    Others, the  appellant  could  not  internally  relocate  to  Mogadishu
    because he has never previously lived there, he has no  nuclear  family
    or close relatives in the city to assist him  in  establishing  himself
    there, has no remittances to call upon, and  no  clan  associations  to
    call upon.  As an asylum seeker in the UK, he relies upon  the  limited
    support that  is  provided  to  him.   Mr  Nyawanza  submits  that  the
    appellant is an individual who is perceived as having  worked  for  the
    Ethiopian forces, and the fact that he has been targeted in  the  past,
    is a good indication that he will be targeted again in the  future.  He
    refers me to paragraph 6.3.1 of the respondent's  "Country  Policy  and
    Information Note: Somalia; (South and Central): Fear of  Al  Shabaab  -
    July 2017", which confirms that the main Al Shabaab targets are federal
    state officials, high ranking politicians, clan leaders supporting  the
    federal government, AMISOM,  and  SNA.  The  report  confirms  that  Al
    Shabaab may also target cleaning staff and other low ranking  staff  at
    government and AMISOM facilities.  It is said that "UN staff and  staff
    of international organisations at all levels, are also a target".


16. In reply. Mr Clarke submits that the respondent has accepted  that  the
    appellant was targeted in his home area, but importantly,  all  of  the
    appellant's problems with Al Shabaab occurred in that area,  and  there
    is no basis upon which it can be said that the appellant will  continue
    to be targeted in Mogadishu.   He submits that insofar as any risk from
    Al Shabaab  is  concerned,  in  MOJ  and  Others,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded, at headnotes (iv), (v) and (vi), as follows:


         "(iv)    The level of civilian casualties,  excluding  non-military
         casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target  groups  such
         as politicians, police officers,  government  officials  and  those
         associated with NGOs and  international  organisations,  cannot  be
         precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence   which   is
         incomplete and  unreliable.  However,  it  is  established  by  the
         evidence considered as a whole that there has been a  reduction  in
         the level of civilian casualties since 2011,  largely  due  to  the
         cessation  of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al
         Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
         targets.  The present level of casualties  does  not  amount  to  a
         sufficient risk to ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
         Article 15(c) risk.


         (v)  It is open to an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
         further still his personal exposure  to  the  risk  of  "collateral
         damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was  not
         targeted at him, by avoiding  areas  and  establishments  that  are
         clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it  is  not
         unreasonable for him to do so.


         (vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab  for
         civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees from
         the West.


17. Mr Clarke submits that the FtT Judge found, and it is now  accepted  by
    the appellant, that the Ajuran Tribe is  a  sub-clan  of  the  majority
    Hawiye clan.  He refers to the remaining guidance set out  in  MOJ  and
    others:


         (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
         will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
         for  assistance  in  re-establishing   himself   and   securing   a
         livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from  his
         clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only  likely
         to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may
         have little to offer.


   viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has changed. Clans
         now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms and assist with
         access to livelihoods, performing less  of  a  protection  function
         than previously. There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,  no  clan
         violence, and no clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
         minority clan members.


     ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu  after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:


           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;


           . length of absence from Mogadishu;


           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;


           . access to financial resources;


           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self-employment;


           . availability of remittances from abroad;


           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;


           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


      x) Put another way, it will be for the person facing return to explain
         why he would not be able to access the economic opportunities  that
         have been produced by the economic boom,  especially  as  there  is
         evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are  taking  jobs  at  the
         expense of those who have never been away.


     xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.


    xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it  is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards.


18. Mr Clarke submits that at paragraphs [344] of MOJ and Others, the Upper
    Tribunal considered the economic boom in Mogadishu that  was  described
    as "remarkable", considering what is known about conditions in the city
    since the civil war began in 1991.   At  paragraphs  [349],  the  Upper
    Tribunal found:


         "...  The  evidence  is  of  substantial   inward   investment   in
         construction projects and of entrepreneurs returning  to  Mogadishu
         to invest in business activity. In  particular  we  heard  evidence
         about hotels and restaurants and a resurgence  of  the  hospitality
         industry as well as taxi  businesses,  bus  services,  drycleaners,
         electronics stores and so on. The evidence speaks  of  construction
         projects and improvements in the city's infrastructure such as  the
         installation of some solar powered street lighting.  It  does  not,
         perhaps, need much in the way of direct evidence to  conclude  that
         jobs such as working as building labourers, waiters or  drivers  or
         assistants in retail outlets are unlikely to be filled by the  tiny
         minority that represents "the elite." ..."


19.  Mr  Clarke  submits  that  the  appellant  has  suffered  no   adverse
    circumstances in Mogadishu previously,  and  that  the  length  of  his
    absence from Somalia is  irrelevant.  He  has  an  association  with  a
    majority clan, and he is likely to have access to  financial  resources
    from relatives in Somalia. He submits that the  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant's mother and sisters remain in Somalia, and the FtT Judge did
    not accept that he does not know where they are.  Mr Clark submits that
    there is no evidence as to how the appellant has supported  himself  in
    the UK, and there is no evidence that the appellant could not secure  a
    livelihood and take advantage of the economic boom. He is a young adult
    male, with no health problems, and there is no evidence  that  internal
    relocation to Mogadishu would be unduly harsh in the circumstances.


20. The country guidance in MOJ and others was concerned with the issues of
    whether those returning or relocating to  Mogadishu  could  succeed  in
    claims  for  refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection  or  protection
    against refoulement under Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR,  solely  on  the
    basis that they were civilians without adequate protection.  The  scope
    of the country guidance in MOJ and others is  identified  in  paragraph
    [1] of the decision in the following way:


         "...  the  Upper  Tribunal  addresses  the  current  situation   in
         Mogadishu in order to determine the individual appeals and to  give
         guidance limited to the following issues:


             Whether the current situation  in  Mogadishu  is  such  as  to
             entitle nationals of Somalia whose home area is  Mogadishu  or
             whose proposed area of relocation is Mogadishu to  succeed  in
             their  claims  for  refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection
             status under Article 15(c) or  protection  against  refoulment
             under Articles 3 or 2 of the ECHR solely  on  the  basis  that
             they are civilians and  do  not  have  powerful  actors  in  a
             position to afford them adequate protection."


21.  In my judgement, there is no evidence that the appellant will continue
    to be targeted in Mogadishu by Al Shabaab. The appellant  was  targeted
    in his home  area,  because  of  perceived  un-Islamic  behaviour,  and
    because he was suspected of working  for  the  Ethiopian  forces.   The
    appellant's father was killed in 2009 and  the  appellant  claims  that
    between 2009 and 2012 he was forced to carryout work for Al Shabaab. He
    was however, able to live in Halgan and open a  tyre  repair  business,
    that he ran until 2016, when the Ethiopian military left the area,  and
    Al Shabaab returned.  He was able to live in Halgon and earn  a  living
    between 2012 and 2016 without being targeted by Al Shabaab.


22. Mr Nyawanza referred me to paragraph 6.3.1 of the respondent's "Country
    Policy and Information Note: Somalia; (South and Central): Fear  of  Al
    Shabaab - July 2017", in support of the  claimant  that  the  appellant
    remains at risk from Al Shabaab.  That information note draws upon  the
    Danish  Immigration  Service  report  "Security  situation,  Al-Shabaab
    Presence and Target Groups of March 2017"  and  confirms  that  sources
    agreed that the main targets are federal state officials, high  ranking
    politicians, clan leaders supporting the federal government, AMISON and
    the Somali national army.  The appellant does not fall  within  any  of
    these categories.  The country guidance establishes that there has been
    durable change in  the  sense  that  the  Al  Shabaab  withdrawal  from
    Mogadishu is  complete,  and  there  is  no  real  prospect  of  a  re-
    established presence within the city.


23. The report relied upon by the appellant indicates that Al  Shabaab  may
    also target cleaning staff and other low ranking  staff  at  government
    and  AMISON  facilities,  UN  staff,   and   staff   of   International
    organisations at all levels, but that is not to say that the  appellant
    would be employed in any such capacity, and would therefore be at risk.
    MOJ and others confirms that it is  open  to  an  ordinary  citizen  of
    Mogadishu, as the appellant here would be in Mogadishu, to  reduce  his
    personal exposure to the risk of "collateral damage" in being caught up
    in an Al Shabaab attack that is not targeted at him, by avoiding  areas
    and establishments that are clearly identifiable as likely  Al  Shabaab
    targets, and it is not unreasonable for him to do so.  There is no real
    risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for  civilian  citizens  of
    Mogadishu, including for recent returnees from the West.


24. In his asylum interview, (Q.5), the appellant confirmed that his mother
    and two younger sisters are in Booco and that he has no other  extended
    family in Somalia.   He explained, (Q.68), that he was in contact  with
    his family occasionally when he was living in Halgan and  (Q.109)  that
    he had an aunt in Halgan (although he claims  that  she  is  now  in  a
    Refugee camp in  Kenya).   The  appellant  claimed  in  that  interview
    (Q.86), that he contacted his mum shortly before  he  left  Halgan  and
    (Q.102), that the arrangements for him to leave Somalia  were  made  by
    his mother.  He stated (Q.158) that he has had  no  communication  with
    his family since coming to the UK.  He claimed (Q.105), that he  cannot
    return to an area that  is  not  under  Al  Shabaab  control,  such  as
    Mogadishu, because he does not have any family there, and he is  scared
    of the big tribe members.


25. I have carefully considered the  content  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and the answers that he gave in interview.   The  appellant's
    claim that he has not had any communication with his mother and sisters
    since his arrival in the UK, is simply incredible.  The  appellant  was
    in contact with his family whilst he was living in Halgan, and  on  his
    own account, he contacted his mum shortly before he  left  Halgan,  and
    the arrangements for him to leave Somalia  were  made  by  his  mother.
    Against that background, there is no reason why the appellant has  been
    unable to remain in contact with his  family  and  I  reject  his  bare
    assertion, without any explanation, that he has  had  no  communication
    with his family since coming to the UK.  That assertion is all the more
    incredible when considered against the backdrop of  his  claim  in  the
    screening interview (Q.4.1) that he is the eldest in his  family,  that
    there is "no one to help my family ..." and (Q.3.2) that he had come to
    the UK because he was threatened and so that he can "...  claim  asylum
    and help my siblings and mum.".


26. The current whereabout of  the  appellant's  family  is  unclear.   His
    evidence that he has lost contact with them is not credible.   However,
    even on the premise that the appellant has no family or close relatives
    in Mogadishu, it is clear that he has clan associations to call upon in
    Mogadishu.  The appellant is from the Ajuran Tribe that is  a  sub-clan
    of the majority Hawiye clan.  In MOJ and  Others,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    confirmed that the evidence establishes  clearly  that,  in  Mogadishu,
    there is no inter-clan violence taking  place,  and  no  real  risk  of
    serious discriminatory treatment being  experienced  on  the  basis  of
    clan.  For a returnee to Mogadishu, clan membership is not a  potential
    risk factor, but something which is relevant to the extent to which  he
    will be able  to  receive  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  on
    return, especially if he  has  no  close  relatives  to  turn  to  upon
    arrival.  There is no evidence before me to suggest that the  appellant
    would be unable to receive assistance from the majority Hawiye clan, of
    which the Ajuran is a sub-clan, in establishing himself.


27. In MOJ and Others Upper Tribunal considered evidence to show that those
    returning from the West may have an advantage in seeking employment  in
    Mogadishu because they are likely to be better educated and  considered
    more attractive as employees. The fact that a person  has  had  a  long
    period of absence from the city and had no experience of  living  there
    as an adult, were not sufficient factors, in themselves,  to  make  the
    prospect of return unreasonable or unacceptable.  I note in  particular
    the reference at paragraph [351] of MOJ and others;


         "Further, there is evidence before the Tribunal, identified  by  Dr
         Mullen, to the effect that returnees from  the  West  may  have  an
         advantage in seeking employment in Mogadishu over citizens who have
         remained in the city throughout. This is said to  be  because  such
         returnees are likely to be  better  educated  and  considered  more
         resourceful and therefore more attractive as  potential  employees,
         especially where the employer himself or herself has returned  from
         the diaspora to invest in a new business."


28. Between  2012  and  2016,  the  appellant  established  a  tyre  repair
    business.  He has at least some entrepreneurial skills that he would be
    able to call upon in Mogadishu.  In MOJ and others, the Upper  Tribunal
    noted the inward investment in Mogadishu and of entrepreneurs returning
    to invest in business activity including, as taxi businesses,  and  bus
    services.  The skills that the  appellant  used  to  establish  a  tyre
    repair business would no doubt assist him  to  take  advantage  of  the
    business opportunity that this creates, and of securing  a  livelihood.
    In any event, he is a young adult male with no health issues and he  is
    well placed to take advantage of the  economic  revival  of  Mogadishu.
    The economic boom has resulted in jobs  such  as  working  as  building
    labourers, waiters or drivers or  assistants  in  retail  outlets,  any
    which of the appellant is plainly capable of securing.


29. There  is  no  reason  why  the  appellant  could  not  seek  unskilled
    employment in Mogadishu.  There is no evidence to  establish,  even  to
    the lower standard, that if returned to Mogadishu, the  appellant  will
    become destitute.  There is  no  evidence  before  me  as  to  how  the
    appellant has supported himself in  the  UK.   He  has  demonstrated  a
    certain degree of resilience in his ability to travel from  Somalia  to
    the UK and support himself with  some  limited  assistance.   He  would
    undoubtedly be able to draw upon that same resilience  upon  return  to
    Somalia, where it would be possible for  him  to  live  in  safety,  in
    Mogadishu.  If he has received support from family and friends  in  the
    UK, there is no reason for me to believe that such support would not be
    provided to assist the appellant  re-establish  himself  in  Mogadishu.
    There remains the possibility of him being able to turn to  his  mother
    in Somalia, and in any event, he could rely upon  financial  assistance
    from the Facilitated Returns Scheme as a means  of  sufficient  support
    while he establishes himself in Mogadishu.


30. Having carefully considered all  of  the  evidence  before  me,  in  my
    judgement, the  appellant  has  not  established,  even  to  the  lower
    standard required that internal relocation to Mogadishu  would  not  be
    possible or that it would be  unduly  harsh.   The  appellant  has  not
    established that it is unreasonable in all the circumstances for him to
    be returned to Mogadishu in light of the factual matrix of  this  case,
    relevant country information, and country guidance case law.


31. It follows that in my judgment his appeal  falls  to  be  dismissed  on
    asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   FtT  Judge  Smith  had
    dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds and the appellant did  not
    seek to challenge those conclusions.  For the avoidance of doubt, in my
    judgment, the appellant's claim cannot succeed on Article 3 and Article
    8 grounds for the reasons already given by the FtT Judge.


 NOTICE OF DECISION


32. The decision of FtT Judge Smith promulgated on 26th April 2018  is  set
    aside


33. I remake the decision and;


          a.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds


          b. The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian/subsidiary  protection
             grounds under the Immigration Rules and Qualifying Regulations


          c. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date          17th May 2019

       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can in any event be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          17th May 2019

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




