
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/12317/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 August 2019                       |On 13 September 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    NWSD
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, counsel, Paramount Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre, promulgated on  29  March  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 16 July 2019.

Anonymity

   2. Such a direction has been made previously, and is repeated below, this
      being a protection matter.

Background

 3. On 18 January 2009, the respondent arrived in the United  Kingdom  from
    Sri Lanka with leave to enter as a student. Her leave was  extended  in
    the same capacity on  several  occasions.  The  respondent's  leave  to
    remain was curtailed on 2 March 2014 because the licence of her Tier  4
    sponsor was revoked.  She unsuccessfully applied for further  leave  to
    remain as a student on 6 June 2014 and her appeal against this decision
    was dismissed. On 4 December 2014, the respondent  was  encountered  by
    immigration officials working illegally and  was  served  with  removal
    directions. Thereafter, the respondent sought to remain on human rights
    grounds, but this  application  was  rejected.  On  16  May  2017,  the
    respondent applied for asylum.

 4. The substance of  the  respondent's  asylum  claim  was  that  she  was
    arrested and detained by the Sri Lankan authorities during 2008 as  she
    was suspected of involvement with DG, who  in  turn  was  suspected  of
    having involvement with the LTTE. The respondent had worked with DG  in
    connection with her employment at a  realty  company  in  Colombo.  The
    respondent described being detained for a week, being questioned  about
    DG and mistreated. The respondent saw DG in the United Kingdom, when he
    advised her not to return to Sri Lanka.

 5. In a letter dated 10 November 2017, the Secretary of State, refused the
    protection claim on the basis that since the  respondent's  arrest,  DG
    had become an MP and a minister in the Sri Lankan  government  for  the
    ruling United National Party (UNP). The Secretary of State  noted  that
    the respondent was unable to demonstrate awareness of any links between
    DG and the LTTE; that she had been photographed at an official  UK  UNP
    meeting with DG which undermined aspects of her claim and that she  had
    been attempting to leave Sri Lanka prior to her problems in Sri  Lanka.
    There were also said to be a number  of  inconsistent  aspects  to  the
    respondent's claim as well as criticism of her  delay  in  leaving  Sri
    Lanka and in seeking asylum. The respondent's claim that  she  suffered
    from depression was considered but did not engage Article 3 ECHR.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The respondent  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, having fallen and injured herself earlier  in  the  day.  The
    appeal proceeded by way of submissions, with the judge  dismissing  the
    protection claim and humanitarian protection  claim  but  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds, based on the respondent's  current  mental
    health problems and PTSD. The judge found there to be  no  evidence  of
    DG, who was described as a high-profile minister for  the  UNP,  having
    any links with the LTTE and she rejected the core of  the  respondent's
    claim.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds argued firstly,  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  in
    stating that the appropriate test in Article 3 health  cases  had  been
    relaxed following Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867  and  secondly
    that she failed to apply the test set out in J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    629

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 9. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

10. Mr Walker argued as follows. There was no  evidence  before  the  judge
    regarding what medical care was available in Sri Lanka and she erred in
    finding that the appellant ought to  be  granted  leave  to  remain  on
    health grounds. The judge had further erred in failing  to  follow  the
    test set out in N and finding that the  threshold  had  been  lessened.
    Given that the judge found that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  of
    persecution, it was an error to allow the appeal based  on  aspects  of
    that claim.

11. Mr Paramjorthy made the following comments. The  decision  and  reasons
    did  not  read  well.  There  was  a  comprehensive  rejection  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim at [49], however the appellant relied  on  the
    circumstances of her detention  to  support  her  claim  that  she  had
    serious mental health issues.  At [67], the  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant was claiming that there was a risk of suicide  or  self-harm,
    whereas the argument had been regarding the availability  of  treatment
    in Sri Lanka and the "intense suffering" test.  The  judge  recommended
    that the appellant be granted leave  to  remain  to  receive  treatment
    whereas she ought to have reached a finding on whether Article 3  would
    be breached by her removal.

12. At the end of the hearing  I  announced  that  the  decision  contained
    material errors of law.

13. In discussing the remaking of the decision, Mr Paramjorthy stated  that
    there had been a number of developments since the previous hearing  and
    requested that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

14. The judge considered the appellant's Article 3 claim on the basis  that
    she was relying on a risk of  suicide.  At  [67],  the  judge  said  as
    follows; "The real issue before me is  not  whether  or  not  there  is
    adequate medical treatment in Sri Lanka but whether or not the enforced
    return of the appellant might bring about her suicide or  the  risk  of
    self-harm..." Yet, the  skeleton  argument  before  the  judge  clearly
    states that what was relied upon was paragraphs 454-456 of GJ,  on  the
    basis that there was insufficient psychiatric treatment  available  for
    the appellant in Sri Lanka. Accordingly, the judge's reliance on J  was
    misplaced and she failed to consider the  case  advanced.  Furthermore,
    the judge had rejected the appellant's  protection  claim  and  it  was
    therefore irrational for her to accept  that  she  was  suicidal  as  a
    result of what she said had happened to her in detention.

15. The judge purported to allow the appeal on Article 3  grounds  but  did
    not explain her reasoning. It is hard to discern  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed, given the judge's  criticism  of  the  appellant's  protection
    claim as well as the  deficiencies  noted  in  the  report  of  Dr  Raj
    Persaud. The judge also wrongly stated that the  test  in  N  had  been
    relaxed following Paposhvili.  Indeed,  the  judgment  in  MM  (Malawi)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 2482 shows that the reverse was found.


16. In view of Mr Paramjorthy's comments it is unnecessary to say more. The
    judge's decision  contained  material  errors  of  law  such  that  her
    conclusions on the Article 3 health claim  are  unsafe.  There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's findings on the protection claim and these are
    preserved.

17. I was told that efforts are being made to find the  appellant  a  legal
    aid solicitor and that there have been developments in her case.  While
    mindful of Statement 7 of the Senior President's Practice Statements of
    10 February 2010, it is the case that the appellant has yet to have  an
    adequate consideration  of  her  Article  3  claim  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive her of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  in  relation  to  the
free-standing Article 3 claim.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.

The appellant is represented pro bono  by  Mr  N  Paramjorthy  of  Paramount
Chambers - the matter is to be listed at his convenience


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 06 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
