
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/12389/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On 30 July 2021                      |On 16 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    H O A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  this
is an appeal on protection grounds.  It is  therefore  appropriate  to  make
that order.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Khan, solicitor, Kings Law solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Young-Harry  promulgated  on  20  March  2020   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  3  December  2019
      refusing his protection and human rights claims.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Iraq,  coming  from  the  Kurdish
      area of that country. He was born in Sulaymaniyah.  The Appellant  was
      encountered in the UK on 5 September 2017, having  entered  illegally.
      He claimed asylum on 6 September 2017.  The Appellant claims  to  have
      worked for Asayish (Kurdish intelligence).   He  claims  that  he  was
      threatened by an unknown individual as a result of his  job.   He  was
      threatened in four telephone  calls  between  July  and  August  2015.
      Although he was given protection by his employers, the Appellant  says
      that this was insufficient and so he left Iraq in September 2015.   He
      says that before he left Iraq, he had an argument  with  his  superior
      officer about the level of protection afforded him. The Appellant says
      that a warrant has been issued against him since he left  Iraq  as  he
      has been absent without leave from Asayish ("the Arrest Warrant").  He
      also says that the PUK would  have  an  interest  in  him  as  he  has
      information which would be of interest to other countries or political
      parties which the PUK might consider he had divulged.   The  Appellant
      claims to have posted details of corruption in the party on  Facebook.



3.          The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  worked  for  Asayish
      before leaving Iraq.  The Respondent also accepted that the  Appellant
      had received threatening phone  calls  in  2015  but  noted  that  the
      Appellant had received protection against those threats.  It was  also
      accepted that the Appellant had a disagreement with his  superior  and
      that a warrant had been issued for his arrest.  The  validity  of  the
      Arrest Warrant was not put in issue.  However, if action were taken in
      accordance with the Arrest Warrant, the Respondent concluded that this
      would be prosecution and not  persecution.   The  Respondent  did  not
      accept that the Appellant would be at risk from the PUK nor, it seems,
      that he had posted adverse comments about the party on Facebook.

4.          The Respondent noted in the decision letter  under  appeal  that
      the Appellant is in possession of a valid  passport.   The  Respondent
      also holds a copy of  the  Appellant's  CSID  (Civil  Status  Identity
      Document).   It  appears  that  some  of  the   Appellant's   original
      documentation may be in Sweden where he previously claimed asylum.

5.          The Appellant appeared at the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  person.
      However, he produced  a  skeleton  argument  which  has  clearly  been
      drafted  by  someone  with  some  legal   knowledge   ("the   Skeleton
      Argument").  I note that, until shortly before the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing, the Appellant had been represented by experienced immigration
      solicitors (Halliday Reeves).   The Skeleton Argument takes issue with
      the Respondent's conclusion in relation to risk  from  the  PUK.   The
      Respondent's acceptance of the remainder of the  protection  claim  is
      noted.   It is asserted that the Appellant is at risk if arrested  and
      detained by the Asayish.  Reference is made to an expert report.  That
      is to the report of Alison  Pargeter  dated  12  February  2020  ("the
      Expert Report").  I will come to the substance of that report  in  due
      course.  It is asserted that there is "a risk of serious harm  to  the
      Appellant if he is arrested, detained and/or convicted".  It  is  said
      that, as the risk emanates from the State, there is no sufficiency  of
      protection or internal relocation option.  That position is consistent
      with the grounds of appeal against the Respondent's decision which are
      directed at the Respondent's conclusions as to risk only.

6.          The Judge noted the elements  of  the  Appellant's  claim  which
      were accepted.  At [16] to [18] of the Decision, she  dealt  with  and
      rejected the disputed element, namely  the  risk  from  the  PUK.   In
      relation to the Arrest Warrant, the Judge concluded that there was  no
      evidence that any action arising from that would breach Article 3 ECHR
      or amount to persecution for a Refugee Convention reason ([22]).   The
      Judge referred at  [23]  of  the  Decision  to  the  country  guidance
      decision in force at that time (SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity
      documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) - "SMO").  She  found  that
      the Appellant could return directly to IKR as he has a valid  passport
      and CSID.  He could return to join his family in that  area  or  to  a
      different area within IKR if he so chose.

7.          The Appellant appeals on six grounds.  I do not  rehearse  those
      here.  I deal with them in turn below.

8.          Permission to appeal was granted on 26 February 2021  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker.  The decision is quite a lengthy  one
      and I therefore cite only the relevant paragraphs as follows:

           "... 5.     The respondent had accepted that the appellant had a
           limited involvement with the PUK and at [16] the  judge  rejects
           the appellant's clam of holding secrets about  the  PUK,  taking
           into account at [18] the appellant's claim that  he  had  posted
           compromising information  about  the  PUK  on  Facebook  but  no
           evidence was produced.  The judge however had arguably failed to
           consider the issue holistically factoring in the  accepted  fact
           that  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  Asayish,  a   security
           organisation.


           6.    At [19] the judge considers the arrest warrant  and  notes
           at [21] the concession that the respondent had accepted  that  a
           warrant had been issued and finds that it was likely that he was
           wanted for a breach of an internal Asayish rule.


           7.    In considering the issue  of  return  at  [23]  the  judge
           records that the respondent held the  appellant's  passport  and
           CSID.  She found that the appellant could  return  to  his  home
           area or another part of the IKR but there were no reasons  given
           or any reference to background material.


           8.    The decision arguably discloses  errors  of  law  in  that
           inadequate findings have been made on the appellant's claim  and
           the risk on return.


           9.    Permission is granted."

9.          The matter comes before me to decide whether there is  an  error
      of law in the Decision and, if I conclude that there  is,  whether  to
      set aside the Decision for re-making.  If the Decision is set aside, I
      may either retain the appeal in this Tribunal for  redetermination  or
      remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to re-hear the appeal.

10.         The hearing was conducted via Microsoft Teams.   There  were  no
      technical issues affecting the hearing generally.

11.         The Appellant has changed his solicitors and is now  represented
      by Kings Law solicitors.  The Tribunal did  not  have  before  it  the
      complete Appellant's bundle and requested a copy of  that  from  Kings
      Law.  In response some documents were sent prior to the hearing but it
      was indicated that not  all  documents  had  been  received  from  the
      previous solicitors.  It is not clear why that should be so.  I  asked
      Mr Khan at the outset  if  he  had  the  Expert  Report  as  that  was
      pertinent to one of the grounds before me and was not in the bundle as
      sent.   He managed to find that document and to provide  it  before  I
      heard submissions.  I am satisfied that I had the necessary  documents
      in order to determine the grounds challenging the Decision.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground two

12.         I begin with two of the grounds which I can take  shortly.   The
      first, ground two, complains that the Judge  "failed  to  consider  or
      adequately consider the witness statement of the  Appellant".   It  is
      asserted at [26] of the grounds that the Appellant,  who  appeared  in
      person  before  Judge  Young-Harry,  was  not  cross-examined  at  the
      hearing.  Somewhat  surprisingly,  it  is  suggested  that  the  Judge
      herself should have cross-examined the Appellant.  As I observed,  had
      the Judge done so, there might very well have been a challenge on  the
      basis that the Judge had descended into the arena.

13.         This ground is in any event misconceived.  Unfortunately,  I  do
      not appear to have the Appellant's witness  statement  as  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  I only  have  one  apparently  drafted  for  the
      hearing before this Tribunal (dated  13  April  2021  -  "the  Witness
      Statement").  The grounds do not  identify  what  of  the  Appellant's
      evidence the Judge is said to have ignored. Mr Walker  confirmed  that
      the Appellant had been cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.

14.         The Judge  refers  as  fact  at  [8]  of  the  Decision  to  the
      Appellant having given evidence and having  been  cross-examined.   As
      the Judge says at [9] of the Decision there was no need to record  the
      evidence and arguments in detail as those are set out in the record of
      proceedings.  The Judge has  fairly  summarised  the  essence  of  the
      Appellant's  claim  at  [10]  and  [11]  of  the  Decision   and   the
      Respondent's case in response  at  [12]  and  [13]  of  the  Decision.
      Absent a reference to relevant evidence which the  Judge  is  said  to
      have ignored, this ground does not identify any error of  law  in  the
      Judge's approach.

Ground three

15.         By this ground, the Appellant criticises  the  Judge's  approach
      to the Appellant's case regarding posts said  to  have  been  made  on
      Facebook. I do not understand the  Appellant's  case  to  be  that  he
      claimed to have divulged secret information about the PUK via Facebook
      as yet but rather that he has posted material which  was  critical  of
      the organisation.  The basis of the challenge is that the Judge  erred
      by requiring corroboration of that claim because there was no evidence
      that the Appellant had published the information on Facebook.

16.         The Judge dealt with the claimed risk from the PUK  at  [16]  to
      [18] of the Decision as follows:

           "16.  The respondent accepts that  the  appellant  was  involved
           with the PUK, but only to a limited extent.  It was  not  accept
           [sic] that the appellant was so involved, that he would be privy
           to the secrets of the party or that the party leaders  would  be
           concerned about the appellant disclosing information  about  the
           party.


           17.   I do not find the appellant has shown, even to  the  lower
           standard, that he was privy to valuable secrets about the PUK or
           that  the  party  leadership  would  be  concerned   about   him
           disclosing such secrets.  The appellant has  failed  to  explain
           how he obtained this sensitive information, what the information
           is, why he believes the party is concerned about it  or  how  he
           knows they are concerned.


           18.   Neither has he provided any supporting  evidence  to  show
           that he has posted any compromising information about the PUK on
           Facebook or any other  social  media  site.   One  would  expect
           supporting evidence in this regard would be  readily  available.
           I therefore do not accept this aspect of the appellant's  claim.
           I am not satisfied that the appellant has  shown  that  he  will
           face a risk on return due to his association with  the  PUK.   I
           find the appellant has failed to  show  that  the  PUK  has  any
           interest in him."

17.         Those three paragraphs have to be read together.  The  reference
      to the absence of corroboratory evidence has to be  read  in  context.
      The Facebook posts were material to which the Appellant ought  readily
      to have access as the Judge observes.  He did not explain why he could
      not produce it.  The reference to the lack of corroboration when  read
      with the rest of that section of  the  Decision  is  therefore  merely
      making the observation that, for the reasons given at [17] as well  as
      [18] of the Decision, the Appellant had not made out his case on  this
      aspect.  There is no error of law in the Judge's approach.

18.         I  add  that  the  Witness  Statement  now  produced  does  make
      reference to some of the information to which the  Appellant  says  he
      had access due to his role.  However, the Witness  Statement  was  not
      before Judge Young-Harry and the Decision cannot be  impugned  on  the
      basis of evidence she did not have.

19.         I observe in addition and  although  the  Judge  does  not  make
      reference to it, that the Expert Report is equally sceptical about the
      Appellant's claim in this regard.  At [6.1] of the report, Ms Pargeter
      says that she is "unable to understand  what  secrets  the  party  may
      believe he has and would divulge".  At [6.2], she concludes  that  the
      Appellant  "should  not  have  any  problems"  arising  from  critical
      Facebook posts provided those were general in nature.   The  Appellant
      has not, as I have already noted, provided evidence about what was  or
      is said to have been included in those posts if indeed any  were  made
      (which the Judge did not believe).

Grounds one and five

20.         The focus of the Appellant's first  and  fifth  grounds  is  the
      Arrest Warrant and I therefore take those  grounds  together.   Ground
      one asserts that the Judge "failed to look at all the evidence in  the
      round before coming to her conclusion and dismissing this document  as
      reliable".  It is there noted that the  Respondent  had  accepted  the
      validity of the Arrest Warrant.  At ground five, it is  asserted  that
      the Judge "failed to make any finding on accepted material  issues  in
      the case".

21.         The Judge dealt with the Arrest  Warrant  and  claimed  risk  on
      return in that regard at [19] to [22] of the Decision as follows:

           "19.  The appellant further claims that an  arrest  warrant  has
           been issued for being absent without leave from Asayish.  I have
           regard for the translation of the document the appellant  relies
           on.  I consider the documents in the round, with  Tanveer  Ahmed
           in mind.  The documents [sic] is  headed  the  Kurdistan  Region
           Government, Council of  Ministers  -  Kurdistan  Region  -  Iraq
           Asaish Institute -  Kurdistan  Region  and  is  dated  the  25th
           January 2016.


           20.   The document  states  that  the  'convicts'  listed  below
           should be arrested, in order to comply with  'urgent  and  legal
           acts for the performing of the order'.  Three names are  listed,
           the appellant's name is among them.  There  is  reference  to  a
           Rule 5 Punishments Law - Interior Asaish Forces - Number  14  on
           [sic] 2008.


           21.   It is not clear what the order is for or why the appellant
           is referred to as a convict.  I note also that the  document  is
           dated the 25th January 2016, yet  the  appellant  left  Iraq  in
           September  2015.   The  respondent  however  accepts  that   the
           document is a warrant for the appellant's arrest.  I note  there
           is reference to what appears to be an internal  Asaish  rule  or
           law, thus it is likely the appellant is wanted for breaching  an
           internal Asayish rule.  The specific law or breach is not given.


           22.   It is likely therefore, if the appellant is correct and he
           is to face punishment for being  absent  without  leave,  it  is
           likely that he  will  face  an  internal  process  conducted  by
           Asayish.  The appellant however has  failed  to  show  that  the
           process, resultant consequences or punishment for  being  absent
           without leave, would breach Art 3 or would amount to persecution
           for  a  convention  reason.   According  [sic],   although   the
           appellant would prefer to  avoid  the  consequences  of  leaving
           without permission, the appellant has not  established  a  claim
           for international protection."

22.         Although I accept that the Judge  there  expresses  some  doubts
      about the validity of the Arrest Warrant, there is no error of law  in
      her treatment of that document for two reasons.  First, she has  taken
      into account the guidance  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  when  considering  that
      document and explained why she considers that it raises  some  issues.
      Second, and more importantly, the Judge  thereafter  proceeds  on  the
      basis that the Arrest Warrant  is  valid  based  on  the  Respondent's
      concession and considers risk on that basis.

23.         Contrary to the suggestion in the fifth ground  that  the  Judge
      has failed to make findings about the risk arising from  the  material
      facts which are  accepted  by  the  Respondent,  the  Judge  has  done
      precisely that.  In relation to the Arrest Warrant, the Judge explains
      why there is no risk arising at [22] of the  Decision  (cited  above).
      In relation to the other aspects, the Judge records  at  [12]  of  the
      Decision the facts which were accepted but notes  that  the  Appellant
      was given protection against the threats from the unknown caller.

24.          In  his  oral  submissions  as  regards  the  risk  arising  in
      particular from the Arrest Warrant,  Mr  Khan  relied  on  the  Expert
      Report.  Although there is  no  reference  to  this  document  in  the
      grounds of appeal to this Tribunal, I permitted him to  rely  on  that
      report as it is said in the Skeleton Argument to be the source of  the
      assertion that the Appellant would be at risk based  on  the  material
      facts of his claim which were accepted.  The following passage of  the
      Expert Report is of relevance:

           "2.12 As I understand it, therefore, under this law, [HOA] would
           be liable to a prison sentence of up  to  six  months.   Indeed,
           there is no mention of desertion in this law, and to the best of
           my knowledge, his fleeing Iraq would be dealt with as a crime of
           absence.


           2.13  Whilst the punishment for being absent without leave is  a
           prison term, Article 39 of the  law  stipulates  that  a  prison
           terms of less than three years can be replaced with  a  fine  by
           the Internal Security Forces' Court (which is regulated  by  Law
           17 of 2008) if the court can justify its decision.


           2.14  Despite this law, I have been unable to find any  evidence
           of Asayesh members being punished for  being  absent  from  duty
           without  leave.   This  also  holds  true  for  the   Peshmerga.
           According to the Kurdish Human Rights  Watch,  as  at  2016,  no
           cases of desertion from the Peshmerga forces has been brought to
           court [footnoted source is a 2016 document].  I  have  not  been
           able to find any cases of Asayesh  members  being  punished  for
           crimes of absence.  This does not necessarily  mean  that  there
           have been no such cases and it should  be  remembered  that  the
           Asayesh are not subjected to government oversight and are  under
           the control of the two main  ruling  parties.   As  such,  their
           internal workings remain somewhat opaque.  However, it does  not
           appear to be commonplace  for  Asayesh  members  who  go  absent
           without leave to be imprisoned."

25.         Ms Pargeter sets out at section 3  of  the  Expert  Report  what
      might occur on the Appellant's return to Iraq.   She  notes  that  the
      Appellant may have been tried and convicted in his absence.  If  there
      had been a trial in absentia, the Appellant would likely  be  detained
      on arrival.  However, she goes on to say that the Appellant  would  in
      such circumstances be entitled to appeal and to seek  a  retrial.   Ms
      Pargeter does refer to material concerning  the  independence  of  the
      judiciary but notes at [3.4] of the report that  the  Appellant  would
      not be considered to be a political prisoner "meaning that there is no
      particular  reason  to  suggest  that  his  trial  would  be  unfair".
      Similarly, although Ms  Pargeter  refers  to  incidents  of  suspected
      torture in detention, she says that "she would be  surprised  if  [the
      Appellant] were subjected to the same kinds of abuse" as his crime  is
      not political.

26.         For completeness, I note that the Expert Report also deals  with
      the Appellant's claim that he is at risk for arguing with his superior
      officer about the level of protection the Appellant was given  against
      the threats.  Ms Pargeter deals with  this  at  [2.15]  onwards.   She
      refers to the section of the penal code relevant to this crime (not  I
      note the section set out in the Arrest  Warrant)  and  refers  to  the
      potential penalty  being  imprisonment  for  one  year.   Ms  Pargeter
      expresses some surprise at [2.18] of the Expert Report that someone in
      the Appellant's position would have access to someone as senior as the
      person he has named.  She goes on to note however that if he  were  to
      have insulted that person as the  Appellant  asserts  "he  could  find
      himself liable to punishment under  this  law".   As  I  have  already
      noted, however, there is no reference in the  Arrest  Warrant  to  the
      sections of the penal code to which Ms Pargeter there refers.

27.         Mr Khan placed reliance on  [2.12]  and  [2.13]  of  the  Expert
      Report as set out above.  However, those paragraphs have to be read in
      the context of [2.14] of that  report.   To  Ms  Pargeter's  knowledge
      there have not been any cases of punishment  for  crimes  of  absence.
      She does not discount the possibility that there may be cases but  she
      regards the risk as not being "commonplace".  If  the  Appellant  were
      detained, Ms Pargeter "would be surprised" if the Appellant  would  be
      subject to any abuse in detention.  She also has "no particular reason
      to suggest that [the Appellant's] trial would be unfair".

 28.        Based on the Expert Report, the Judge was  clearly  entitled  to
      conclude that there was no real  risk  to  the  Appellant  on  return,
      stemming from the Arrest Warrant or  the  fact  of  him  being  absent
      without leave.

Grounds six and four

29.         Ground six includes a number of factors which  it  is  said  the
      Judge has failed to consider.  I will come to the ones on which  focus
      was placed at the hearing.  Before I do so, I note that [37]  of  this
      ground raises the risk of detention on return as being  in  breach  of
      Article 3 ECHR.  I have already dealt with that issue in  relation  to
      grounds one and five above.  I do not repeat what is there said.

30.         Similarly, I do not  need  to  deal  with  [38]  of  ground  six
      concerning the Appellant's credibility.  As I have already noted, much
      of the Appellant's claim was accepted by the Respondent and  therefore
      also the Judge.  The Judge has dealt with the risk arising from  those
      aspects and, as I have already concluded, there is  no  error  in  her
      conclusions that the facts accepted do not give rise to a real risk on
      return.  I have also concluded when dealing with ground three that the
      Judge did not err in her findings regarding the credibility  of  those
      aspects of the claim which were not accepted.  What is said at [38] of
      the grounds adds nothing to the challenge which I dealt with under the
      heading of ground three above.

31.         The focus of the remaining paragraphs of ground six  and  ground
      four go to the general risk on return.

32.         The main thrust of the Appellant's case in this regard  is  that
      the Judge failed to  take  account  of  the  guidance  given  in  SMO.
      Although SMO has been accepted to contain an error of law and has been
      remitted to this Tribunal, that occurred in February  2021  and  after
      the hearing and Decision  in  this  case.   The  Judge  was  therefore
      required to consider and apply SMO in its reported form at that  time.



33.         The Judge referred to SMO at [23]  of  the  Decision.   In  that
      regard, she said this:

           "23.  In relation to an Art 3 risk on return due to the  general
           security situation in Iraq, I consider SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article
           15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC),   I
           find as the appellant is a Kurd, he can be returned directly  to
           the  IKR.   The  appellant  confirmed  in  evidence   that   the
           respondent is in possession of his passport and his CSID.


           24.   I find it is likely his family remain in  their  home,  so
           accommodation and support can be provided by his family  and  he
           can reside with them without legal impediment or requirement.  I
           find the appellant can safely return to his home area  or  to  a
           different area within the IKR if he so chooses, with the support
           of his family."

34.         The Judge's conclusion regarding Article 3  risk  based  on  the
      general level of violence is unimpeachable having regard  to  [A1]  of
      the headnote in SMO.  Paragraph [36] of the grounds  (ground  six)  is
      entirely misconceived.

35.         Ground four raises the issue of safety of  IKR.   The  reference
      to a Home Office Country of Origin Information Service ("COIS") report
      in relation to Iraq does not say to which report  the  ground  refers.
      However, in any event, what is said at [32] of the  grounds  is  again
      misconceived.  The Appellant comes from Sulaymaniyah which  is  within
      IKR.  There is no question of a restriction on freedom of movement  or
      inability to relocate to that  area.   Nor  can  I  find  any  country
      guidance case entitled "MK (Iraq)" save for one which was  promulgated
      and reported in 2012 and does not assist the Appellant in  any  event.
      The Judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion  she  did  that  the
      Appellant could return to IKR.

36.         The remaining issues concern the likely destination  of  return.
      It appears to be assumed in the list  of  issues  said  to  have  been
      ignored by the Judge at [39] of the grounds that the  Appellant  would
      not be able to travel to IKR, having been returned to Baghdad.  It  is
      said that the  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  principles
      established in SMO.  There is an assertion that  the  Appellant  would
      "face considerable difficulty in making the  journey  between  Baghdad
      and the IKR by land without a CSID or an INID [which is in the process
      of replacing the CSID]".

37.         The first point to make is that the Appellant does have a  CSID.
       Mr Khan made the point that the document produced by  the  Respondent
      to the Tribunal with her bundle contains only a copy of that document.
       It is not said where is the original.  In any event, though, the copy
      shows the relevant information needed to get a replacement.

38.         Mr Khan  submitted  however  (and  I  understood  Mr  Walker  to
      accept) that the relevant document now is  an  INID.   It  was,  as  I
      understood the submission, now accepted that  a  replacement  identity
      document in the form of the INID could not  be  obtained  outside  the
      home area in Iraq as it is a biometric document.   The  submission  is
      said to be supported by a COIS report in relation to Iraq  dated  June
      2020 ("the June COIS").  That of course post-dates  both  the  hearing
      and the Decision.  Mr Khan accepted that the  Decision  could  not  be
      impugned based on what is there said.

39.         Mr Khan suggested however that there was an error  made  by  the
      Judge in failing to explain how the  Appellant  could  return  to  IKR
      absent his CSID and/or how he could obtain a replacement.   There  are
      two reasons why I reject that submission.

40.         First, the Appellant has never appealed on  this  basis.   There
      is no reference to any  challenge  to  the  Respondent's  decision  in
      relation to ability to return  in  the  original  grounds  of  appeal.
      Issue was not taken with this part of the Respondent's decision in the
      Skeleton Argument.  The first mention of any challenge on  this  basis
      appears in the grounds challenging the  Decision.   Indeed,  there  is
      still no mention of the point in the Witness  Statement  prepared  for
      the Upper Tribunal hearing.  The  Judge  cannot  be  faulted  for  not
      considering an issue which was not raised.

41.         Second, and more importantly, based on what is said at  [22]  of
      the guidance in SMO, the Appellant would be able to return to  IKR  as
      he is in possession of a valid passport.  The guidance is  that  "[i]f
      [an appellant] has one of those  documents  [which  includes  a  valid
      passport], the journey from Baghdad to the IKR by land  is  affordable
      and practical and can be made without a real risk  of  [an  appellant]
      suffering persecution, serious harm, or Article 3  ill  treatment  nor
      would any difficulties on the journey make  relocation  unduly  harsh"
      (see also [347] and [380] of SMO in relation to the evidential  source
      of that guidance).  The Respondent confirms in her Rule 24 Reply  that
      she  "holds  the  documents  that  are  required   to   arrange   [the
      Appellant's] return".

42.         For those reasons, there is no error of  law  disclosed  by  the
      Judge's consideration of the guidance in SMO and/or in relation to the
      ability of the Appellant to return to IKR.

43.         It is not clear to  me  whether  the  position  in  relation  to
      return to IKR using a valid passport remains the  same  following  the
      June COIS report.  However, if  the  Appellant  wishes  to  raise  any
      points now about his  ability  to  return  based  on  that  report  or
      otherwise or to put forward any further evidence such as is  contained
      in the Witness Statement, it is of course open to him to make  further
      submissions to the Respondent.


CONCLUSION

44.         For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that the grounds  disclose
      no error of law in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with
      the consequence that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision does not involve the making of  a  material
error on a point of law. I  therefore  uphold  the  Decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Young-Harry  promulgated  on  20  March   2020   with   the
consequence that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 5 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
