
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12847/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2020                  |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
         legal errors in the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  C
         Greasley, promulgated on 8 August 2019, dismissing the  appellant's
         appeal  against  the  refusal,  dated  17  November  2017,  of  his
         protection and human rights claim.


      2.  A  previous  decision  dated  17  October  2018   dismissing   the
         appellant's appeal was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.  In  a  decision
         promulgated on 30 October 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  found
         that Judge Greasley failed to  consider  the  plausibility  of  the
         appellant's claimed detentions and releases as  a  PKK  suspect  in
         light of the Country Guidance case of IK  (Returnees  -  Records  -
         IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, and that he failed to apply  the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 (the  Guidance  Note)
         and the principles enunciated in AM (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123  in  determining
         whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness and  in  failing  to
         consider how the appellant's vulnerability may have impacted on his
         ability to give consistent evidence. The  Upper  Tribunal  retained
         the appeal and it was set down for a further fresh hearing.

Background


      3. The appellant is a national of Turkey, born in 1986. He entered the
         UK on 14 January 2017 pursuant to a grant of entry clearance  as  a
         visitor. He made an in-time protection claim on 19 May 2017.


      4. I summarise the appellant's  protection  claim.  He  was  born  and
         brought up in the Malatya Province of Turkey. He is Kurdish and  of
         the Alevi faith. He is a  long-standing  supporter  of  pro-Kurdish
         political parties. Members of  the  appellant's  family  were  also
         politically active, and his sister, GK, was recognised as a refugee
         by the UK authorities in 2001 due to her  political  activities.  A
         2nd cousin, GA, was granted refugee status in the UK in 2018  as  a
         result of her political activities. The appellant  became  involved
         with the BNP (Peace and Democracy Party) in 2010, and then the  HDP
         (People's Democratic Party) in 2014. The appellant participated  in
         marches,  Newros  celebrations  (Kurdish   new   year),   political
         meetings, social  activities  and  distributed  leaflets.  He  also
         attended the HDP party building several times a month.

      5. The appellant was detained for short periods of time (up  to  three
         days) by the Turkish authorities on at least 10  occasions  between
         2011 and 2016, although  he  cannot  recall  the  exact  number  of
         detentions or  all  the  dates  he  was  detained.  Some  of  these
         detentions occurred when he was at  demonstrations,  but  on  other
         occasions he was detained from his home or his place of employment.
         He  was  ill-treated  during  these  detentions  and  suspected  of
         supporting the PKK, a banned terrorist organisation. The  appellant
         had been taken to the anti-terrorist branch security headquarters.

      6. On 12 December 2016 the appellant applied for a visit visa to visit
         his sister, GK. He arrived in the UK on 14 January 2017.  In  April
         2017 the appellant was informed by  his  family  that  the  Turkish
         authorities had visited his home and that  an  arrest  warrant  had
         been issued against  him.  The  appellant  believes  this  occurred
         because a friend of his was detained on his way to the HDP building
         and gave the appellant's name to the authorities.  Since  then  the
         Turkish authorities have continued to search for him, both  in  his
         home village but also in Istanbul where some of his sibling live.

      7. Since being in the UK  the  appellant  has  been  involved  in  the
         activities of the Kurdish Community  Centre,  which  have  included
         protests and demonstrations.

      8. There is medical evidence that the appellant has displayed symptoms
         of PTSD, social anxiety, and epilepsy, and  that  he  has  suffered
         from epileptic  seizures,  panic  attacks  and  flashbacks.  He  is
         receiving medication for his mental health  (anti-depressants)  and
         his epilepsy.

      9. The respondent accepted that  the  appellant  was  Kurdish  and  an
         Alevi. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  been
         involved with either the BDP or the HDP in the manner  he  claimed.
         This was primarily based on vagueness and  inconsistencies  in  the
         appellant's account of the formation and objectives of the parties,
         his failure to mention the parties  or  his  suspected  involvement
         with the PKK in his Screening Interview, his  inability  to  recall
         the dates  of  his  detentions,  inconsistencies  relating  to  his
         contact with his family  in  Turkey,  the  absence  of  documentary
         evidence supporting  his  claim  and  the  hearsay  nature  of  the
         information upon which he relied. The respondent was not  satisfied
         the appellant faced a well-founded fear of persecution  if  removed
         to Turkey.

Documentary evidence

     10. The  respondent's  bundle  contained,  inter  alia,  the  Screening
         Interview, the substantive Asylum Interview,  representations  made
         on the appellant's  behalf  and  the  asylum  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter.


     11. The appellant relied on two bundles of documents  including,  inter
         alia, a witness statement dated 16 July 2019  and  a  supplementary
         statement dated 3 February 2020,  statements  from  his  sister  GK
         (dated 12 September 2018) and his 2nd  cousin  GA  (dated  14  June
         2019), medical evidence including a manuscript  letter  from  a  GP
         surgery confirming that the appellant was under the care of a North
         Middlesex Hospital Neurology Consultant and that an EEG  undertaken
         at the hospital confirmed a diagnosis of  temporal  lobe  epilepsy,
         medical notes issued by  the  GP  surgery,  a  letter  from  a  CBT
         therapist dated 29 November  2017  indicating  that  the  appellant
         presented with symptoms of PTSD, a letter dated 23  September  2018
         from a doctor at his GP surgery indicating that the  appellant  was
         suffering  from  depression  and  was  forgetting   to   take   his
         medication, translated medical notes issued in Turkey,  details  of
         the  appellant's  current   medical   prescriptions   (Mirtazapine,
         Levetiracetam Milpharm, and Depakote), background evidence  on  the
         evidence of epilepsy on  cognitive  function,  a  letter  from  the
         Kurdish Community Centre dated 17 September 2018,  and  photographs
         of the appellant at demonstrations in the UK. The first bundle also
         included a number of human  rights  reports  on  the  situation  in
         Turkey. Ms Patyna provided a helpful skeleton argument. Mr Whitwell
         provided the CPIN 'Turkey: Kurdish political parties', dated August
         2018 and the Report of a Home Office Fact-Finding  Mission  Turkey:
         Kurds, the HDP and the PKK, October 2019.


     12. At the hearing I was provided with a letter dated 4  February  2020
         said to be  issued  by  the  Mukhtar  (the  village  head)  of  the
         appellant's  home  village.  The  letter  was  accompanied   by   a
         translation and a photograph of the mukhtar's ID card. I was  later
         provided by email  with  Screenshots  of  the  appellant's  claimed
         communication with the Mukhtar. I have taken all this evidence into
         account.

The hearing

     13. In light of the medical documents and the  evidence  of  medication
         prescribed to the appellant the hearing was conducted in accordance
         with  the  Guidance  Note  and  the  principles  identified  in  AM
         (Afghanistan). The appellant was offered the opportunity of  having
         breaks and his  questioning  were  appropriate  to  his  identified
         medical needs.


     14.  The  appellant  adopted  his  statements.  I  summarise  his  oral
         evidence, so far as is necessary to determine his protection claim.
         He confirmed that he was "a bit  stressed".  In  December  2019  he
         moved in with his nephew, but the appellant was  unable  to  recall
         his new address. The letter from the Mukhtar stated that the family
         home had  been  raided  on  10  October  2019,  and  the  appellant
         described how he had been in contact with the Mukhtar and  obtained
         the Mukhtar's letter.

     15. In  cross-examination  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  he  had
         received a diagnosis of epilepsy in Turkey. The appellant  referred
         to the translated medical documents in his bundle. Although one  of
         the medical documents referred to 'narcolepsy'  the  appellant  did
         not know anything about this. The appellant had known  the  Mukhtar
         from childhood and they knew each other well. The appellant did not
         know whether other homes had  been  raided  in  October  2019.  The
         appellant was  reminded  that  in  his  first  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing he said  he  had  been  fingerprinted  every  time  he  was
         detained, but in the second First-tier Tribunal hearing he said  he
         had never  been  fingerprinted  when  arrested  and  detained.  The
         appellant  said  he  suffered  from  memory  loss  and   that   the
         inconsistency may be attributable to his epilepsy. In  response  to
         questions  from  me  the  appellant  said  there  were  no  warrant
         documents issued against him by the Turkish authorities that  could
         be  obtained.  After  the  translated  emails  of  the  appellant's
         communication with the Mukhtar were provided, he was  asked  a  few
         more questions about the identities of the communicators.


     16. The appellant's sister, GK, adopted her statement. In  examination-
         in-chief she said the appellant continued to  have  memory  issues.
         She gave the example of how she would ask him whether he  took  his
         medication, but he could not remember whether  he  had.  In  cross-
         examination GK stated that she had not returned to Turkey  for  the
         first 10 years after her arrival in  the  UK  in  2000.  She  first
         returned in 2010 to  see  her  family,  and  she  had  subsequently
         returned every 2 or 3 years, staying for  2  to  3  weeks  on  each
         occasion. When she first returned, she  was  detained  for  2  days
         before being released. She returned to Turkey because  her  surname
         was now different, she did  not  show  her  Turkish  ID  card,  she
         travelled on a British passport and obtained a visa. GK  was  aware
         that the appellant had been  detained  on  at  least  10  occasions
         because of regular  conversations  she  had  with  her  family.  In
         response  to  questions  from  me  GK  said  she  had  no  criminal
         convictions in the UK and had never been in trouble with the police
         in this country.

     17. The appellant's 2nd cousin GA adopted her statement. She  confirmed
         that she and the appellant used to attend some political and social
         events together. GA confirmed that she had no criminal  convictions
         in the UK and had never been in trouble  with  the  authorities  in
         this country.

     18. In addition to adopting the Reasons for Refusal Letter Mr  Whitwell
         submitted  that,  as  the  appellant  left  Turkey  using  his  own
         passport, he  was  unlikely  to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
         authorities. He drew my attention to the CPIN at 2.4.14 and  2.4.15
         in respect of ill-treatment of members and supporters of HDP. There
         was no evidence of any arrest warrant and the  appellant's  current
         fear was based on hearsay evidence. I was directed to 3.1.3,  3.1.5
         and 3.2.5 of the Fact-Finding  Mission  report  relating  to  state
         action against the HDP. I was invited to attach  little  weight  to
         the Mukhtar's evidence as it was not  possible  to  identify  those
         corresponding by email and the appellant knew  the  Mukhtar  for  a
         long time. Mr Whitwell submitted that Judge Greasley  was  entitled
         to find a core inconsistency in the appellant's account relating to
         whether he was fingerprinted during his  detentions  and  that  the
         appellant's explanation - that it was due to his forgetfulness, was
         not credible. Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  appellant  would  be
         able  to  internally  relocate  to  Istanbul,  with  reference   to
         paragraph 199 of IK. I was invited to attach little weight to  GK's
         evidence given the frequency of her returns to Turkey.


     19. Ms Patyna adopted her skeleton argument. She relied on paragraph 76
         of IK to support her  claim  that  many  individuals  who  were  of
         interest to the authorities were detained and then released without
         court appearances. There was nothing in the Fact-Finding mission or
         the CPIN that was inconsistent with the appellant's claim  to  have
         been detained in the  past.  All  section  3  of  the  Fact-Finding
         Mission was saying was that HDP members were not always  considered
         as supporters of the PKK. The appellant was someone who had a  long
         enough  and  political  enough  profile  to  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities, especially considering where he  came
         from. I was invited to attach weight  to  the  Mukhtar's  evidence,
         with reference to R (on the application of SS) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department  ("self-serving"  statements)  [2017]  UKUT
         00164 (IAC). The inconsistency in  respect  of  the  fingerprinting
         could be explained by reference to the appellant's memory problems.
         The internal  relocation  alternative  was  not  available  to  the
         appellant because he would be stopped and detained at the  airport,
         and because, in any event, the authorities had already searched for
         him in Istanbul.

Findings and reasons

     20. I remind myself that the burden of proof in protection cases  rests
         on the appellant and that he must prove that there is a 'real risk'
         that he would face  persecution  in  Turkey,  this  being  a  lower
         standard of proof.


     21. I will first consider the  medical  evidence.  Despite  a  lack  of
         clarity in the translated medical documents emanating from  Turkey,
         I am satisfied the appellant suffers from epilepsy. The  translated
         medical evidence from Turkey consists of lab results undertaken  in
         2015 and 2016 which  refer  to  a  diagnosis  of  "G40.9  Epilepsy,
         Undiagnosed", an EEG obtained in 2014 that was said to  be  "within
         normal limits" and a report from December 2017 referring  again  to
         "G40.9 Epilepsy, Undiagnosed" and mentioning narcolepsy and febrile
         convulsions. It is unclear why there is a reference  to  narcolepsy
         and febrile convulsions, although there was no suggestion that  the
         appellant suffered from these conditions. It  is  possible,  as  Ms
         Patyna submitted, that these may be associated  conditions  in  the
         same general category, but there is insufficient evidence for me to
         make any specific finding. The  translated  Turkish  documents  did
         however  indicate  that  the   appellant   was   being   prescribed
         levetiracetam, which both representatives confirmed at the hearing,
         having checked using their computers,  was  a  medication  for  the
         treatment of epilepsy. Nor was there any challenge  to  the  letter
         from the appellant's GP dated 16 December 2016 indicating that  the
         appellant had been diagnosed with 'temporal  lobe  epilepsy'  by  a
         North Middlesex Hospital Neurology Consultant following EEG  tests.
         Moreover, his current prescriptions,  which  were  not  challenged,
         include Levetiracetam Milpharm tablets. The abstract 'The Impact of
         Epilepsy on Cognitive Function' in the appellant's bundle indicates
         that cognitive problems can frequently  occur  in  those  suffering
         from epilepsy.


     22. A  letter  from  a  CBT  therapist  indicated  that  the  appellant
         presented with symptoms of PTSD and  social  anxiety,  as  well  as
         epileptic seizures, resulting  in  panic  attacks,  flashbacks  and
         insomnia. A GP  at  the  appellant's  surgery  indicated  that  the
         appellant was suffering from  depression,  and  that  he  had  been
         forgetting to  take  his  medication.  I  note  that  he  has  been
         prescribed anti-depressant medication. The  GP  notes  refer  to  a
         diagnosis of anxiety and depression in  June  2017,  prior  to  his
         Asylum Interview. The appellant has consistently maintained,  since
         his Screening Interview, that he suffers from  memory  problems.  I
         witnessed myself  the  appellant  encountering  problems  with  his
         memory when, at the start of the hearing, he was asked to give  his
         new address. Despite having lived there  for  two  months,  he  was
         unable to recall the address. GK described how the appellant  would
         forget whether he took his medication, which is consistent with the
         letter from the GP. Having holistic regard to this  evidence  I  am
         satisfied that the appellant is a vulnerable witness  and  that  he
         does suffer from memory problems. I take  this  into  account  when
         assessing the appellant's evidence in accordance with the  Guidance
         Note. I remind  myself  however,  applying  SB  (vulnerable  adult:
         credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 00398 (IAC),  that  it  is  for  the
         Tribunal  to  determine  the  relationship,  if  any,  between  the
         appellant's vulnerability and his evidence, and that I am in no way
         bound to attribute inconsistencies or vagueness in his evidence  to
         his mental health and memory problems.


     23. Whilst the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
         answer some questions concerning the BDP and the HDP correctly, she
         concluded that his  overall  evidence  was  vague  and,  at  times,
         inconsistent. I have considered the appellant's substantive  asylum
         interview. He gave accurate answers when asked about  the  name  of
         the BDP, the year it was founded, and its emphasis on promoting the
         rights of Kurds, Alevis and  women.  Although  the  respondent  was
         unable to verify that Mustafa Ayzit founded the BDP, the  appellant
         provided background evidence confirming the same and this  was  not
         challenged. The appellant gave a relatively  vague  description  of
         the circumstances in which the BDP was formed,  but  this  was  not
         inconsistent with the  background  information  relied  on  by  the
         respondent describing how the group arose from  the  banning  of  a
         previous party. I note that the appellant only began supporting the
         organisation in 2010, and I take into account his claim that he was
         nervous during his asylum interview. I do not find the  appellant's
         answers when asked how Mustafa Ayzit planned to achieve  the  goals
         of the BDP to be vague when considered against the  general  nature
         of the question. The appellant explained that the  BDP's  goals  of
         achieving equality for Kurds  and  the  Alevis  would  be  achieved
         through winning elections.  This  was  a  reasonably  accurate,  if
         general, explanation. Nor do I find that the appellant gave a vague
         account when asked his motivations for going on marches  supporting
         women's rights. In his asylum  interview  the  appellant  explained
         that he attended the marches because of his mother and his sisters,
         that he was concerned with violence against women, that he did  not
         believe that women should be treated  as  commodities,  that  women
         should not be wed at a young age, that they should have the  choice
         to  marry  who  they  want,  and  that  dowry  payments  should  be
         abolished. This, with respect, was a full and detailed explanation.




     24. The respondent accepted that the appellant accurately  stated  that
         the BDP and the HDP shared similar aims and ideals,  that  the  HDP
         was formed in 2012, and that it was officially founded in 2013. The
         respondent relied on background evidence indicating  that  the  HDP
         was formed after a recommendation from Abdullah Ocalan that the BDP
         was too narrow in its focus on Kurdish issues and that an  umbrella
         group  was  needed  to  attract   different   leftist,   socialist,
         progressive and western orientated groups. The respondent found the
         appellant's explanation for the formation of the HDP  to  be  vague
         and contradictory as he stated that the  BDP  was  accused  by  the
         Turkish state of having  links  with  the  PKK  and  that  the  BDP
         dissolved  into  the  HDP.  Although  the  appellant's  account  is
         general, it is not inconsistent with the information relied  on  by
         the respondent. The respondent's CPIN dated August  2018  indicated
         (e.g. at 7.1.3)  that  BDP  members  were  targeted  because  of  a
         perceived association with the PKK, and that the BDP did merge with
         the HDP. When assessing the generality of the appellant's answers I
         take  into  account  the  evidence  that  he  was  diagnosed   with
         depression and anxiety prior to the asylum interview and  that  his
         symptoms may have contributed to the generality of his explanation.
         The respondent maintains that the appellant  only  gave  a  general
         account of the aims and objectives of the HDP, citing their support
         for the Alevi and Kurds, the importance of supporting  the  Kurdish
         language and Kurdish culture and traditions, and the  defending  of
         women's rights. Having considered the Asylum Interview for myself I
         find that the appellant gave a relatively accurate account  of  the
         aims and objectives of the HDP, bearing in mind the  generality  of
         the question asked. The account given by the appellant  essentially
         reflected the HDP manifesto  set  out  by  the  respondent  in  her
         Reasons for Refusal Letter. One  would  not  reasonably  expect  an
         interviewee in the context of an asylum interview  to  recall  each
         head of the manifesto.


     25. The respondent drew  an  adverse  credibility  inference  from  the
         appellant's claimed inability to speak about any particular women's
         rights marches. It is apparent from the Asylum Interview that, when
         first asked, the appellant did not appreciate  that  he  was  being
         asked to describe a particular march (questions 104 to 106). He did
         however  then  provide  the  names  of  the  places  where  marches
         occurred, and then focused on a particular March in September 2016.
         This was the last march he attended. He arrived about half an  hour
         before the end of the march. The appellant's described the path  of
         the march and stated that it was organised by people from  the  HDP
         and concerned the murder of women, female employment and  education
         and child brides. I find that the appellant was able  to  speak  in
         detail about a particular march.

     26. The appellant was not a member of either the BDP or the HDP. In his
         Asylum Interview he explained that  he  did  not  become  a  member
         because he did not want to be subject to the further pressure  from
         the Turkish authorities that membership of such groups may  entail.
         This explanation is inherently plausible having regard to the  CPIN
         report  (e.g.  at  2.3.1,  2.4.1  -  2.4.12),  which  support   the
         appellant's concerns. Moreover,  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         arrests and detentions because of his involvement with the HDP  and
         suspicion of his support for the PKK is consistent  with  the  CPIN
         report (e.g. 2.4.2 and 2.4.15). The perceived  association  between
         the HDP and the PKK and the frequent arrests and detention  of  HDP
         supporters was confirmed in the evidence given to the  Fact-Finding
         Mission, as outlined in their report of October 2019 (see, e.g. 3.2
         - dealing with the targeting of members and supporters of the  HDP,
         7.12  -  dealing with arrest and punishment,  and  7.13  -  dealing
         with torture and other forms of ill-treatment). Moreover, in IK (at
         [76]) the Tribunal  confirmed  the  prevalence  of  detentions  "of
         persons who were considered to be of material significance  by  the
         security forces even  if  they  were  thereafter  released  without
         judicial involvement." The appellant's detentions and releases were
         therefore plausible when placed  in  the  contest  of  the  country
         evidence. Although a relatively low-level supporter of BDP and then
         HDP,  the  appellant's  support  was  consistent,   including   his
         attendance at the HDP building, and  continued  over  a  period  of
         years. I  find,  in  these  circumstances,  and  in  light  of  the
         aforementioned background evidence, that  the  Turkish  authorities
         may well have identified the appellant as a potential supporter  of
         the PKK.

     27. The appellant did give inconsistent evidence regarding  whether  he
         had been fingerprinted by the Turkish authorities when detained. In
         his  substantive  asylum  interview  the  appellant  said  he   was
         fingerprinted every time  he  was  detained  except  for  his  last
         detention. In his first First-tier Tribunal hearing he said he  had
         been fingerprinted every time, but in the 2nd  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing he denied having been fingerprinted. At the hearing  before
         me the  appellant  attributed  this  inconsistency  to  his  memory
         problems. I have considered the evidence of the impact of  epilepsy
         on cognitive function, and I note that the appellant has  presented
         with symptoms of PTSD, including flashbacks, and that the questions
         relating to whether he was fingerprinted concerned  times  when  he
         claims he was ill-treated. I find, applying the lower  standard  of
         proof, and having regard to the appellant's evidence  as  a  whole,
         that I can attribute this inconsistency to his memory  problems.  I
         have additionally considered the appellant's  inability  to  recall
         all the dates of his various detentions, a point relied on  by  the
         respondent. The appellant's evidence was that he was detained on at
         least 10 occasions from 2011 to 2016 for short periods of time. The
         detentions occurred over a period of 5 years, and commenced  around
         8 years ago. It  is  not,  in  my  judgment,  surprising  that  the
         appellant  would  be  unable  to  recall  all  the  dates  of   his
         detentions. Even if he did not suffer from memory problems, I would
         not have held this against him. The evidence of his memory problems
         however further reinforces my view that the  appellant's  inability
         to recall all the dates of his detentions does  not  undermine  his
         account.

     28. I do not find the appellant's ability to leave Turkey using his own
         passport to undermine his claim that the  authorities  now  have  a
         significant  adverse  interest  in  him.  The   trigger   for   the
         appellant's protection claim was the issuance of an arrest  warrant
         and the subsequent raid on his family home, which was  precipitated
         by the arrest of one of the appellant's friends who, the  appellant
         believes, disclosed his name when interrogated by the  authorities.
         This aspect of the appellant's claim is inherently plausible and is
         consistent with the background evidence, considered above. Prior to
         that incident an arrest warrant had never been issued  against  the
         appellant, suggesting that the authorities did not have  sufficient
         evidence to charge him with any offence. There  is  no  indication,
         either in the relevant country guidance case or in  the  background
         material brought to my attention and upon which the parties relied,
         that the Turkish authorities would centrally record the details  of
         persons who had only been detained and released but not charged and
         that  this  information  would  be  available  to  the  authorities
         checking those leaving Turkey.

     29. I do not find the absence  of  a  copy  of  an  arrest  warrant  to
         undermine the appellant's claim. There was no evidence provided  to
         me, either in the extant country guidance case or in the  documents
         brought to my attention and upon which  the  parties  relied,  that
         copies of such warrants were served on members of the family of the
         person  sought,  or  that  copies  could  be  obtained   from   the
         authorities. I note in this regard the appellant's evidence  answer
         at question 186  that  the  authorities  informed  the  appellant's
         family that they could "not hand out information" to anyone but the
         appellant because he was over the age of 18. There is no background
         evidence inconsistent with this assertion.

     30. I find I can attach weight to the evidence purporting to come  from
         the Mukhtar and the supporting  email  correspondence.  The  letter
         itself stated that the author was the Mukhtar  of  the  appellant's
         province in Turkey and that the  security  forces  had  raided  his
         neighbourhood  on  10  October  2019  and  had  asked   about   the
         appellant's whereabouts. The letter was signed and  stamped.  There
         was nothing inherently  incredible  in  the  format,  structure  or
         content of the letter. The Mukhtar gave the appellant's  name,  his
         date of birth, his Turkish ID No. and confirmed that the  appellant
         was registered in the neighbourhood. The letter was supported by  a
         photograph of the Mukhtar's ID card. There was nothing on the  face
         of the photograph to cause me to doubt the authenticity of  the  ID
         card, although the absence of the actual ID  card  does  reduce  to
         some extent  the  weight  I  attach  to  it.   The  email  messages
         indicated that the original message containing the Mukthar's letter
         and ID card were  sent  by  someone  using  his  name,  although  I
         appreciate that the actual email address was not provided. Whilst I
         have considered the possibility that the Mukhtar may have  provided
         the letter and the  photograph  of  his  ID  card  to  support  the
         appellant's appeal because of  friendship,  having  considered  the
         appellant's claim as a whole I find I  can  attach  weight  to  the
         evidence from the Mukhtar.


     31. I found the appellant's sister, GK, and his 2nd cousin, GA,  to  be
         impressive witnesses. They each gave their evidence  in  a  direct,
         forthright and even-handed manner. Their  evidence  was  clear  and
         detailed and was given without hesitation. There was no perceptible
         attempt at embellishment. Nor was there anything to  indicate  that
         they were anything other than persons of good character. I do  take
         into account the close family relationship and the possibility,  as
         a result of the familial relationships, of actual  or  subconscious
         bias in favour of the appellant. I remind myself however that self-
         serving statements can still attract weight and the  assessment  of
         what weight to attach must be considered 'in the  round'.  Although
         GK's knowledge of the  appellant's  political  activities  and  his
         detentions arose from information provided to her by her family  in
         Turkey, it was obtained over a  period  of  some  years.  Whilst  I
         cannot discount the possibility that GK's family have lied  to  her
         during their regular conversations, I do  not  find,  applying  the
         lower standard  of  proof,  that  this  is  likely.  There  was  no
         challenge to GK evidence relating to the appellant's epilepsy,  his
         sleep problems, his  panic  attacks  and  his  forgetfulness.  This
         supports  the  appellant's  claim  that  the  few   inconsistencies
         identified by the respondent can be reasonably  attributed  to  his
         memory problems. I do not find GK's returns  to  Turkey,  once  she
         naturalised as a British  citizen,  to  undermine  her  claim.  She
         indicated that she took the risk of returning  to  see  her  family
         because she has changed her surname and was travelling on a British
         passport. This is an inherently credible explanation. AG's evidence
         further reinforced the appellant's claimed political involvement in
         Turkey as she was personally aware of his involvement with both the
         BDP and the HDP and had attended political events with him.


     32. Having considered the appellant's evidence 'in the round', and  for
         the reasons given above, I find he has given a credible account  of
         the events that caused him to leave Turkey. I find that  he  was  a
         supporter of the BDP and then the HDP, albeit at a  relatively  low
         level. I find that he had  attended  political  marches,  meetings,
         social events, and that he did distribute leaflets and visited  the
         HDP meetings several times a month. His support for  the  political
         parties has been long standing.  I find  he  was  detained  by  the
         authorities on at least 10 occasions between 2010 and 2016 and that
         he was questioned about his suspected support for the  PKK.  During
         these  detentions,  some  of  which  occurred  in  the  anti-terror
         headquarters, I find he was seriously ill-treated. I find that  the
         Turkish authorities adverse interest  in  the  appellant  increased
         following the arrest of one of the  appellant's  friends.  Although
         the appellant does not know what  information  was  given  by  this
         person to the authorities, it was sufficient to enable a warrant to
         be issued against him and for the authorities to  raid  his  family
         home and to look for him at the homes of his siblings in  Istanbul.




     33. In determining whether,  in  light  of  my  factual  findings,  the
         appellant would face a real  risk  of  persecution  if  removed  to
         Turkey, I have considered and applied the guidance in IK,  and  the
         additional background evidence provided by  the  parties  including
         the Fact-Finding Mission,  the  CPIN  August  2018,  the  US  State
         Department report for the year 2018 and the  Amnesty  International
         and Human  Rights  Watch  2018  reports  on  Turkey.  Although  the
         appellant's involvement has been at a relatively low level, it  has
         occurred over a period of years. The appellant is now perceived  or
         suspected to have some  involvement  with  the  PKK,  a  proscribed
         separatist organisation. He has been arrested and detained  and  an
         arrest warrant has been issued against him. Given  the  appellant's
         Kurdish ethnicity and his Alevi faith, and given that other members
         of his family were also targeted by the authorities as a result  of
         their political activities, I find the appellant is  highly  likely
         to be questioned by the authorities at the airport,  and  that  any
         warrant issued against him would appear in  the   computerised  GBT
         system accessible  at  the  airport  (paragraph  133  of  IK).  The
         appellant cannot be expected to lie if interrogated  (paragraph  86
         of IK). If the appellant was detained at the airport as a suspected
         supporter of the PKK, there is a real risk he would be subjected to
         ill-treatment sufficient to amount to persecution.

     34. Even if the appellant were to pass through the  airport,  he  would
         face the same risk of ill-treatment in his home area if he came  to
         the attention of the authorities in his home area in light  of  his
         past-detentions and ill-treatment and the  issuance  of  an  arrest
         warrant. Nor would internal relocation be reasonably  open  to  him
         given that the authorities have also searched for him in  Istanbul.
         This suggests that the state  authorities  would  have  an  adverse
         interest in the appellant wherever he relocated in Turkey. At [115]
         of IK the Tribunal indicated that in most normal  circumstances  it
         would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a  person  to  live   without
         appropriate registration for any material time as a requirement for
         avoiding persecution. At paragraph 118 the Tribunal considered that
         an individual's material history  would,  in  broad  terms,  become
         known to the authorities at the airport and in his new area when he
         settles, either through registration with the local Mukhtar  or  if
         he comes to the attention for any reason of the  police  there.  In
         these circumstances I find that the appellant would be at  risk  of
         persecution if he is returned to Turkey.

Notice of Decision

The protection appeal is allowed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum
         20 February 2020

Signed
      Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

