
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12823/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 26, 2018                            |On May 02, 2018               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR YASSIN QADR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Tabbasum, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make and anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iranian national.  He claimed to have  entered  the
    United Kingdom clandestinely on April 22, 2016 and  claimed  asylum  on
    May 11, 2016. The respondent refused his claim on November 8, 2016.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  November  18,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davies (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on August 14, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on
    August 30, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on September 11, 2017.  Permission
    to appeal was refused by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Woodcraft on November 9, 2017 but when those grounds were renewed Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission on  January  9,  2018.  She
    found it arguable (a) it was  unclear  how  old  the  Judge  found  the
    appellant to be as at the date of hearing, bearing in mind there was no
    Merton compliant age assessment report and (b) no account was taken  of
    appellant's age when the events were supposed to have occurred.

 5. This matter came before me on the above date.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 6. Miss Tabbersum relied on the grounds of appeal that led  to  permission
    being granted and  submitted  that  the  decision  was  flawed  because
    firstly there was no Merton compliant age report before the  Judge  and
    secondly it had been incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  make  a  specific
    finding about the appellant's age. The Judge had made positive findings
    on aspects of his case but ultimately rejected his  case  attaching  no
    weight to his age at the time he was in Iran smuggling. The  Judge  had
    accepted that he was smuggling illegal items but failed to assess  risk
    on  return  against  that  background.  Whilst  he  had  rejected   the
    appellant's claim the Judge nevertheless  should  have  considered  the
    fact that he should not be required to lie  about  his  activities,  if
    questioned.

 7. Ms Aboni submitted there was no material error in law.  The  Judge  had
    considered the evidence regarding his  age  and  whilst  there  was  no
    Merton compliant report there was a statement about  his  age  and  the
    Judge made findings that were open to him. The Judge had concluded that
    he was over the age of 18 by a clear margin at the date of hearing  and
    he was over the age of 18 when he entered the United Kingdom. The Judge
    further concluded that the appellant had told untruths about his age to
    benefit himself and  the  Judge,  having  assessed  all  the  evidence,
    concluded he was not a credible witness and that he had not come to the
    attention of the authorities. There was therefore  no  risk  on  return
    because he fell into the category of a failed asylum  seeker,  who  had
    left illegally, and case law made clear that such persons did not  face
    a risk of persecution or face their rights under ECHR been breached.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 8. This was an appeal  brought  by  the  appellant  who  claimed  to  have
    smuggled illegal goods and that he had come to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.

 9. There was an issue over his age and this led  to  the  local  authority
    undertaking an age assessment of him. Despite the best efforts of  both
    the appellant's representative and the respondent that report  was  not
    put before the Judge and whilst that report is now available today,  it
    is not something I have had regard to when deciding this issue.

10. In submissions, it was argued that the appellant was 16  years  of  age
    when he carried out his smuggling  activities  and  that  his  age  was
    consistent with the country evidence. The Judge was  mindful  that  the
    appellant's age was in dispute as he commenced  his  findings  on  this
    very point. He reminded himself that it was fraught with risk  to  base
    an assessment on appearance and  demeanour  alone  because  a  person's
    ethnicity, culture, education and background could  all  affect  visual
    assessment. The  Judge  therefore  made  it  clear  that  he  would  be
    assessing the appellant's age having  regard  to  all  the  documentary
    evidence and evidence given to him.

11. The Judge did not require  corroboration  but  noted  that  there  were
    significant credibility issues in his appeal. This was not a case where
    the appellant had given a single age and had stuck to it but it  was  a
    case where there had been various accounts of age put forward.

12. He was questioned during the hearing about his identification  document
    and the responses he gave were such that the Judge was  critical  about
    his account and concluded this aspect lacked credibility. He  concluded
    at paragraph 21 of his decision that he  was  "someone  older  than  18
    years of age by a clear margin". At paragraph 22 he stated, "I  do  not
    accept that the appellant has established even to  the  lower  standard
    that he was under the age of 18 years when he  entered  the  UK.  I  am
    satisfied that he was an adult when he arrived."

13. Whilst the Judge accepted that it was reasonably  likely  that  he  had
    been  involved  in  cross-border  trading  or  transport  of  goods  or
    smuggling the Judge had to decide the extent of his activities. He  had
    regard to the appellant's interviews and  found  his  account  of  what
    happened on December 29, 2015  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  country
    information and he further found he gave  inconsistent  evidence  about
    the Pasda.

14. The Judge was highly sceptical of how he had been identified as he gave
    different accounts-in his substantive interview  he  suggested  it  was
    because he had left his horse behind but in  oral  evidence  he  stated
    that someone had given his name.

15. The Judge carried  out  a  careful  examination  of  his  evidence  and
    ultimately concluded  that  his  evidence  was  both  unconvincing  and
    lacking in credibility. He concluded at paragraph 38 that  he  had  not
    come to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities.

16. There were further issues of credibility raised such as the fact he had
    described himself as an Iraqi when of  course  he  is  an  Iranian.  He
    admitted using various names and ages in order to bolster his case.  At
    paragraph 45 of his decision the  Judge  concluded  the  appellant  was
    neither a credible nor truthful witness and that he  had  been  evasive
    throughout.

17. The Judge said at best he had probably been "advised  tactically  by  a
    people smuggler at the  best  way  of  deceiving  national  immigration
    authorities so as to maximise his chances of being allowed to stay".

18. It has been argued before me that  the  respondent  should  never  have
    proceeded with the decision letter without a fully compliant report.  I
    accept that in an ideal world there would be a fully compliant  report,
    but this was a case where there was a witness statement available about
    age, but the Judge chose not to rely on that document alone  but  chose
    to rely on all the evidence in deciding how old he was.

19. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable he should have
    made a specific finding on his age. I do not find that  the  Judge  was
    able to make a specific finding on his age for the simple  reason  that
    he is not an expert. All the Judge could do was to make a finding about
    whether he was over or under the age of 18.

20. The Judge made two clear findings  in  paragraphs  21  and  22  of  his
    decision. He made a finding that he was over the age of  18  before  he
    came to the United Kingdom and that he was someone older than 18  years
    of age by a clear margin by the time of the hearing.

21. I therefore find that the Judge did make clear findings on age.

22. He also made clear findings when considering the age of  the  appellant
    when he may have  been  carrying  out  his  smuggling  activities.  The
    country evidence  makes  it  clear  that  teenagers  carried  out  such
    smuggling and I remind myself that teenagers spanned the age 13 to  19.
    He had concluded that when he arrived here he was not under the age  of
    18.

23. It was also argued that the Judge failed to consider the  risk  brought
    about by his activities. The Judge properly considered the case law  of
    SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308. The Judge had made it clear that the appellant had not  come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities and consequently as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who had left illegally he would not be at risk.

24. Having considered both grounds advanced the hearing I am not  persuaded
    there is a material error in law.

    DECISION

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

26. I uphold the previous decision.


Signed                              Date     26/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     26/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
