
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12698/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2019                   |On 24 October 2019                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                     HA
                      (Anonymity order previously made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Nicolaou of counsel, instructed by Turpin &
Miller LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh, who had been born in  1996.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2004 and  applied  for
    asylum, as an unaccompanied child, on  25  October  2004.  A  residence
    order in favour of a paternal uncle was made on 3 March 2006 but he was
    abused and neglected and this order was discharged on 24 June 2008  and
    a residence order was made in favour of AK. From 2015  he  was  in  the
    care of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets.

2.   Meanwhile, his application for asylum  had  been  refused  but  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain and this leave  was  subsequently
    extended until July 2011. He was granted indefinite leave to remain  on
    19 September 2011.

3.   Whilst in foster care the Respondent developed a  significant  drinking
    problem. He was also involved in a serious road accident in which  both
    of his legs were broken.

4.   On 24 February 2016 the  Respondent  was  fined  for  using  a  vehicle
    without insurance and possession of a Class B drug. On 2 December  2016
    he was fined for possessing a Class A drug,  namely  cocaine.   He  was
    also fined on 14 February 2017 for failing to attend for an  assessment
    after a drugs test. On 12 May 2017 he  was  sentenced  to  a  community
    order and disqualified from driving after pleading guilty to failing to
    stop a vehicle, using a vehicle without insurance and driving with  the
    proportion of a specified  controlled  drug  being  above  a  specified
    limit. He was also convicted of four other vehicle related offences  on
    another date on 12 May 2017.

5.   On 7 July 2017 he was convicted of failing to stop  after  an  accident
    and failing to  provide  a  specimen  and  this  eventually  led  to  a
    suspended prison sentence of 4 months.  On the same date  he  was  also
    convicted of four other vehicle related offences which had taken  place
    on another date but no separate penalties were imposed.  On  23  August
    2017 he was made the subject of a community order for possession  of  a
    knife  and  on  4  September  2017  he  was  sentenced  to  six  months
    imprisonment for possession of a knife. He  was  also  sentenced  to  a
    further three months  for  committing  a  further  offence  during  the
    operational period of a suspended sentence.  Finally,  on  17  November
    2017, he was fined for burglary and theft from a non-dwelling.

6.   On 10 October 2017 the Respondent was served with a decision to make  a
    deportation order in his favour. He then made a human rights  claim  on
    16 October 2017 but this was refused on 11 September 2018. He  appealed
    and First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff allowed his appeal in a decision
    promulgated on 8 August 2019. The  Appellant  appealed  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lever refused her permission  to  appeal  on  27  August
    2019. However, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  on
    11 September 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   Counsel for the Respondent made an application  to  rely  on  a  letter
    from the Respondent's GP Surgery, dated 7 August 2019,  which  had  not
    been before First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff. I found that  it  would
    only be necessary to consider whether to admit this evidence if I found
    that there had been an error of law in the Judge's decision.  The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and counsel  for  the  Respondent  made  oral
    submissions and I have  taken  these  into  account  when  reaching  my
    findings below.  I also took into  account  the  content  of  counsel's
    skeleton argument.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

8.   Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted the Appellant permission  to  appeal
    on the basis that "it was arguable that in finding that there were very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into Bangladeshi
    society because of the appellant's claimed mental health problems,  the
    judge failed to appreciate  that  there  was  no  up  to  date  medical
    evidence and that despite the claimed issues, the appellant was in full
    time studies for a degree course and able to work which suggested  that
    the high threshold had not been met".

9.   However, in paragraph 62 of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff clearly stated "... I am in some difficulties here  because  I
    do not have a specific medical report which has been provided for these
    proceedings and I do  not  have  a  specific  letter  from  the  doctor
    explaining the various diagnosis". But he went on to state "what I have
    instead [are] photocopies from the Appellant's medical records, letters
    confirming that he is receiving psychotherapy  and  evidence  from  the
    social workers who have been responsible for  managing  and  supporting
    his care since his release from prison. There is no  dispute  that  the
    Appellant made  a  serious  attempt  at  suicide  last  year.  That  is
    indicative of significant mental health problems and vulnerability".

10.  This finding was clearly in accordance with the medical evidence  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the Respondent's  132  page
    Bundle.

11.  In particular, there was a  statement,  dated  26  July  2018,  from  a
    social worker in the East London Mental Health Trust,  which  confirmed
    that he had had access to the Respondent's mental  health  records.  He
    noted that the Respondent first came to the attention of the Service at
    the age of 17 and had presented as a troubled teenager with  a  history
    of abuse from adult carers both in Bangladesh and in the UK.  He  added
    that he presented with symptoms which were consistent with a  diagnosis
    of personality disorders related to childhood trauma and abuse and that
    he had had impulsive suicidal thoughts and plans. He also referred to a
    very serious suicide attempt on 21 July 2018 and noted that in spite of
    recent  progress  [the  Respondent]  remains  vulnerable,  and  it  was
    important to recognise the seriousness  and  severity  of  his  suicide
    attempt. He finished by stating  that  he  would  have  concerns  about
    future suicide risks if he was not allowed to stay in the UK, as he had
    not yet developed the psychological resilience  to  cope  with  such  a
    major disruption to his life. In addition, his detailed  medical  notes
    confirmed this diagnosis and the extent of his mental health needs over
    an significant period of time.

12.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Respondent  was
    no longer at a crisis point in his life  in  relation  to  this  mental
    health but the Respondent's vulnerability was  confirmed  by  the  four
    witnesses who gave oral evidence at the appeal hearing and his progress
    was seen to be dependent upon the support he was being given.

13.  In the context of all of this evidence, it was clearly open  to  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff to conclude  in  paragraph  63:  "in  that
    context I am satisfied that the Appellant has significant mental health
    needs and I infer that he would need help and support where ever he was
    living accordingly I do find that he would struggle to cope if he could
    not put comparable social and medical  support  networks  in  place  on
    return to Bangladesh".

14.  The Judge then relied on extracts from the Appellant's  Country  Policy
    and Information Note Bangladesh: Medical and Healthcare Issues  Version
    1.0 May 2019 which stated that:

         "9.1.1.  An Australian DFAT report of February 2018 noted, 'Despite
                considerable needs, there are few support services available
                for those suffering from mental health disorders and  [there
                is] no specific mental health authority in Bangladesh'.  The
                US State Department 2018 Report on  Human  Rights  Practices
                similarly  observed,  'Government  facilities  for  treating
                persons with mental disabilities were  inadequate  [for  the
                country as a whole]

         9.1.2.   MedCOI commented in a response of 4 September 2015:

                'Based on the information found in several  sources,  mental
                illness in  Bangladesh  is  highly  stigmatized  and  mental
                healthcare is in its nascent stages. Healthcare provision is
                limited ..."

15.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that,  as  the  Respondent
    was now studying on a full-time basis and also working on  a  part-time
    basis, he would be able to work in order to fund any services which  he
    may need if removed to Bangladesh. However, this does not  address  the
    reality of the country evidence which suggests that mental health  care
    is  still  in  its  nascent  stages  and  those  with   mental   health
    difficulties are stigmatised  even  if  they  can  afford  to  pay  for
    services.  The lack of facilities was also  confirmed  in  the  article
    from the International Journal of Mental Health Systems which was  also
    in the Respondent's Bundle.

16.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic also found that it  was  arguable  that  the
    Judge had failed to take into account financial  assistance  which  the
    appellant would receive from a facilitated return and potentially  from
    his family in Bangladesh.

17.  However, at paragraph 61 of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff noted that "the Appellant's account of having no contact  with
    his family at all was not disputed". He also added that "that  is  also
    consistent with the account of the  Appellant  being  taken  into  care
    because even the relatives in the UK were being abusive. I am satisfied
    that that Appellant has no support mechanism in Bangladesh to  call  on
    to facilitate his return".

18.  At paragraph 60 the Judge also found that "in the Appellant's  case  he
    has been in the UK since the age of eight. He also,  and  this  is  not
    disputed by the Respondent, left  Bangladesh  because  his  father  was
    abusive. That must form a significant factor to take into account  when
    considering whether or not there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to
    return...I consider in  essence  the  Appellant  claims  to  have  fled
    Bangladesh and the abusive situation there to be unchallenged. Although
    the Appellant is now  an  adult  that  must  increase  the  stress  and
    difficulty he would face on return".

19.  In terms of the Respondent benefitting from a facilitated  return,  the
    Appellant had made a general reference to the Facilitated Return Scheme
    in refusal letter, dated 11 September 2018.  However,  The  Facilitated
    Return Scheme (FRS) Version  8.0  indicates  that  the  scheme  is  not
    available to a person who pursued a right of appeal beyond the level of
    the First-tier Tribunal  or  someone  who  has  an  extant  immigration
    appeal. This interpretation of the policy  was  accepted  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer and he did not seek to rely  on  this  second
    ground of appeal.

20.  However, he did submit that First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff had  not
    undertaken the broad evaluative assessment of the  evidence  which  was
    necessary in the light of Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, when considering whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to the Respondent establishing a private life  in
    Bangladesh. However, between paragraphs 60 and 65 of his decision First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff did give very detailed consideration to  a
    range of evidence, including that related to his mental health,  before
    giving cogent reasons for finding in paragraph 65  that  "there  [were]
    very ...significant obstacles to  this  highly  vulnerable  Appellant's
    integration on return..."

21.  In addition, between paragraphs 52 and 56 of  his  decision  the  Judge
    gave appropriate weight and detailed consideration to  the  extent  and
    seriousness of the Respondent's criminal offences and how this effected
    his right to leave to remain.

22.  Therefore, I find that there were no errors of law  in  the  manner  in
    which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff  considered  whether   the
    Respondent fell within the exception contained in paragraph 399A of the
    Immigration Rules and section 117C(4) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

23.  Therefore, there were no errors of law  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff's decision.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff's decision is upheld.


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 21 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

