
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12715/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th September 2017                   |On 10th October 2017                |
|Extempore                                |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mupara, Counsel instructed by AA Immigration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  promulgated  on  10th   March   2017
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse his protection and human rights claims.

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Ukraine, originally from Afghanistan.  It
    is not in dispute that he has significant  and  serious  mental  health
    problems which has resulted in him  being  sectioned  pursuant  to  the
    Mental Health Act 1983.  The appeal was initially  adjourned  in  order
    for his solicitors to take  further  instructions,  to  obtain  further
    evidence and also to obtain an expert report.  It was then relisted  on
    22nd February 2017, approximately two months later.

 3. On 16th February the appellant's solicitors sent a letter by fax to the
    Tribunal requesting  a  further  adjournment  as  the  judge  noted  at
    paragraph [22] for different  reasons.   The  letter  states  that  the
    applicant had been detained and "sectioned" under the Mental Health Act
    1983.  This is recited by the judge and he concluded  however  that  as
    there was no indication as to when the appellant would be fit  to  give
    evidence that it would not in the circumstances be fair and appropriate
    to adjourn the case.

 4. I am guided in this case by  AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123
    which, although it postdates the decision and the grant  of  permission
    in this case, is clearly and manifestly of relevance.   It  emphasises,
    amongst other things, the need for Tribunals, particularly  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, to have proper regard to the Practice Direction  'First-
    tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult   and   Sensitive
    Witnesses' issued by the Senior President and to the  Joint  and  which
    are annexed to AM (Afghanistan).  Regrettably  there  appears  to  have
    been Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010.   There  is  no  proper
    indication that the judge considered that the appellant, who  had  been
    sectioned under the Mental Health Act and could not attend  his  appeal
    was a vulnerable individual, or that the relevant guidance was applied.



 5. The failure to follow the guidance in my view is a sufficient basis  of
    which it could be said that this was not a  procedurally  fair  way  in
    which to proceed and on that basis I consider  that  the  decision  did
    involve the making of  a  procedural  error  such  as  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a proper hearing.

 6. In reaching that conclusion I do however note that the  solicitors  did
    not attend the hearing and no good reason is provided for  their  other
    systematic failures in failing to comply with directions in this  case,
    but I bear in mind that I am dealing here with an individual who was at
    the relevant time in a  particularly  vulnerable  position  and  facing
    considerable if not insuperable difficulties in instructing lawyers  to
    represent him. For these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  there  was  a
    procedural error amounting to an error of  law  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision on that basis.

 7. I am satisfied that, given the nature of the error, the  appellant  was
    deprived of a proper hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    therefore the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh decision on all issues.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  remit  the
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.



 2. It is for the First-tier Tribunal to ensure that, on this occasion, the
    relevant guidance is followed, and it would be advisable for  detailed,
    case-specific directions to  be  given  and  the  need  for  reasonable
    adjustments  considered  before  this  matter  is  listed   again   for
    substantive hearing.

 3. I make an anonymity direction, given the appellant's  state  of  health
    and vulnerability.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  9 October 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


