
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/12470/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 21 December 2018                        |On 17 January 2019            |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ARI AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read as incorporating the decision on error
    of law issued to parties on 15 November 2018.  As directed therein, the
    case came before the UT for  remaking  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant had a right on private life grounds to remain in the UK.

 2. The decision of FtT Judge Mrs D H Clapham, promulgated on 16 May  2018,
    was set aside because at [85] it applied to the  private  life  case  a
    test of "difficulties which cannot be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship".  No source was cited for that test.  The grounds  of
    appeal to the UT suggested that it was taken from EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
    of the rules, which does not apply to private life.

 3. The decision issued on 15 November 2018  suggested  that  the  question
    might be put this way: is the criterion whether the appellant will have
    a normal life by the standards of the UK, or by the  standards  of  the
    IKR / KRG?  Attention was drawn to  possible  points  of  reference  in
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and in the respondent's guidance.

 4. The rules prescribe thus:

         Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
         grounds of private life


         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:


             (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
             Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.
             in Appendix FM; and


             (ii)      has made a valid application for leave to remain on
             the grounds of private life in the UK; and


             (iii)     has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (iv)      is under the age of 18 years and has lived
             continuously in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any
             period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to
             expect the applicant to leave the UK; or


             (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
             at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (vi)      subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or
             above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to leave
             the UK.


 5. The respondent's decision said at [92] that  there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles, because the appellant is Kurdish, speaks Kurdish
    Sorani, has been employed in Iraq, and has family in Iraq.

 6. The appellant has not contended that he can meet all  the  requirements
    of the rules.   He has argued that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Iraq, and that he therefore  succeeds
    on human rights grounds, although the rest of the rule cannot  be  met.
    In his grounds of appeal to the UT he relied upon humanitarian factors,
    such as poverty rates and the need for food and medical  aid.   In  his
    skeleton argument and in submissions he relied on these factors:

          i) absence of a CSID,  leading  to  difficulty  in  getting  from
             Baghdad to the KRG and in accessing services;

         ii) the high rate of unemployment in the KRG;

        iii) lack of higher education, having completed only the 6th grade;
             and

         iv) having no family members to assist him.

 7. Kamara was a case about deportation, not private life, but it  involved
    interpretation  of  the  concept  of  very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration. Sales J said at paragraph 14:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."


 8. Home Office Guidance carries no authority of its own, but may be useful
    to consider.  The  guidance  is  within  a  document  entitled  "Family
    Migration", version 2.0, published on 19 December 2018.  Pages 58 to 64
    are relevant, particularly these paragraphs:

         A "very significant obstacle to integration" means something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
         than the usual obstacles which may arise on relocation (such as the
         need to learn a  new  language  or  obtain  employment).  They  are
         looking to see whether  there  are  "very  significant"  obstacles,
         which is a high threshold. Very significant  obstacles  will  exist
         where the applicant demonstrates  that  they  would  be  unable  to
         establish a private  life  in  the  country  of  return,  or  where
         establishing a private life in the country of return  would  entail
         very serious hardship for the applicant. ...


         The decision maker should consider whether the  applicant  has  the
         ability to form an adequate private life by the  standards  of  the
         country of return - not by UK standards. The  decision  maker  will
         need to consider whether the applicant will be able to establish  a
         private life in respect of all its essential elements, even if, for
         example, their job, or their ability to find work, or their network
         of friends and relationships may be differently constituted in  the
         country of return. The fact the applicant may find  life  difficult
         or challenging in the country of return does  not  mean  that  they
         have established that there would be very significant obstacles  to
         integration there. The decision maker must  consider  all  relevant
         factors in the person's background  and  the  conditions  they  are
         likely to face in the country of return in making their decision as
         to whether there are very significant obstacles to integration. ...


         Lack of  employment  prospects  is  very  unlikely  to  be  a  very
         significant obstacle to integration. In assessing a claim  that  an
         absence of employment prospects would  prevent  an  applicant  from
         integrating in the country of return, their circumstances on return
         should be compared to the conditions that prevail in  that  country
         and to the circumstances of the general population,  not  to  their
         circumstances in the UK.


 9. There is no reason for Kamara not to apply in the present context.  The
    respondent's guidance is consistent with that case and with  the  terms
    of the rule.  The issue of  integration  is  approached  by  whether  a
    person is an insider or an outsider, not by  difficulties  shared  with
    persons of local origin in  their  own  territory.   The  criterion  is
    normal life there, not normal life in the UK.  Private life is  not  to
    be used  as  if  it  opens  up  humanitarian  protection  by  a  lesser
    threshold.

10. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The appellant has shown no
    reason to revisit its findings of primary fact.   Accordingly,  he  has
    access to a CSID, has no  difficulty  in  travelling  or  in  accessing
    services, and has  family  members  to  help  him  in  returning  home.
    Standing those findings, and applying country  guidance,  he  does  not
    qualify for protection.  For the reasons given above, he has not  shown
    that the same facts constitute a private life claim.

11. As the case turns out on fuller inspection  of  the  grounds,  the  FtT
    judge was not far wide of the mark in applying the test she did.

12. The decision is remade thus: the appeal, as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is
    dismissed.

            [pic]

            9 January 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

