
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/12050/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 March 2019                         |On 10 September 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   mr a h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Abraham, Solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Ethiopia  born  on  4  June  1993.   He
    arrived in the UK and claimed asylum having entered clandestinely on 22
    May 2018 on the basis that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in
    Ethiopia on the basis of his political opinion.  This  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 1 October 2018 and the  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision.  His appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Warren for hearing in Manchester on 13 November 2018.

 2. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  22  January  2019  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    sought in time on a number of grounds:-

      1) that the judge failed to make findings on a material aspect of  the
         appeal, i.e. a letter from the Ethiopian Peace Commission;

      2) that the  judge  failed  to  adequately  assess  the  risk  to  the
         Appellant on account of his accepted sur place activities for GB7;

      3)  in  failing  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for   rejecting   the
         credibility of the Appellant's  account  and  in  failing  to  make
         findings in relation to the Appellant's account of being  arrested,
         detained and tortured in Ethiopia;

      4) in applying the wrong standard of proof  at  [3],  i.e.  reasonable
         probability rather than the lower standard of proof;

      5) in failing  to  give  the  appeal  anxious  scrutiny  referring  at
         [32](iv)  to  Bangladesh  when  the  Appellant  is  a  national  of
         Ethiopia; and

      6) failing to make findings in respect of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
         the Immigration Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keith  in  a
    decision dated 16 July 2019 in general terms, but  in  particular  with
    reference to grounds 2 and 3.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates  submitted  although
    there were aspects of the judge's decision he would defend he  conceded
    that there had been inadequate reasoning in respect of ground 3  as  to
    why the judge did not accept the Appellant had been arrested,  detained
    and tortured and also in relation to the  judge's  findings  concerning
    the Appellant's involvement with GB7 at [33].  He did not  accept  that
    there was an error in  relation  to  the  judge's  application  of  the
    correct standard of proof as that had been remedied by [32]  where  the
    judge expressly made reference to the reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    and the real risk in asylum and human rights cases.

 5. Mr Bates invited me to set the decision aside and to remit  the  appeal
    for a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.   Mr  Abraham  on
    behalf of the Appellant was content for that to take place.

     Decision

 6. In light of Mr Bates's helpful concession, I find and agree  there  are
    material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Warren.  The first and most striking aspect is  that  there  is  really
    only one paragraph of analysis of the appeal as a whole and that is  at
    [33] and provides as follows:-

         "Having considered all of the evidence before me and having weighed
         its relative credibility, I conclude that  the  Appellant  has  not
         satisfied me on the lower standard of proof that he is genuinely in
         fear of persecution.  His credibility has been impacted  by  having
         several months living in Greece, a safe place, when he had  applied
         for  asylum  but  then  chose  to  leave.   His  account   of   his
         circumstances in Ethiopia is not supported other  than  by  general
         information readily available in the public domain, and is entirely
         reliant on his own credibility, which I  have  found  wanting.   He
         claims to have come from a wealthy family in Ethiopia, and that his
         uncle paid a lot of money for his release  and  to  facilitate  his
         escape.  He claims though to have had no contact  with  his  uncle,
         his mother or his sisters, or his wife and child since leaving.  Of
         particular concern is that  GB7  do  not  support  his  account  of
         membership in Ethiopia, and provide a generic letter accounting for
         his activities in the UK, which has no bearing on his own  evidence
         at all.  I have therefore  concluded  that  the  Appellant  is  not
         credible, and his account cannot be relied upon.  He has failed  to
         satisfy me that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  if  returned  to
         Ethiopia he would be persecuted for his political belief.   I  find
         as a fact from the photographs in the bundle that he  has  attended
         one meeting of GB7 in the UK - such sur place activity however  was
         undertaken after the application for asylum, and at a time when  he
         was not a member of the organisation in the UK."

 7. I find that the  Judge  has  not  properly  engaged  with  or  provided
    sufficient reasons for rejecting the basis of claim in respect  of  the
    Appellant's account of having been arrested, detained and  tortured  in
    Ethiopia. I further find  that,  given  the  basis  of  claim  and  the
    evidence before  the  judge,  not  only  from  the  Appellant  but  the
    background  supporting  evidence,  that  GB7  is  considered  to  be  a
    designated terrorist group and any involvement with  that  organisation
    would potentially put the Appellant or any individual at risk on return
    to Ethiopia.  In those circumstances I find that the judge should  have
    engaged with that evidence and given further  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's attendance at a meeting, albeit only once,  would  not  put
    him at risk, bearing in mind that whilst  this  was  after  the  asylum
    claim had been made, it was before any decision had been  made  by  the
    Respondent to refuse the claim.

     Decision

 8. I set the decision aside and remit the appeal for  a  hearing  de  novo
    before the First-tier Tribunal in Manchester.   I  make  the  following
    directions:

(i)  The appeal should be listed for two hours;

(ii) An Amharic interpreter should be provided;

(ii) Any evidence upon which the parties wish to rely  should  be  submitted
to the   Tribunal and the other party five working days before the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

