
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12133/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st August 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |On 23rd September 2020        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     T S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Sanders, query, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 20th March 2020.  The
    appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1st January 1999  appealed
    against the Home Office decision to  refuse  him  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and  protection  under  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 2. The appellant claimed his life would be in danger if he  were  returned
    to Afghanistan owing to his relationship with the daughter of the  head
    (MH) of the 'mafia'  or  part  of  the  'mafia'  who  worked  with  the
    government.  MH, it was  asserted,  was  also  the  nephew  of  a  very
    powerful man called Sayar/Sayaff/Sayyaf/Sayaf.  As  a  result  of  this
    relationship his family, that is  his  father,  had  problems  with  MH
    regarding money.

 3. The grounds for permission to appeal stated as follows:

Ground 1

 4. There were factual errors in the case summary and in parts the decision
    was incoherent, for example in paragraph 4 with reference to the  claim
    for asylum in Austria, the Judge at [4] stated 'the  appellant  claimed
    asylum in Austria it is unclear whether the appellant made a  claim  in
    Austria'.  Secondly the father's land  dispute  with  MH  preceded  the
    appellant's illicit relationship with his daughter but the relaying  of
    the facts suggested that this caused the problems with the relationship
    he formed.  Thirdly, at 6 it was recorded that the father  and  brother
    were killed.  The appellant had never claimed his father was killed.

 5. This  showed  the  judge  had  a  misunderstanding  of  the  facts  and
    demonstrated a sufficient lack of care and  attention  contrary  to  ML
    (Nigeria) v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 844.

Ground 2

 6. The appellant was assessed by Dr Eileen Walsh, clinical psychologist as
    suffering from severe PTSD and a severe major depressive disorder  (AB,
    page 55  to  85).   The  judge  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  was
    vulnerable but failed to apply the proper approach when  assessing  the
    evidence as set out in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note Number 2 of
    2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance  and  AM
    Afghanistan [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.  The judge should have considered the
    extent to which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity  of  the  witness
    was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity in  his  evidence
    and the effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had
    in assessing the evidence before it.  As  AM  Afghanistan  states,  the
    findings of medical experts should not be merely 'add ons'  but  should
    be treated as part of a holistic assessment.

 7. The judge did not make any reference to the report of  Dr  Walsh  until
    paragraph 25 and made no mention of her opinion as to the  difficulties
    the appellant was likely to experience when giving evidence.  The judge
    rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  before  considering  the  medical
    evidence and Dr Walsh assessed the appellant for signs of  malingering.
    The judge found the appellant could access medication  in  Afghanistan,
    which was unreasoned and he made no reference to the expert evidence to
    the contrary set out in Dr Ahmad's report, and he could receive support
    from his family, predicated on his assessment of credibility which  was
    again a circular finding.

Ground 3

 8. There were errors in the credibility assessment.  The judge  failed  to
    properly  assess  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the  light   of   his
    vulnerability and the following points in relation to  his  credibility
    were erroneous.  The credibility findings should be made in the  round.
    With regard to the land dispute the judge recorded  that  the  personal
    details were vague and any issues that arose from the dispute concerned
    his father and not the appellant personally.   It  was  submitted  this
    finding was insufficiently reasoned and the fact that the appellant had
    limited knowledge of the land dispute owing to his young age  and  lack
    of direct involvement did not in itself  support  the  conclusions  the
    events did not happen.  Secondly the judge  made  a  finding  that  the
    objective evidence did not support the fact that  MH  received  support
    from Sayyaf as the objective evidence did not reveal that a  person  by
    the name of Sayyaf was a member of the government.  This finding at  19
    was contrary to the finding at 23 but the country expert report  of  Dr
    Ahmad confirmed Sayaff was a politician and former member of parliament
    and that MH was his nephew.  The judge's findings on  this  point  were
    contradictory and incoherent.

 9. At paragraph 24 the judge failed to attach weight  to  the  consistency
    between the appellant's account and the  country  background  evidence,
    not just in the terms of the existence of Mumtaz and Sayyaf,  but  also
    the consistency of the appellant's experiences with the expert evidence
    about Afghan honour crimes.

10. Further the findings at 20 to 21 were matters of the  judge's  personal
    opinion as to inherent plausibility and are insufficient to reject  the
    appellant's account.

11.  The  judge  also  incorrectly  summarised  Tanveer  Ahmed   (documents
    unreliable and forged) Pakistan *  [2002]  UKIAT  00439   and  although
    rejected that the appellant was no longer in contact  with  his  family
    provided no reason for that finding.

Ground 4

12. There was a failure to consider the appellant's age and  maturity.   At
    ground 5 the judge failed to address submissions in relationship to the
    Convention reason and the  judge  failed  completely  to  consider  the
    submission as set out in Counsel's skeleton argument 7 to  9  regarding
    the  appellant's  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  as   an
    individual who had transgressed against traditional notions of honour.

Ground 6

13. There was an erroneous finding in relation to internal relocation.  The
    judge  although  finding  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  within
    Afghanistan provided no reasons in support of that finding and did  not
    address any of the Counsel's submissions.



Ground 7

14. There was an erroneous assessment of Article 8  because  there  was  an
    erroneous factual assessment underlying the conclusions.

15. It was further submitted that the judge's summary of the oral  evidence
    was incomplete and/or inaccurate.  The judge omitted a reference to the
    appellant confirming that he  did  claim  asylum  in  Austria  but  the
    authorities there sought  to  return  him  to  Greece  because  he  was
    fingerprinted there.  The summary of  the  appellant's  medication  was
    inaccurate at 13 and the judge's summary at  14  was  inaccurate.   The
    appellant did not indicate any problem with the Tribunal interpreter.

    Analysis

16. At the hearing before me Mr Walker conceded, very properly in my  view,
    that there was a material error in relation to ground 1,  for  example,
    the timing of the father's land dispute with M H.

17. Any error must be "a material error of fact in  a  determination  of  a
    Tribunal" in order to constitute an error of  law.   Any  doubt  as  to
    whether an incorrect fact was material, should be resolved in favour of
    the individual who so claims.  The question is whether  there  was  any
    doubt in this instance. There are contradictions within  the  recording
    of the evidence for example at paragraph 5 and 19  which  suggest  that
    the judge did not have a firm grasp of the facts before him or at least
    that was not the impression conveyed in the decision.

18. Central  to  the  claim  was  that  the  appellant  had  engaged  in  a
    relationship with a girl who was connected to a powerful  figure  named
    Sayaff.   The  judge  used  numerous  spellings  in  relation  to  this
    particular individual who was said to be powerful and in  part  of  the
    threat. The judge made no findings about the various spellings.  In the
    asylum interview, I note, the appellant referred to this person as both
    Sayar and Sayaf and in his witness statement as Sayaff.  The  forenames
    were identical to those of someone with a similar surname said  by  the
    Secretary of State to be not listed as someone 'in power'  and  by  the
    expert as currently a politician in Afghanistan.

19. At paragraph 19 the Judge made a finding that  the  objective  evidence
    did not reveal that there was a person by the name of Sayaff who was  a
    member  government and related to MH but at paragraph 24 recorded there
    was a reference to the expert stating that MH was the nephew of  Sayyaf
    who in turn was previously a member of parliament (and his own son  now
    was a member of parliament).  The findings on this were contradictoryl.



20. The Judge found the information provided  by  the  appellant  regarding
    Sayyaf was available on the internet and was public knowledge  and  was
    easily accessible and thus the appellant's account of the  relationship
    was discounted, but the assessment of the appellant's  own  credibility
    was affected by the failure to apply the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note Number 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Appellant
    Guidance and AM Afghanistan [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

21. The judge failed to approach  the  evidence  holistically  and  made  a
    credibility finding at the outset of his findings at paragraph  19  and
    turned only to the medical report much later  at  paragraph  25  noting
    'the  appellant  also  provided  me  with  an  expert  report  from   a
    psychiatrist who states that the appellant presents himself as a person
    who has symptoms of having gone through trauma 'PTSD  and  depression'.
    Those credibility findings were thus rendered unreliable but  fed  into
    the assessment of the overall account regarding  the  relationship  and
    the relevant family members.

22. I have not pursued an analysis of the remaining grounds but bearing  in
    mind the fundamental errors that I have identified I conclude there are
    indeed material errors of  law  which  undermines  the  safety  of  the
    decision.

23. Owing to the nature and extent of the findings  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I set aside the decision  in  its
    entirety.

24. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Helen Rimington                          Date  17th  September
    2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

