
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12501/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 5 March 2018                    |On: 9 March 2018                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Lupins solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Rowlands promulgated  on  10  January  2018  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 9 October  2017  refusing  his  asylum,  humanitarian
       protection and human rights claim.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the UK as  a
       student with leave  to  26  February  2011  which  was  subsequently
       extended to 26 June 2013.  A further application made  on  the  same
       basis  was  refused  and  his  appeal  against  that  decision   was
       dismissed.  He was appeal rights exhausted on 9 January 2015.


    3. On 26 July 2017, the Appellant was  encountered  working  illegally.
       He claimed asylum on 5 August 2017.  His claim relies upon a fear of
       a group called Jammat Ul Dawah  ("JUD")  which  is  an  organisation
       which the Appellant at one time supported.  However, he claims  that
       JUD attacked  him  because  he  refused  to  fight  for  them.   The
       Appellant also claimed that he was  previously  a  member  of  Jammu
       Kashmir Liberation Front ("JKLF") although he did not claim to be at
       risk from this organisation.


    4. The Judge found  the  Appellant  not  to  be  credible.   The  Judge
       concluded that, even if the Appellant had been threatened and  faced
       a risk from JUD (which was not accepted) there was no evidence  that
       JUD would be able to find him following return.


    5. There is one issue raised by the  grounds  of  appeal  and  that  is
       whether the Decision is unlawful for the Judge's refusal to  adjourn
       the appeal hearing in order to  allow  the  Appellant  to  obtain  a
       report from a country expert in relation to Pakistan.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keane
       on 30 January 2018 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-

           "...The grounds disclosed an arguable error of law but for which
           the outcome  of  the  appeal  might  have  been  different.   In
           refusing a request for an adjournment which the  judge  recorded
           at paragraph 3  of  the  judge's  decision  the  judge  arguably
           applied an incorrect test in according weight  the  judge's  own
           opinion as to whether an  expert's  report  would  assist.   The
           judge arguably perpetrated an irregularity capable of  making  a
           material difference to  the  outcome  or  the  fairness  of  the
           proceedings in refusing the request for an adjournment on such a
           ground.  The application for permission is granted."

    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law.  Both parties accepted that, if I found there
       to be an error of law in  the  Decision,  given  the  basis  of  the
       challenge, the appeal would have to be remitted  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal for re-hearing.

      Decision and Reasons


    8. As set out in the grounds, the question for the Judge  dealing  with
       an application for an adjournment is whether the appeal can be dealt
       with fairly and justly.  That arises from the Tribunal's  obligation
       to comply with the overriding objective which  provides  as  follows
       (rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration
       and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014):-

           "2. - (1) The overriding objective of these Rules is  to  enable
           the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


           (2)   Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-


                (a)    dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate
                to the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,
                the anticipated costs and the resources of the  parties  and
                of the Tribunal;


                (b)      avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                flexibility in the proceedings;


                (c)    ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
                able to participate fully in the proceedings;


                (d)     using  any  special  expertise   of   the   Tribunal
                effectively; and


                (e)    avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
                consideration of the issues."

    9. As is stated in Nwaigwe (adjournment; fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
       (IAC), the question on appeal challenging a refusal  to  adjourn  is
       not whether the Judge acted reasonably but whether he acted  fairly.
       The essential issue is whether by refusing the  adjournment  sought,
       the party seeking the adjournment has been deprived of the right  to
       a fair hearing.


   10. Those principles are uncontroversial.   However,  at  this  point  I
       depart from the way in which the Appellant frames the challenge.  It
       is said that the question whether the expert report could assist was
       not the right question to ask.  It may not be the only question  but
       I disagree that it is not material to the issue whether  the  appeal
       can be dealt with fairly  and  justly  without  the  expert  report,
       bearing in mind the Tribunal's expertise  in  the  determination  of
       asylum appeals.


   11. I accept that the Judge's reasons are very shortly stated at [3]  of
       the Decision where the Judge says this:-

           "[3]  In the  skeleton  argument  provided  by  the  Appellant's
           representative there had been application to adjourn the  matter
           to obtain a country  experts  report.   I  considered  that  and
           decided it was not appropriate to adjourn on the basis  of  what
           might or might not be country expert report  without  indication
           as to whether it would assist."

   12. I accept that  this  paragraph  does  not  refer  expressly  to  the
       overriding objective of dealing with the matter fairly  and  justly.
       However, in  my  estimation,  the  Judge  can  be  assumed  to  have
       considered that in the context of whether it  was  "appropriate"  to
       adjourn.  As I have already  indicated,  the  question  whether  the
       report might assist is part and parcel of that consideration.


   13. For those reasons, I  do  not  accept  that  the  Judge  misdirected
       himself as to the test to be applied.  The  issue  for  me  then  is
       whether the Judge's refusal to adjourn can be shown to have deprived
       the Appellant of his right to a fair hearing.


   14. My starting point is the basis of the  application  to  adjourn.   I
       note that the application was not made for the  first  time  in  the
       skeleton argument for the hearing.  It was made for the  first  time
       in a letter from the Appellant's solicitors dated 12 December  2017.
       Having set out the background to the application, the basis  for  it
       is stated as follows:-

            "We submit that such a report is highly probative  evidence  in
           his appeal and could support the credibility of the  Appellant's
           account which is a key issue for determination by a judge at the
           full hearing.  This is because a report which shows that it  was
           plausible that:


             1) the Appellant was a member of the JUD;


             2) had then left the JUD; and


             3) was later approached by them to join  them  in  their  fight
                against India and was severely beaten as he refused.


            would support the Appellant's general credibility.  We  further
           submit that generally there is insufficient  objective  material
           on JUD and other  political  organisations,  how  they  operate,
           whether the state can provide sufficient protection and  whether
           they can internally relocate."

   15. That application was refused on 14 December 2017.  The  reasons  are
       shortly stated as being "There is ample evidence about  Pakistan  in
       the public domain" which is another way of  saying  that  an  expert
       report was not needed.


   16. The application was repeated in a letter dated 18 December  2017  in
       substantially the same terms safe that to the above  was  added  the
       following paragraph:-

           "We submit that further to the reasons specified in our  initial
           adjournment request, the  expert  will  also  be  commenting  on
           whether the Appellant will face future persecution  in  Pakistan
           due to  his  membership  with  Jammu  Kashmir  Liberation  Front
           (JKLF).  The Home Office in their  reasons  for  refusal  letter
           dated 09 October 2017 rely on the fact that  the  Appellant  and
           his father have not been persecuted due to their membership with
           the JKLF. However, this does not  evidence  that  the  Appellant
           will not face future persecution by state actors and the  expert
           will be instructed to comment on this.   The  expert  will  also
           comment on whether it is  plausible  that  the  Appellant  is  a
           member of the JKLF".

   17. I pause there to note that it was not the Appellant's case  that  he
       was in fear of JKLF or on account of his membership  of  that  group
       from State actors; his claim was to be at risk  only  from  JUD.   I
       also observe that, whilst an expert might form  an  opinion  on  the
       credibility of a person's account based  on  the  consistency  of  a
       claim with what is known from background  information  or  expertise
       about a particular group, it is for the Judge to assess  credibility
       not for the expert.  What the solicitors  referred  to  as  evidence
       about  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  is  largely
       directed at the credibility of that account, save insofar as  it  is
       said that there was a  need  for  expert  evidence  to  support  the
       limited background evidence about the groups in question.


   18. The Judge did not of course need to direct himself  to  the  earlier
       request for the adjournment as that had already been  refused  prior
       to the hearing (as recorded in the Appellant's  skeleton  argument).
       The application made by way of the skeleton argument puts  the  case
       for an adjournment on the following basis:-

           "[5]  The Tribunal is asked to grant an adjournment on the basis
           that it is in the interests of justice and fairness to do so as:


             a. There is limited information in the public domain about  the
                ability and motivation of Jamat Ul Dawah ("JUD")  to  pursue
                individuals and the geographical reach of the  organisation.
                A country  expert  could  comment  on  this.   A  report  is
                therefore relevant to the issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
                would be at risk for having refused to fight for JUD and the
                credibility of the Appellant's claim to have  been  attacked
                in the past.  A country report  can  also  assist  with  the
                issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal   re-
                location.


             b.  The  Appellant's  representatives  have  already  made   an
                application for funding and the outcome of that is  expected
                shortly.  An expert  has  been  identified  and  preliminary
                instructions have been sent.  The expert has indicated  that
                a report can be produced within 3 weeks of receiving  formal
                instructions.  There is therefore a  clear,  and  relatively
                short, timeframe for any adjournment."

   19. Ms Reid initially submitted that public  funding  had  already  been
       granted by the time of the appeal hearing but accepted based on  her
       skeleton argument that this could not be correct.  As such, although
       the adjournment might have been short if there were  no  delays  for
       public funding reasons, it might equally have been  longer  if  that
       were refused.  I was told by Ms Reid that in fact public funding had
       subsequently been made available for this purpose.


   20. Ms Reid informed me that the proposed expert is a Christopher  Bluth
       who is said to be an expert in Pakistan and who  would  be  able  to
       comment on political factions within that country.  She said that no
       report had been obtained  or  application  made  to  admit  that  as
       further evidence because, following the  dismissal  of  the  appeal,
       public funding would not allow this.  That does not of  course  make
       my job easier as it is difficult to see  whether  the  report  could
       make any difference and, to that extent, renders the appeal  hearing
       unfair.  Ms  Reid  indicated  that  there  had  been  a  preliminary
       approach to the expert which showed that he expected to be  able  to
       assist.  I was not shown any documentation in that regard.


   21. I also asked Ms Reid how an expert might  be  able  to  provide  any
       useful comment in particular in relation to JUD if it was said  that
       one of the reasons that an expert report was needed is the  lack  of
       published material about that group, particularly when that group is
       a proscribed organisation.  Ms Reid accepted that there is  in  fact
       some material in the public domain; indeed, the  Appellant's  bundle
       for the hearing includes such material.
   22. In response,  Mr  Kotas  directed  me  to  the  Judge's  credibility
       findings at [26] to [32] of the Decision.  As he pointed  out,  this
       was not a claim or appeal which foundered  for  lack  of  background
       information  but  because  the  Appellant's  claim  was  rife   with
       inconsistencies and  therefore  not  credible.   In  particular,  in
       relation to the claimed risk from JUD, the Judge made the  following
       findings:-

           "[31] His father's statement also conflicts with  his  son.   It
           says that during the ambush they fired and missed and whereas he
           says it jammed or  misfired.   He  also  says  that  the  Police
           refused to register an FIR whereas  the  newspaper  report  says
           that one was lodged.  It does not assist his case whatsoever.  I
           am satisfied that effectively his case has fallen apart with all
           the documents that he has provided conflicting  with  everything
           that he has said concerning the matter.


           [32]  I have also considered the timetable in  this  case  which
           shows, according to him that the incident took place in 2008 yet
           he did not submit an application for a  student  visa  for  over
           three years until December 2011  and  actually  remained  for  a
           further nearly two years before leaving.  I do not  accept  that
           he could possibly be in any danger if he managed to stay in  the
           country for five whole years without further incident."

   23. The Judge did go on in the alternative to find at [36] that, even if
       he were wrong  about  the  threats  or  risk,  the  Appellant  could
       relocate.  That finding does depend  in  part  on  the  geographical
       reach of JUD which might  be  a  matter  for  expert  or  background
       evidence.   However,  an  additional  factor  which  went   to   the
       credibility of remaining at risk from JUD was  the  Appellant's  own
       evidence that he had remained in Pakistan  without  incident  for  a
       number of years after the attack he claimed to have suffered at  the
       hands of JUD.


   24. I accept Mr Kotas' submission that an expert  report  in  this  case
       could not make any difference to the credibility findings which  are
       based on internal inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account,  his
       delay in claiming  asylum  and  implausibility  based  on  what  had
       occurred (or rather not occurred) whilst he was still  in  Pakistan.
       Even if the expert positively supported the whole of the Appellant's
       account in terms  of  its  plausibility,  on  the  facts  and  other
       evidence, that would be insufficient to dislodge the  findings  that
       the claim is not credible.


   25. As I have already indicated, the issue for the Judge is whether  the
       hearing  could  be  conducted  "fairly  and  justly"   without   the
       adjournment which itself encompasses the question whether the appeal
       could be determined fairly and justly without the expert  report  on
       which the adjournment request was based.  The Judge did not err when
       considering that question at [3] of the Decision.  Nor, based on the
       credibility findings which were inevitable on the evidence here, has
       the refusal of the adjournment request deprived the Appellant  of  a
       fair hearing.  No doubt, the Appellant disagrees with  the  outcome.
       However,  that  is  insufficient  to  show  that  the  hearing   and
       determination of his appeal was unfair.


   26. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of  law  in
       the Decision. I therefore uphold the Decision.




    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands
    promulgated  on  10  January  2018  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands dismissed
       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 8 March 2018
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
