
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/12265/2018
                                                               PA/12264/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10 October 2019                  |On: 15 October 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  S A & S S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Symes, instructed by Lawmatic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the respondent's decision  to
refuse their protection and human rights claims.

The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh  and  are  partners,  born  on  27
January 1993 and 27  January  1992  respectively.  They  both  independently
arrived in the UK in February 2014 with entry clearance as  Tier  4  student
migrants and both had their leave curtailed as a  result  of  problems  with
their sponsoring colleges. They met in  2015  and  started  living  together
from December 2015. They applied, on 23 March  2017,  for  leave  to  remain
outside the immigration rules. The first  appellant  claimed  asylum  on  23
March 2018 and  his  claim  was  refused  on  5  October  2018.  The  second
appellant claimed asylum on 6 March 2018 and her  claim  was  refused  on  8
October 2018.

Both appellants made their claim on the basis that  they  were  at  risk  on
return to Bangladesh as a result of their conversion, in April 2017, to  the
Ahmadi faith. They also claimed to fear their families as a result of  their
relationship which was not approved since the second appellant  was  from  a
lower caste than the  first  appellant.  They  both  claimed  to  have  been
threatened by their respective families because of their conversion  to  the
Ahmadi faith. The respondent, in refusing the claims,  did  not  accept  the
appellants' accounts of their conversion and  threats  from  their  families
and considered that the appellants would in any  event  have  a  sufficiency
protection available to them from the Bangladesh authorities and  that  they
could relocate to another part of Bangladesh where there were Ahmadis.

The appellants' appeals against the respondent's  decisions  were  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  both
appellants,  including  evidence  that  the  second   appellant   had   been
pressurised by their parents into having an abortion in order  for  them  to
recognise her relationship with the first appellant and that  their  parents
had then reneged on their promise and demanded that  both  appellants  marry
someone of their family's choosing. The appellants had  been  threatened  by
their families and would  be  ostracised  if  returned  to  Bangladesh.  The
second appellant had since had a baby with the first appellant,  who  was  5
months old.

Judge Housego accepted the appellants' account of their conversion  and  the
abortion but did not find that they would be at  risk  of  harm  from  their
families on return to Bangladesh. He considered that if there was  any  risk
from their families on account of  their  relationship,  there  would  be  a
sufficiency  of  protection  available  from  the  Bangladesh   authorities.
Alternatively the appellants could relocate to another part  of  Bangladesh.
The judge did not  accept  that  the  objective  evidence  showed  that  the
appellants would be at risk on account of their relationship nor on  account
of their Ahmadi faith. The judge considered that the  respondent's  decision
was not disproportionate and did not breach their Article  8  human  rights.
The Secretary of State's duty under section 55 of  the  Borders  Citizenship
and Immigration Act 2009 would not be breached as their child  would  return
with them. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellants sought permission to appeal Judge Housego's decision  on  six
grounds, the first four of which challenged the judge's  assessment  of  the
background country evidence, the  fifth  of  which  challenged  the  judge's
findings on internal relocation  and  the  sixth  of  which  challenged  the
judge's assessment of  insurmountable  obstacles  and  the  welfare  of  the
child.

Permission to appeal was granted by  First  tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth  in
relation to the judge's assessment of the country information.

Appeal hearing

Mr Symes, in his submissions, referred to  the  background  information  and
country reports in the appellants' appeal bundle,  in  particular  the  EASO
Country of Origin Information Report on  Bangladesh  for  December  2017  at
page 77 dealing with the Ahmadis in Bangladesh and the Home  Office  Country
Policy  and  Information  Note  (CPIN)   entitled   "Bangladesh:   Religious
minorities and atheists" for October 2018 at page 207 likewise dealing  with
the Ahmadis. He referred to the reports of attacks on the  Ahmadi  community
in Bangladesh and submitted that the  judge's  assessment  of  that  country
evidence was lacking. There was no consideration of HJ  (Iran)  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 31 and the  facts  that
attacks against Ahmadis were limited because they kept a low  profile.  With
regard to the question of internal relocation,  the  background  information
provided evidence of a broad geographical risk and the judge ought  to  have
considered the implication of this on the best interests of the  appellants'
baby. As regards Article 8, the judge did  not  consider  the  questions  of
ostracism and lack  of  parental  support  when  assessing  the  appellants'
ability to integrate into Bangladesh.

Mr Walker accepted that the  judge  had  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
country  information,  to  the  extent  that  he  had  not  considered   the
escalation in societal  discrimination  against  the  Ahmadis.  Although  he
initially submitted that that was a material error,  having  considered  the
background country information further he submitted that the error  was  not
material since the background information did not show  that  the  incidents
experienced  by  the  Ahmadi   communities   in   Bangladesh   amounted   to
persecution.

Mr  Symes  reiterated  his  submissions  in  response,  referring   to   the
appellants as being a socially isolated Ahmadi family with no experience  of
navigating their way through the problems for Ahmadis in Bangladesh.

Consideration and findings.

Whilst the judge's findings on  the  objective  country  evidence  were  not
particularly lengthy and, as Mr Walker accepted,  could  have  been  fleshed
out more, I do not consider that  to  be  a  material  error  requiring  the
decision to  be  set  aside.  The  judge  considered  the  relevant  country
reports, focussing on the two main reports to which Mr Symes  also  referred
in his submissions. He clearly had full regard to the fact that there was  a
young baby involved when considering internal relocation at  [62]  and  took
account of the baby's best interests in his assessment of Article 8.

Section 12.3 of the EASO Report deals with  the  situation  for  Ahmadis  in
Bangladesh and refers to incidents of attacks against the Ahmadi  community,
as Mr Symes submitted. Likewise, sections 7.3.3 and 7.3.5 at pages  208  and
209 of the CPIN Report refer to attacks on Ahmadi  mosques  and  the  Ahmadi
community, reflecting the incidents referred to in the EASO Report.

However, Mr Walker made  various  relevant  references  within  the  country
information, in particular the following in the CPIN report:

"2.4.6 Some Government  officials  have  openly  declared  Ahmadis  as  non-
Muslims although the Government maintains it does not endorse  these  views.
A ban on Ahmadi publications was lifted  by  the  ruling  Awami  League  and
there are no legal restrictions preventing  Ahmadis  from  practising  their
faith.

2.4.8 There are no laws prohibiting religious conversion, yet  it  might  be
seen as apostasy. Interfaith marriages can  take  place  under  the  Special
Marriage Act although, under the Act, couples must declare  their  disbelief
in  any  traditional  religion  (see  Religious  conversions  and  apostasy,
Interfaith marriages and Personal status laws).

2.4.9 In general, the level  of  state  discrimination  faced  by  religious
minorities is low  and  is  not  sufficiently  serious  by  its  nature  and
repetition to amount to a real risk of persecution and/or serious harm.

2.4.10 However, people accused of blasphemy  or  religious  defamation  (for
example, converts from  Islam,  atheists  or  secularists)  may  face  legal
sanction, including imprisonment.

12.1.1 There are no laws prohibiting  religious  conversion  in  Bangladesh.
However, leaving Islam is seen as shameful or apostasy.  Apostasy  may  also
be considered blasphemous by Islamic extremists"

As Mr Walker submitted, there are no legal restrictions  preventing  Ahmadis
from practising their faith in Bangladesh, as there  are  in  Pakistan.  The
evidence shows a level of discrimination against Ahmadis and some  incidents
of attacks over recent years, but, as Judge Housego properly found at  [60],
[67] and [68], there is nothing in the objective evidence  to  suggest  that
there is a risk to Ahmadis of treatment amounting to  persecution.  Although
the judge could perhaps  have  provided  a  more  detailed  account  of  the
Ahmadis' experiences in Bangladesh  from  the  country  reports,  there  was
nothing in those reports to suggest that the  conclusions  he  reached  were
not fully and properly open to him.

Having considered the country information, the judge gave  full  and  proper
consideration to the appellants'  circumstances  at  [62]  when  considering
whether they could reasonably be expected to relocate  to  another  part  of
Bangladesh,  living  independently  from  their  respective   families.   He
provided cogent reasons for concluding that an  internal  relocation  option
was available to them and was entitled to conclude as he did.  Likewise  the
judge gave proper consideration to all relevant factors, including the  best
interests  of  the  child,  when  considering  whether   there   were   very
significant obstacles  to  integration  within  the  immigration  rules,  or
compelling circumstances outside the immigration rules, for the purposes  of
Article 8. The decision he reached in that regard was  also  one  which  was
properly open to him on the evidence.

For all of these reasons I find no error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
requiring it to be set aside. I uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

The appellants'  appeals  are  accordingly  dismissed.  The  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a  point  of
law requiring the decision to be set aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellants' appeals therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 10 October
2019
