
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12584/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 15th November 2018  On 10th December 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                 MISS Z K L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss Hashmi, Counsel, instructed by Lei Dat and
                    Baig, Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant has permission to appeal the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Raikes. In a decision promulgated on 23rd July 2018 the
      Judge dismissed her appeal against the refusal of her claim for
      protection.

   2. She is a national of Angola, born on 9 May 1987.She claimed to be at
      risk if returned because of her political opinions, including her
      involvement with the Movementio Revolucionario.

   3. She said she joined Movementio Revolucionario in 2010 whilst at
      University. She attended a demonstration on 7th March 2011 and was
      detained by the authorities. She was assaulted by them and woke up in
      hospital, having lost the sight of an eye. She was discharged.

   4. On 17th May 2013 she said she took part in another demonstration.
      Following which she was detained for 3 months. Whilst in custody she
      was abused, including being raped. She was brought to court on 2
      occasions and then released on 10th August 2013 due to lack of
      evidence.

   5.  On 20 June 2015 she was with her friends when the police appeared and
      started to arrest people. She managed to escape. She later learnt that
      the authorities had been at her home and taken various items,
      including her computer. She believes one of her friends who was
      detained must have informed. Fearful of what would happen she moved to
      a friend's house and then on 21 April 2016 flew to the United Kingdom
      using a passport which did not belong to her. She claimed protection
      the following day.

   6. The respondent did not accept her claim of involvement with the
      Movementio Revolucionario. Country information indicated the existence
      of such a group but it was not formed until 7 March 2011 whereas she
      claimed that she joined in 2010. The country evidence did indicate the
      group held a demonstration on the day of its formation and went to
      Largo Square as she said. However, the respondent question why she
      would be singled out as she described. The appellant had not provided
      evidence to confirm her account as to how she lost her eye yet at her
      substantive interview she said there were medical records.

   7. The respondent then said on 17 May 2013 she was heading for Largo
      Square with members of the Movementio Revolucionario when the police
      arrived. They started to attack the group and she was arrested and
      detained for 90 days. Whilst the respondent found objective evidence
      of such attacks around this time no reference could be found an
      incident that day.

   8.  She referred to another incident on 20th June 2015 when she said her
      colleagues were detained by the police and she believed informed on
      her subsequently. The respondent did find evidence in the media of
      such an incident but the appellant could have learnt this. She said
      she learnt the police had been to her home asking about her and told
      people if they found her, they would kill her. The respondent felt it
      was not credible that they would say this.

   The First tier Tribunal

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes considered the appellant's
      credibility and concluded her account was inconsistent and
      implausible. The judge noted that the country information confirmed
      the existence of the revolutionary group named by the appellant.
      However, the judge found her credibility was damaged because the group
      had not been formed at the time she said she joined.

  10.  Whilst the country information confirmed a demonstration took place
      on 7th March 2011 this information was in the public domain. The judge
      also commented on the appellant's account of losing her eye, pointing
      out that this significant incident was not mentioned at her screening
      interview. When she referred to the incident in her substantive
      interview she said medical records existed. The judge recorded she had
      made no attempt to obtain these to support her claim. The appellant
      said she was afraid to get in touch with the people in Angola which
      was not accepted. Furthermore, the judge questioned why she would have
      been targeted on that occasion only to then be released from hospital.

  11.  Regarding the demonstration on 17th May 2013 following which she said
      she was detained and raped, the country information did not indicate a
      demonstration on that date though other dates were recorded.
      Furthermore, the judge found it implausible that she would have been
      released as claimed.

  12. Regarding the 20th June 2015 incident the judge did not find her
      account credible. Whilst the country information confirmed arrests
      that day this information was in the public domain. There was no
      reference to it at her screening interview. Furthermore the country
      information indicated that the individuals were released. It was not
      felt credible that the police would say to the people they intended to
      kill her.

  13. The appellant had produced an identity card as well as a student card.
      The judge found her evasive about the source of the documentation. The
      judge did not find it credible she would be able to stay undetected
      with a friend for 9 to 10 months if sought. It was also pointed out
      that she was able to leave through the airport without any
      difficulties.

  14. In summary, the judge did not find the appellant credible and did not
      accept she faced any risk by reason of being a member or supporter of
      the group she described.





The Upper Tribunal.

  15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge had required corroborative evidence and had applied too high a
      standard of proof.

  16. Miss Hashmi opened the appeal by stating that whilst the judge at
      paragraph 7 said that the burden of proof upon the appellant was a low
      one the judge then expected her to obtain evidence, for instance,
      about her medical treatment in relation to her eye. At paragraphs 30
      to 32 there was reference to corroborative evidence. Furthermore, the
      respondent had accepted that a demonstration had taken place on 7th
      March 2011 yet the judge discounted this, saying that the appellant
      could have learnt this information from media articles. She submitted
      the judge was wrong in treating an undisputed matter in this way.

  17. She also pointed out that the appellant had referred to a second
      incident on 17 May 2013. The respondent could not find any country
      information on this. However, there was country information of an
      incident on 27 May 2013. Not all are recorded.

  18. In response, Mr Tan points out that the judge self-directed as to the
      lower standard of proof at the outset. He referred me to paragraphs 28
      and 29 of the decision where the judge saw no evidence to support her
      claim of having joined the organisation in 2010.This reflects
      paragraph 10 of the refusal letter. The judge then set out over a
      number of paragraphs why he concluded the appellant was not at risk on
      return. At the end of paragraph 30 the judge commented that the
      details of what she said took place in 2011 were wholly
      unsubstantiated by her, either initially at screening or subsequently
      by the production of evidence. At 5.4 of her screening she had been
      asked specifically if she had ever been detained and she only said on
      one occasion only. The judge refers to the screening and the failure
      to mention the 1st claimed incident at paragraph 31 of the decision.

  19. Regarding the reference at paragraph 32 to medical records the judge
      set out her explanation for not producing these but questioned why
      this was so. By the time of the appeal hearing the appellant had been
      in the United Kingdom over a year. Seven years had elapsed from the
      claimed injury occurring. TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 held that a
      Judge in assessing credibility commits no error of law in relying on
      the fact that there is no independent supporting evidence where there
      should be and there is no credible account for its absence. Mr Tan
      pointed out that whilst the appellant's representatives and raise the
      question of data protection, there was nothing to indicate this was an
      issue in Angola or that the appellant could not have obtained the
      information by other means. He also referred me to paragraph 33 where
      the judge questioned why she would have been targeted in the 1st
      claimed incident. I was referred to paragraphs 34 through to 36 where
      the appellant had suggested she was suspected of involvement in a
      possible coup yet on her account was released.

  20. He said there were a number of reasons why her evidence was not
      considered credible, including the fact that the country information
      indicated that typically those detained were released very shortly
      afterwards. At paragraph 37 the judge noted that the appellant made no
      reference to the incident of 20 June 2015 at screening interview.
      Paragraph 39 to 44 of the decision dealt with her claim to have hidden
      for 9 months and then leaving the country from the main airport. Mr
      Tan submitted that when the decision was considered in its entirety
      the judge had advanced sound reasons for dismissing the appeal.

Conclusions

  21.  The judge at paragraph 7 correctly points out that the burden of
      proof is upon the appellant and then referred to the low standard of
      proof applicable. The judge correctly refers to a reasonable degree of
      likelihood. The judge states all of the evidence was considered in the
      round.

  22. Central to the claim was the appellant's credibility. The judge has
      given a number of reasons for not finding her credible. At screening
      there was no reference to the claim that she had lost her eye as a
      result of her activities. It is reasonable to ask why she would omit
      such a significant event. Furthermore, she only refers to being
      arrested on one occasion whereas her subsequent claim related to three
      incidents. There is also no explanation as to why she would apparently
      be singled out from a number of demonstrators. There were inaccuracies
      in dates in relation to when she joined the organisation and when one
      of the altercations took place. I do not find these inconsistencies
      are remedied by a subsequent corrective statement.

  23. At her substantive interview she was questioned about the loss of her
      eye and said there were medical records but she was unable to produce
      them. It would be reasonable to expect a hospital would keep medical
      records and the appellant had confirmed this. The records would have
      been very useful in dating the incident and also may have referred to
      the cause. The reference by the judge to the medical records is not in
      the context of requiring her to provide corroboration but is simply
      raising the reasonable question about why material evidence is absent.



  24. As stated by Mr Tan, other valid reasons were advanced for the
      dismissal of the appellant's claim. The claim made was one which could
      have been made from information the appellant gathered through the
      media. In this context the areas where there where gaps or mistakes is
      all the more significant.

  25. I find the judge has provided adequate reasons for finding her not to
      be credible. This is not simply a case of the judge rejecting her
      claim because of a lack of corroborative evidence (which is not
      required). Rather, the judge is looking at the totality of the
      evidence in assessing her credibility. The judge has carefully set out
      the details of the claim and summarised the country information. The
      judge then has analysed the details of the claim and made findings
      which I find are sustainable for the reasons given by the judge. The
      decision has been carefully prepared and I see no evidence that the
      judge imposed a higher standard of proof than was required. I can find
      no material error of law established.


Decision

No material error of law has been demonstrated. Consequently, the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

