
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12339/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 April 2019                              |On 2 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    c h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by UK & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Page of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  28
    January 2019 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 5 October 2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The principal grounds of appeal allege that the judge erred in  failing
    to give any consideration to  the  appellant's  Article  8  grounds  of
    appeal.  At the outset of the hearing Mr Coleman  and  Mr  Tarlow  said
    they were jointly of the view that the judge's treatment of  Article  8
    was vitiated by legal error.  After discussion with them I have come to
    the same view.  In the asylum process the appellant had identified that
    he had a girlfriend in the UK.  In the refusal decision the  respondent
    addressed this aspect  of  his  claim  under  the  heading  "Article  8
    Exceptional Circumstances".  The appellant had not specifically  raised
    Article 8 in his grounds of appeal,  but  he  had  included  a  general
    ground reliant on s. 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  and  he  had  also
    produced witness statements from him and his  partner  regarding  their
    relationship  and  the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  12  that   "...
    submissions were made on behalf of the  appellant  that  he  wished  to
    pursue an appeal under Article 8 on the  grounds  of  his  relationship
    with his girlfriend, Ms BG, a Hungarian national ...".  The judge  also
    heard evidence from her.  In the same paragraph the  judge  notes  that
    the appellant's reliance on Article 8 had also been expressly raised in
    the appellant's skeleton argument served a few days before the hearing.

3.   At paragraph 27 the judge stated:

         "For the above reasons I dismiss the asylum appeal and the  grounds
         of appeal under Articles 2 and 3 that stand with the asylum  appeal
         in every respect.  The appellant did not  appeal  under  Article  8
         when he raised this appeal and for the reasons I have set out above
         I have declined to make findings under Article 8 on  the  basis  of
         his relationship with an EU national that he is living  with.   The
         appellant appears to have this relationship with her and it is open
         to him to make proper application if he wishes  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom as the partner of an EU national."

    and went on to dismiss the appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    "under Articles 2 and 3" [of the ECHR].

4.   The judge's refusal to accept that the appellant's  appeal  included  a
    human rights claim and his consequent refusal to make findings relating
    to it was a material error of  law.   Given  that  the  respondent  had
    treated his human rights claim as including Article 8 and the fact that
    the appellant had raised human rights grounds  without  restriction  to
    Articles 2 and 3, the judge was obliged to treat the appellant's appeal
    as incorporating an Article 8 claim.  Such a  claim  was  also  clearly
    raised by the written and oral evidence before the judge.

5.   If it was the case that the appellant had formulated  his  claim  based
    on his relationship solely as an EEA claim to a  durable  relationship,
    it may have been open to the judge to decline to engage with it on  the
    basis that such a claim required an  application  to  be  made  by  the
    respondent who would then make a decision that  if  negative  could  be
    appealed on EEA grounds.  However, the appellant did not so confine his
    claim nor, manifestly, did the respondent treat it as so confined.

6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and that the case must be remitted to the FtT.

7.   However, it is clear from the failure of  the  appellant  to  challenge
    the judge's adverse findings on his asylum claim that his  findings  on
    this issue can be preserved.  The only issue before  the  FtT  concerns
    Article  8,  with  particular  but  not  exclusive  reference  to   his
    relationship with his girlfriend.  In assessing  the  efficacy  of  the
    respondent's decision, the next judge may well regard it as a  relevant
    factor that despite claiming to have been  in  a  durable  relationship
    with BG since July/August 2018  (see  paragraph  8  of  the  AIR),  the
    appellant has not yet made an application on the  basis  of  a  durable
    relationship.

Notice of Decision

8.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law;

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Page).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 30 April 2019

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
