
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12707/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2020                 |On 29 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    C N R

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     No submissions received

For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                      Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gumsley on  7
          April 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
          Samimi, promulgated on 26 February 2020  following  a  hearing  at
          Hatton Cross on 29 January 2020.


       2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 19 April  1988.  He
          entered the UK as a Tier 4 student in February 2009  and  obtained
          extensions of leave until 15 September 2017 although his leave was
          curtailed on 11 March 2016 to expire on 15 May 2016 after he  made
          an unsuccessful application under the EEA Regulations on the basis
          of a  relationship  with  a  Romanian  national.  His  appeal  was
          dismissed in June 2016 and he was served with  removal  directions
          thereafter. He failed to report and was treated as  an  absconder.
          In  October  2019  the  appellant  was   encountered   during   an
          enforcement operation and detained and served with  an  IS.19.  He
          claimed asylum the following day. The application was  refused  on
          18 December 2019, giving rise to these proceedings.


       3. Judge Samimi did not believe the appellant's claim  and  concluded
          that the claim was a fabrication. Accordingly, she  dismissed  the
          appeal.


       4. The grounds argue that the judge erred  on three  counts:  (i)  by
          maintaining that the appellant had not given oral evidence when he
          had; (ii) by making sweeping adverse credibility findings  without
          proper reasoning; and (iii) by rejecting the appellant's documents
          because she had found that he was not credible.


       5. Permission was granted on the third ground.  Although  the  others
          were found to be weak, permission to argue them was not withheld.


          Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

       6. The usual procedure would then have been to list  the  matter  for
          hearing but  due  to  the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
          precautions against its spread, this did not  happen  and  instead
          directions were sent to the parties on  18  May  2020.  They  were
          asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on
          the papers and to make any further submissions on the error of law
          issue within certain time limits.


       7. No response was received from either party  within  the  set  time
          limits so on 31 July further directions were sent out  giving  the
          parties a further opportunity to reply. This time submissions were
          received from the respondent dated 13 August 2020 but to  date  no
          correspondence has been forthcoming from  the  appellant.  I  note
          that the respondent's  submissions  were  also  forwarded  to  the
          appellant. Having satisfied myself that the appellant has now  had
          three opportunities to comply, I proceed to consider the matter in
          the absence of his submissions.


       8. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


       9.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  grounds,  the  determination,  the
          submissions and to all the evidence before me before deciding  how
          to proceed. A full account of the facts are set out in the  papers
          on file and the issues to be decided  are  straightforward.  There
          are no  matters  arising  from  the  papers  which  would  require
          clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed for  that
          purpose. I am satisfied that the appellant has been given  several
          opportunities to make any further submissions on his case but  has
          not done so. I am satisfied that I am able to  fairly  and  justly
          deal with this matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to
          do so.


                Submissions


      10. Mr Tufan's submissions for the  respondent  are  dated  13  August
          2020. he sets out the many detailed adverse  credibility  findings
          the judge made in her determination and submits  that  these  were
          made on the totality of the evidence. He  distinguishes  the  case
          from Mibanga ['2006] EWCA Civ 1153. He submits that the  reference
          to the appellant not having given  evidence  was  a  typographical
          error as the judge later sets out the oral evidence.  He urges the
          Tribunal to find  that  the  determination  contains  no  material
          errors and to uphold the decision to dismiss the appeal.


                  Discussion and conclusions

      11. I have considered all the evidence, the  grounds  for  permission,
          the determination and the submissions for the respondent.


      12. The appellant puts forward three complaints  although  the  second
          and third ground overlap as  they  both  pertain  to  the  judge's
          assessment of the evidence. The first is that anxious scrutiny was
          not given to the matter because at paragraph 10 the judge  states:
          "The appellant did not give evidence" when in fact he had done so.
          This  ground  is  without  any  merit.  It  is  plain   from   the
          determination that the judge was  aware  that  the  appellant  had
          given oral evidence  as  this  is  acknowledged  and  set  out  at
          paragraph  17.  The  sentence  at  paragraph  10  is   clearly   a
          typographical error and although regrettable it does  not  support
          the contention that anxious scrutiny was not given  to  the  claim
          particularly in the absence of any other examples of why  this  is
          said to be the case.


      13. I turn now to the complaints regarding the judge's  assessment  of
          the evidence but find that there is nothing in them to render  the
          determination unsustainable.  The judge confirms  repeatedly  that
          she considered the evidence as a whole before making her  findings
          (at 10, 23, 28 and 30). She commences her decision  making  at  18
          and makes the following adverse credibility findings: (i) that the
          authorities would not have  arrested  the  appellant  for  selling
          explosives from his vehicle to the LTTE without any search of  the
          said  vehicle;  (ii)  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  been
          suspected of such an offence when the  premises  where  he  worked
          were not searched and that his father who owned those premises was
          not questioned; (iii) that he had sustained  no  injuries  despite
          his claim of having been beaten and ill treated for two days; that
          if the appellant had been  arrested  but  released  for  the  same
          reason a year earlier, it was not credible that he would have been
          re-arrested without any interest shown in him in  the  intervening
          period; (iv) that the appellant would not have been able to  leave
          Sri Lanka through the proper channels with a UK visa had  he  been
          of interest to the authorities and been on a stop list;  (v)  that
          had his claim been genuine, he would not have voluntarily returned
          to visit Sri Lanka four years later and encountered no problems at
          the airport on either his  arrival  or  departure  or  during  his
          period of stay;  (vi) that the  appellant  had  given  conflicting
          accounts of where the alleged argument with his uncle over  family
          land had taken place; (vii) that the issue of  an  arrest  warrant
          following his uncle's decision to report him  to  the  authorities
          (following a family land dispute)  was  not  credible  because  by
          doing so he was risking disclosure of his own previous involvement
          with the appellant's release and jeopardising his position in  the
          CID and risking his own safety; (viii) that  this  was  even  more
          unlikely because the uncle had already taken over the  land  which
          he and  the  appellant  allegedly  argued  about;  (ix)  that  the
          appellant did not know when in 2015 the arrest warrant was issued;
          (x) that despite claiming that the warrant was issued in 2015,  he
          did not ask his parents to arrange for the attorney to send it  to
          him until 2019 and that he did not claim asylum  until  after  his
          arrest for overstaying in 2019. The judge applied Tanveer Ahmed to
          the consideration of documents. She found he did not fall into any
          or the risk categories of GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319.


      14. There is nothing in the judge's assessment  to  suggest  that  she
          rejected the documents because she had already found the appellant
          had fabricated his claim. It is plain that she had considered  the
          totality of the evidence and that she came to her  conclusions  on
          that basis. Her findings are comprehensive and do not justify  the
          complaint that no reasons were given. From the  numerous  findings
          set out at 18-30, it should be perfectly clear  to  the  appellant
          why he lost his appeal.


      15. No article 8 claim has been pursued.


          Decision

      16. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
          errors of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.


                 Anonymity


      17. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




        Signed


              R. Keki?
              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 24 September 2020












