
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/12677/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Monday 11 November 2020                  |On Monday 16 November 2020     |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    H H P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision  dated  16  October  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim on all available grounds.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Mrs D H Clapham, promulgated on  2  April
         2019.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal, stated in his application to the
         FtT in 4 paragraphs, challenging [63,  65  and  66]  of  the  FtT's
         decision.

      v) The appellant's further grounds of appeal in his application to the
         UT, 1 (a) - (c), elaborating on the first set of grounds.

     vi) The FtT's and UT's refusals of permission, on  the  view  that  the
         grounds were only disagreement on the facts.

    vii) The joint minute between the  parties  in  the  Court  of  Session,
         quoted below.

   viii) The UT's grant of permission, in light of the Court's  interlocutor
         and the joint minute.

     ix) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 14 October 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing on 11 November from  George  House,  Edinburgh.
    Representatives attended remotely. No members of the  public  attended,
    either in person or remotely.   The  technology  enabled  an  effective
    hearing.  I am obliged to both  representatives  for  their  clear  and
    accurate submissions.

 3. The joint minute  agrees  that  the  UT  erred  in  law  when  refusing
    permission:

     i. At [66] ... the FtT found that the  expert  report  overstated  the
        [appellant's] mental health problems;

    ii. At 5.1 of the expert report [by  Dr  TRAN  Thi  Lan  Anh,  dated  5
        December 2018] it was stated that according to the  medical  report
        of 19 November 2018 [by Dr Geraldine M Kelly] the  [appellant]  ...
        suffered from anxiety, trauma and depression; the language used  by
        [Dr Tran] corresponds to the description in [the  medical  report];
        [Dr Tran, in his conclusion] was of opinion  that  the  [appellant]
        was thereby at increased vulnerability inter alia to a serious risk
        of being re-trafficked;

   iii. The conclusion ... is among the sections of the  report  argued  in
        the grounds not to have been taken  into  account  by  the  FtT  in
        assessing the risk of re-trafficking;

    iv. In taking its decision on permission to appeal to  itself,  the  UT
        did not consider whether the FtT  arguably  erred  in  law  in  its
        assessment of the expert report in that regard ... As such  the  UT
        assessment of risk was inadequate.

     v. Parties reserve their position on the remaining issues.

 4. The error identified in the joint minute  is  not  only  arguable,  but
    established.  The country expert  did  not  overstate  the  appellant's
    mental health condition.  He derived his view from the medical  report.
    That error played a part in the FtT's evaluation of the expert report.

 5. The main points in Mr Ruddy' submissions were that the judge  gave  too
    much significance to the appellant being unable to explain how  he  was
    identified at a demonstration, a matter not within his  knowledge,  and
    only one aspect of his claim about events in  Vietnam;   that  she  was
    unreasonably critical of the appellant's evidence  that  his  enquiries
    about his mother were fruitless; and that she  overlooked  sections  of
    the evidence about the risk of re-trafficking.  Although the  judge  at
    [65] set out factors, derived from case law, relevant to that risk, she
    did not go  on  to  recognise  that  several  of  those  apply  to  the
    appellant.

 6. At [66] of her decision the judge said there was  "nothing  to  suggest
    that the appellant owes the traffickers any money", but that  does  not
    sit well with his accepted history, or with the passage at interview to
    which Mr  Ruddy  referred,  part  of  what  the  appellant  said  about
    Vietnamese men who put him to illegal work in the UK:

      Q 164.  Did you ask them how much you were going to be paid?

      A. No they told me to pay off the cost of the travel, I did  not  dare
      to ask them anything.

 7. Having heard the submissions of Mr  Ruddy,  Mr  Diwnycz  conceded  that
    various errors of law were shown in the  decision,  and  it  could  not
    safely stand.  It was agreed that the case required a fresh hearing  in
    the FtT.

 8. (As Mr Diwyncz suggested, it may be useful in the FtT to refer  to  the
    respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note  on  trafficking  in
    Vietnam, most recently updated in April 2020.   The  note  incorporates
    the case law mentioned above.)

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   The  case  is
    remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Clapham.

10. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      [pic]

      12 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




