
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12276/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Wednesday 30 September 2020              |On Thursday 29 October 2020    |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     TTZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Jones White LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, we consider it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    A.M.S. Green promulgated on 5 August 2017 dismissing her appeal made on
    protection and human rights grounds ("the Decision").

2.   The Appellant is a national of China.  She came to the UK as a  student
    on 20 January 2007.  She has returned to China on  one  occasion  since
    then, in 2008 when she returned for her brother's funeral.  She  claims
    to have lost contact with  her  parents  in  2009.  The  Appellant  was
    required to leave the UK in 2010 but was not removed then or since.

3.   The Appellant claimed asylum in October 2016.  She says that she is  at
    risk from the Chinese authorities as she  practises  Falun  Gong.   She
    also claims to fear her ex-boyfriend.  She says also that  he  will  be
    aware that she has resigned from the Chinese  Communist  Party  ("CCP")
    and that the Chinese authorities will persecute her for that reason.

4.    The  other  main  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  case  is  her  medical
    condition.  The Appellant has suffered from  diabetes  for  some  time,
    including when she  lived  in  China.   The  Appellant  says  that  her
    diabetes has deteriorated since she came to the UK.  In  January  2014,
    the Appellant was diagnosed with a kidney infection and her  right-side
    kidney was removed in June 2014.  Her left kidney function then started
    to deteriorate, and she was put on dialysis.  The  Appellant  undergoes
    dialysis three times per week.  She is also waiting to see if she would
    be suitable for a kidney transplant.  The Appellant has end stage renal
    failure.  The current medical evidence indicates that, without  regular
    dialysis, she would die after between ten and twelve days.  In addition
    to  those  conditions,  the  Appellant  says  that  she  suffers   from
    deterioration in the sight in both her eyes.   She has lost  the  sight
    in her left eye and continues to have problems with her right eye.

 5.  The Judge accepted that the Appellant practises Falun  Gong  but  found
    that she did so discreetly at home and that  she  would  not  therefore
    come  to  the  attention  of  the  Chinese  authorities  ([10]  of  the
    Decision).  The Judge did not accept the remainder  of  the  protection
    claim for reasons given at [11] and [12] of the Decision.  Even if  the
    Appellant had suffered at the hands of her  ex-boyfriend  in  the  past
    (which the Judge did not accept as proven), it was implausible that  he
    would be able to trace her on return to China.  The Appellant was never
    a member of the adult league of the CCP.  Even if she was a  member  of
    the youth league which the Judge accepted was possible, that would  not
    place her at risk.  The Judge's findings in relation to the  protection
    claim, save as regards the risk arising from practising Falun Gong, are
    not challenged.

6.   The Judge considered the Appellant's human rights claim  based  on  her
    medical condition at [13] to [17] of the Decision.   In  so  doing,  he
    applied the law as it then stood, specifically N v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 31 ("N") and GS (India) and  others
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  40.   The
    Judge received submissions on behalf of the  Appellant  concerning  the
    judgment of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium  (application  no  41738/10)  ("Paposhvili")  but,
    although the Judge accepted his duty under the Human Rights Act 1998 to
    have regard to Strasbourg jurisprudence, it appears that he  considered
    himself bound by domestic case-law.

7.   The Appellant appeals the Decision on two grounds as follows:

         Ground 1: The Judge has failed to take  into  account  the  country
         information emerging since the country guidance cases regarding the
         attitude of the Chinese authorities towards practitioners of  Falun
         Gong.

         Ground 2: The Judge erred by  failing  to  take  into  account  the
         guidance given by the ECtHR in Paposhvili.  Further, the Judge  has
         failed to take into account some  of  the  evidence  regarding  the
         situation which the Appellant would face during and  following  her
         return in accessing medical treatment.

8.   Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on 12 December 2017 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  Contrary to what is stated in the grounds,  in  a  careful
         and well-reasoned Decision  and  reasons  the  judge  set  out  the
         pertinent issues, law and evidence relating to  the  facts  of  the
         appeal.  In appeals of this nature it is the task of the  judge  to
         make findings of fact on the basis of the evidence and  to  provide
         adequately clear reasons for those findings. That is precisely what
         the judge did.  The findings made by the judge were  properly  open
         on the basis of the evidence.  The  judge  manifestly  specifically
         addressed  the  issues  related  to  the  Appellant's  health   and
         appropriately dealt with her appeals under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

         4.   Neither the grounds nor the Decision and reasons disclose  any
         arguably material error of law."

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on  5
    March 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... The Court of Appeal has now handed down  its  judgment  in  AM
         (Zimbabwe) and another v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         and this casts doubt on the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to
         Paposhvili v Belgium (application no. 41738/10).

         Therefore, it is arguable that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Green's
         decision included arguable errors of law  and  that  permission  to
         appeal is required."

    Although  Judge  Finch  did  not  refer  to  ground  one  expressly  or
    implicitly in her decision, she  did  not  refuse  permission  on  that
    ground.  We therefore proceed on the basis that permission was  granted
    on both grounds.

10.  On 29 March 2018, the Respondent filed  a  Rule  24  Reply  seeking  to
    uphold the Decision on the  basis  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    64 held that the judgment in Paposhvili did not alter the test in N and
    therefore there was no legal  error  in  the  Decision.   However,  the
    Respondent went on to accept  that,  since  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    indicated that the Supreme Court ought to consider the issue, it  would
    be appropriate   to stay the  matter  pending  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision on permission to appeal.  Permission to appeal was  thereafter
    granted and the appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) was heard substantively by  the
    Supreme Court. The Supreme Court gave judgment on  29  April  2020  (AM
    (Zimbabwe v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC  17)
    ("AM (Zimbabwe)")).

11.  On 17 August 2020, the Tribunal gave directions requiring  any  further
    evidence about the Appellant's medical condition and/or availability of
    treatment therefor in China to be filed by 16 September 2020.   Further
    evidence was filed by the Appellant on 16 September  and  23  September
    and by the Respondent on 21 and 22 September 2020.   We  refer  to  the
    evidence in the Appellant's supplementary bundle as [ABS/xx].  We  also
    received a written skeleton argument from Mr Jarvis on the  morning  of
    the hearing.  We also have before us the Appellant's  bundle  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing (to which we refer hereafter as "[AB/xx]"),
    the Appellant's skeleton argument and Respondent's written  submissions
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12.  At this stage, the issue for us is whether  the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law.  If we conclude it does, we need to consider  whether  to
    set aside the Decision based on that error.  If we decide to do so,  we
    would either re-make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal to do so.

13.  The hearing before us was conducted remotely  via  Skype  for  Business
    with  the  agreement  of  both  parties.   There  were   no   technical
    difficulties and both advocates confirmed that they were able to follow
    the proceedings throughout.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground 1

14.  Although Mr Winter  did  not  expand  upon  this  ground  in  his  oral
    submissions, he did not abandon it and we therefore  need  to  consider
    it.  We can do so shortly.

15.  The ground concerns the Judge's  findings  concerning  the  Appellant's
    claim to be at risk as a practitioner of Falun Gong.   The  essence  of
    this ground is that the Judge failed fully to  take  into  account  the
    Country Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled  "China:  Falun  Gong"
    Version 1.0, November 2016 ([AB/70-85]) ("the 2016 CPIN").

16.  Although the grounds link the complaint in  this  regard  to  the  2016
    CPIN, they do not actually cite the passage relied upon.  However, what
    is said to have been overlooked is the  reference  to  the  possibility
    that the Appellant would be spied on  by  a  "neighbourhood  community"
    which would provide information to the Chinese authorities.  Given  the
    wording, that appears to relate to [2.3.9] of the 2016 CPIN which reads
    as follows:

         "Since the determination  in  LL  was  handed  down,  it  has  been
         reported  that  the   Chinese   authorities   reportedly   instruct
         neighbourhood communities to report Falun Gong members to officials
         and offer monetary rewards to citizens who informed on  Falun  Gong
         practitioners."

17.  The Judge  accepted  at  [10]  of  the  Decision  that  "the  Appellant
    practices Falun Gong on a discrete [sic] basis  at  home".   The  Judge
    finds that "[s]he has learnt about the practice from videos and is  not
    in touch with any other practitioners".  That finding is based  on  the
    Appellant's evidence recorded at [7(v)] of the  Decision.   It  is  not
    suggested that the Judge has misunderstood that evidence.

18.  Having set out and considered  the  country  guidance  in  relation  to
    Falun Gong and the 2016 CPIN to which the  Appellant  makes  reference,
    the Judge concludes as follows:

         "10. ... I do not believe that the Appellant's  practice  of  Falun
         Gong is anything more than private and discrete [sic] and there  is
         no evidence to suggest that she intends to practice [sic]  publicly
         and as such she will not be at risk of persecution at the hands  of
         the Chinese authorities for her practice."

19.  On the evidence before the Judge and based on the country guidance  and
    other evidence including the 2016  CPIN,  there  is  no  error  in  the
    Judge's finding in this regard.   The  Appellant's  case  is  that  she
    practises Falun Gong privately and discreetly within the boundaries  of
    her own home (in part because her medical condition prevents her  doing
    more).  She does not even have contact with other  practitioners.   For
    that reason,  there  is  no  basis  for  asserting  that  neighbourhood
    communities would be aware of her practice and therefore no  evidential
    support for a claimed risk on this account.  The Judge  had  regard  to
    the 2016 CPIN as  he  referred  to  it.   Having  recorded  the  highly
    discreet way in which the Appellant practises Falun Gong, the Judge did
    not  need  to  refer  to  the  passage  of  the  2016  CPIN  concerning
    neighbourhood informants as it was not relevant.  There is no error  in
    failing to cite or consider this passage.

Ground 2

20.  The way in which  ground  2  was  originally  pleaded  recognised  that
    Paposhvili was not binding on the Tribunal but that the Tribunal should
    follow "clear and constant jurisprudence of the European Court of Human
    Rights".  At that time, of course, Paposhvili had yet to be  considered
    alongside N by the Supreme Court.  That  has  since  occurred,  and  we
    therefore take account of what is said  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) when determining this ground.  If, as Mr Winter submitted is
    the case, Judge Green applied N rather than Paposhvili, that  would  be
    an error of law but there would then be the question whether that error
    of law made any difference. In particular, as  Mr  Winter  very  fairly
    conceded, since we are only here concerned with whether the  Judge  has
    erred in law, the issue has to be assessed based on the evidence before
    the Judge and not any later evidence.

21.  Dealing first with the Judge's self-direction as to the  law,  that  is
    set out at [14] and [15] of the Decision.  Having  rehearsed  what  was
    said by the respective courts in N and Paposhvili, the Judge went on as
    follows:

         "14. Paposhvili differs from current domestic  case  law  including
         because it appears to put the burden  of  proof  on  the  returning
         state.  In R (on the application of SS) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department ("self-serving"  statements)  [2017]  UKUT  164
         (IAC) there is a reminder that to the extent that  Paposhvili  runs
         counter to binding domestic case law, the latter must,  of  course,
         prevail at Tribunal level.

         15.  In GS (India);  EO  (Ghana);  GM  (India);  PL  (Jamaica);  BA
         (Ghana) and KK (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 it was held that the
         case of a person whose life would be drastically shortened  by  the
         progress of natural disease if he was removed to his home State did
         not fall within the paradigm of Article 3 ECHR.  Such a case  could
         only succeed under that Article if it  fell  within  the  exception
         articulated in D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423. In that  case
         the claimant was critically ill and close to death,  could  not  be
         guaranteed any nursing or medical care in his country of origin and
         had no family there willing or able to care for him or provide  him
         with even a basic level of food, shelter or social support."

22.  Although, as we  observed  in  the  course  of  submissions,  the  last
    sentence of [14] of the Decision is not entirely clear, we accept  that
    by "the latter", the Judge intended to refer to "binding domestic  case
    law" and therefore concluded that he was obliged  to  follow  N.   That
    must be the case when read with what follows in [15] of the Decision.

23.  We turn then to the current legal position as set out  by  the  Supreme
    Court in AM (Zimbabwe).  The difference between N  and  Paposhvili  was
    explained by the Supreme Court in the following way:

         "27. We  need  to  analyse  the  effect  of  the  decision  in  the
         Paposhvili case and, first, to survey the analysis  of  its  effect
         conducted by the Court of Appeal. It was that court's view, at para
         39, that the decision reflected only a 'very modest'  extension  of
         the protection against return given by article 3 in cases  of  ill-
         health. The Court of Appeal fastened in para 39(iv) upon the  Grand
         Chamber's  questionable  choice  of  language  that  the   previous
         approach to such cases  needed  only  to  be  'clarified'.  And  it
         buttressed its restrictive view of the effect of  the  decision  by
         claiming in para 39(ii) that the Grand Chamber had noted that there
         had been no violation of article 3 in the N case and in  para  40
         that the Grand Chamber had 'plainly regarded that case  as  rightly
         decided'. But the careful  reader  of  paras  178  to  183  of  the
         judgment in the Paposhvili case may find it hard to agree with  the
         Court of Appeal in this respect. Of course the Grand Chamber  noted
         that it had been held in the N case there had been no violation of
         article 3; but there is no express agreement on its part with  that
         conclusion and, subject to the precise meaning of the new criterion
         in para 183 of the judgment (to which  we  should  now  turn),  its
         application to the facts of the N case would suggest a violation.

         28.  The Court of Appeal interpreted the new criterion in para  183
         of the judgment in the Paposhvili case, at para 38 as follows:

             'This means cases where the applicant faces  a  real  risk  of
             rapidly experiencing intense suffering (i.e. to the article  3
             standard) in the receiving state because of their illness  and
             the non-availability there of treatment which is available  to
             them in the removing state or  faces  a  real  risk  of  death
             within a short time  in  the  receiving  state  for  the  same
             reason. In other words, the boundary of article  3  protection
             has been shifted from being defined by imminence of  death  in
             the removing state (even with the treatment  available  there)
             to  being  defined  by  the  imminence  (ie   likely   'rapid'
             experience) of intense suffering or  death  in  the  receiving
             state, which may only occur because of the non-availability in
             that  state  of  the  treatment  which  had  previously   been
             available in the removing state.'

         29.  The criticism of the above passage made by the  appellant  and
         by the AIRE Centre largely  relates  to  the  second  sentence.  In
         relation, however,  to  the  first  sentence,  they  suggest  that,
         irrespective of the precise meaning, in context, of 'a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy' in para 183 (as to which see para  31
         below), the paraphrase of 'death within a short time'  favoured  by
         the Court of Appeal may not be entirely accurate.  In  relation  to
         the second sentence, their criticism is directed to the words  'the
         imminence (i.e. likely 'rapid' experience)  of  ...  death  in  the
         receiving state' attributable to the non-availability of treatment.
         They point out that the Grand Chamber was addressing exposure 'to a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  or  her  state  of
         health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
         in life expectancy' (italics supplied); and they contend  that  the
         Court of Appeal has misinterpreted those words so as to refer to  a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  or  her  state  of
         health resulting in intense suffering or in a significant reduction
         in life expectancy. The Secretary of State, for her  part,  rejects
         their criticism as narrow  and  syntactical,  apt  perhaps  to  the
         construction of a statute but inapt to the present context in which
         the meaning of para  183  should  be  informed  by  'case  law  and
         realism'. Her reference to case law turns out to be an  indorsement
         of the questionable conclusion of the Court of Appeal that  in  the
         Paposhvili  case  the  Grand  Chamber  approved  its  decision   in
         the N case. What remains is her reference, rather undeveloped, to
         realism.

         30.  There is,  so  I  am  driven  to  conclude,  validity  in  the
         criticism of the  Court  of  Appeal's  interpretation  of  the  new
         criterion. In its first sentence the reference by the Grand Chamber
         to 'a significant reduction in life expectancy' is  interpreted  as
         'death within a short time'. But then, in the second sentence,  the
         interpretation develops into the 'imminence ... of ... death'; and,
         as is correctly pointed out, this is achieved  by  attributing  the
         words 'rapid ... decline' to life expectancy when, as written, they
         apply only to 'intense  suffering'.  The  result  is  that  in  two
         sentences a significant reduction in  life  expectancy  has  become
         translated as the imminence of death. It is too much of a leap.

         31.  It remains, however, to consider what the  Grand  Chamber  did
         mean  by  its  reference  to  a  'significant'  reduction  in  life
         expectancy in para 183 of its judgment in the Paposhvili case. Like
         the skin of a chameleon, the adjective takes a different colour  so
         as to suit a different context. Here the general context is inhuman
         treatment; and the particular context is that the alternative to 'a
         significant reduction in life expectancy' is 'a serious, rapid  and
         irreversible decline in ... health resulting in intense suffering'.
         From these contexts  the  adjective  takes  its  colour.  The  word
         'significant'  often   means   something   less   than   the   word
         'substantial'. In  context,  however,  it  must  in  my  view  mean
         substantial. Indeed, were a reduction in life expectancy to be less
         than substantial, it would not attain the minimum level of severity
         which article 3 requires. Surely the Court of Appeal was correct to
         suggest, albeit in words too extreme,  that  a  reduction  in  life
         expectancy to death in  the  near  future  is  more  likely  to  be
         significant than any other reduction. But even a reduction to death
         in the near future might be significant for one person but not  for
         another. Take a person aged 74, with an expectancy of  life  normal
         for that age. Were that person's expectancy be reduced to, say, two
         years, the reduction  might  well  -  in  this  context  -  not  be
         significant. But compare that person  with  one  aged  24  with  an
         expectancy of life normal for that age. Were his or her  expectancy
         to  be  reduced  to  two  years,  the  reduction  might   well   be
         significant.

         32.  The Grand Chamber's  pronouncements  in  the  Paposhvili  case
         about the procedural requirements of article 3, summarised in  para
         23 above, can on no view be regarded as mere clarification of  what
         the court had previously said; and we  may  expect  that,  when  it
         gives judgment in the Savran case,  the  Grand  Chamber  will  shed
         light on the extent of the requirements. Yet observations  on  them
         may  even  now  be  made  with  reasonable  confidence.  The  basic
         principle is that, if you allege a breach of your rights, it is for
         you to establish it. But 'Convention  proceedings  do  not  in  all
         cases lend themselves to a rigorous application of [that] principle
         ...': DH v Czech Republic (2008) 47 EHRR 3, para 179. It is clear
         that, in application to claims under article 3 to resist return  by
         reference to ill-health, the Grand Chamber has indeed modified that
         principle. The threshold, set out in para 23(a) above, is  for  the
         applicant to adduce evidence 'capable of demonstrating  that  there
         are substantial grounds for believing'  that  article  3  would  be
         violated. It may make formidable intellectual demands on  decision-
         makers  who  conclude  that  the  evidence   does   not   establish
         'substantial grounds'  to  have  to  proceed  to  consider  whether
         nevertheless  it  is  'capable   of   demonstrating'   them.   But,
         irrespective of the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the test, let
         no one imagine that it represents an undemanding threshold  for  an
         applicant to cross. For the  requisite  capacity  of  the  evidence
         adduced by the applicant is to  demonstrate  'substantial'  grounds
         for believing that it is a 'very exceptional'  case  because  of  a
         'real' risk of subjection to 'inhuman' treatment. All three parties
         accept that Sales LJ was correct,  in  para  16,  to  describe  the
         threshold as an obligation on an applicant to raise a 'prima  facie
         case' of potential infringement of article 3.  This  means  a  case
         which,  if  not  challenged  or  countered,  would  establish   the
         infringement:  see  para  112  of  a   useful   analysis   in   the
         Determination of the President of the Upper Tribunal and two of its
         senior judges in AXB v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC). Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded to explain
         in para 123, the arrangements in the UK are such that the decisions
         whether  the  applicant  has  adduced  evidence  to  the  requisite
         standard and, if so, whether it  has  been  successfully  countered
         fall to be taken initially by the Secretary of State  and,  in  the
         event of an appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal.

         33.  In the event that  the  applicant  presents  evidence  to  the
         standard addressed above, the returning state can seek to challenge
         or counter it in the manner helpfully outlined in the  judgment  in
         the Paposhvili case at paras 187 to  191  and  summarised  at  para
         23(b) to  (e)  above.  The  premise  behind  the  guidance,  surely
         reasonable, is that, while  it  is  for  the  applicant  to  adduce
         evidence about his or  her  medical  condition,  current  treatment
         (including the likely suitability of any other treatment)  and  the
         effect on him or her of inability to access it, the returning state
         is better able to  collect  evidence  about  the  availability  and
         accessibility of suitable treatment in the  receiving  state.  What
         will most surprise the first-time reader  of  the  Grand  Chamber's
         judgment is the reference in para 187 to the  suggested  obligation
         on the returning  state  to  dispel  'any'  doubts  raised  by  the
         applicant's evidence. But, when the reader  reaches  para  191  and
         notes the reference, in precisely the  same  context,  to  'serious
         doubts', he will realise that 'any' doubts in para  187  means  any
         serious  doubts.   For   proof,   or   in   this   case   disproof,
         beyond all doubt is a concept rightly unknown to the Convention.

         34.  This court is not actively invited to  decline  to  adopt  the
         exposition of the effect of article 3  in  relation  to  claims  to
         resist return by reference to ill-health which  the  Grand  Chamber
         conducted in the Paposhvili case. Although the Secretary  of  State
         commends the Court of Appeal's unduly narrow interpretation of  the
         Grand Chamber's exposition, she makes no active submission that, in
         the event of a wider interpretation, we should decline to adopt it.
         Our refusal to follow a decision of the ECtHR, particularly of  its
         Grand  Chamber,  is  no  longer  regarded  as,  in  effect,  always
         inappropriate.  But  it  remains,   for   well-rehearsed   reasons,
         inappropriate save in highly unusual  circumstances  such  as  were
         considered in R (Hallam) and R (Nealon) v Secretary  of  State  for
         Justice (JUSTICE intervening) [2019] UKSC 2, [2020] AC 279. In  any
         event, however, there is no question of our refusing to follow  the
         decision in the Paposhvili case.  For  it  was  15  years  ago,  in
         the N case cited at para 2 above, that the House of Lords expressed
         concern that the restriction of article 3 to early death only  when
         in prospect in the returning state appeared illogical: see para  17
         above. In the light of the decision in the Paposhvili case,  it  is
         from the decision of the House of Lords  in  the  N  case  that  we
         should today depart."

24.  Although the  Supreme  Court  has  now  made  clear  that  there  is  a
    difference between N and Paposhvili in relation to the thresholds which
    apply, it is worthy of note that the Court did  not  endorse  what  was
    said by Judge Green about the burden of proof at [14] of the  Decision.
    As is made clear at [32] of the judgment, the burden remains (primarily
    at least) on an appellant.  It is  only  where  an  appellant  provides
    evidence which shows that there are substantial grounds  for  believing
    that he or she will be subjected to inhuman treatment which  meets  the
    threshold of Article 3 ECHR that he or she can succeed.  We  note  what
    is said by the Supreme Court thereafter which may indicate some form of
    shared burden in terms of the facilities and treatment available in the
    receiving State.  We observe that, depending on the case, it  may  well
    be correct to say that a State has better means of investigating  this.
    However, in  some  cases  where  an  individual  is  suffering  from  a
    particularly acute or unusual condition and is being treated by a  very
    senior  consultant  or  specialist  in  the  UK,  that  consultant   or
    specialist may actually be better placed to provide the information via
    contacts in the receiving State.

25.  We turn back to the Decision  and  how  the  Judge  Green  applied  the
    domestic law as it then stood to the evidence as follows:

         "16. In paragraphs 50-65 of the refusal letter the  Respondent  has
         referred to  objective  evidence  concerning  the  availability  of
         healthcare in China for the Appellant.  I note that kidney dialysis
         is available.  I also note that kidney transplants  are  available.
         The Chinese healthcare system also provides treatment for diabetes.
          I have also  taken  account  of  the  articles  exhibited  in  the
         Appellant's  bundle  about  the  availability  of  kidney  dialysis
         treatment. I accept that in one article [1 AB 19] that in rural and
         remote areas of China the proportion of individuals with  end-stage
         kidney  disease  who  are  treated  with  dialysis  is  about  20%.
         However,  the  same  article  acknowledges  that  several  national
         Peritoneal Dialysis ("PD") centres of first rate scale and  quality
         have sprung up, but the  development  of  PD  varies  widely  among
         geographic regions across China.  The article also referred to  the
         fact  that  the  Chinese  government  has   dedicated   itself   to
         continually increasing the coverage and level  of  medical  service
         for patients with end-stage kidney disease.  On the evidence, I  am
         not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  met  the  high  threshold
         required to trigger Article 3 ECHR.  She will be  able  to  receive
         treatment for her kidney disease and diabetes in China."

         [our emphasis]

26   Although as we have accepted, the Judge may have  considered  that  the
    threshold remained that set out in N, as is clear  from  this  passage,
    his conclusion is not that the  Appellant's  case  did  not  reach  the
    exceptional threshold because her condition was not sufficiently severe
    but because there was no real risk as she would receive  treatment  for
    it in China in the same way as she does currently in the  UK.   Indeed,
    we doubt that it could be said that  a  removal  which  would  occasion
    death in under a fortnight if the Appellant were deprived of  treatment
    would not breach Article 3 ECHR even applying the pre-Paposhvili cases.
     That was not the issue in this case.  The real issue in this  case  is
    whether the Appellant's condition could be managed as it is  currently,
    by treatment in China.  That test is therefore consistent with the  way
    in which it was framed by the Supreme Court in AM  (Zimbabwe)  (see  in
    particular [29] of the judgment cited at [23] above,  where  the  Court
    makes clear that the evidence is focussed on an imminence of  death  or
    significant and irreversible decline in health attributable to lack  of
    treatment in the  receiving  State).   The  substance  of  the  Judge's
    finding is therefore that the Appellant's evidence failed to show  that
    there is a real risk that treatment will not be available and therefore
    she will not suffer Article 3 ill-treatment as  she  will  continue  to
    receive the treatment she needs to survive.

27.  We therefore turn to the complaints made in  ground  2  concerning  the
    evidence and the Judge's treatment of it.  First, it is said  that  the
    Judge failed to take account of the Appellant's evidence that she could
    not afford to pay for treatment in China.  Second, the  grounds  assert
    that the Judge has failed to consider that the Appellant would  not  be
    able to arrange the  necessary  dialysis  within  the  short  timeframe
    available following removal, that the Appellant would face  a  30  hour
    journey to China, that she has lost contact with her family  and  would
    be financially prohibited from accessing the necessary treatment.

28.  Most of the foregoing matters rely on the Appellant's own evidence  and
    we therefore begin with her statement which reads as follows so far  as
    relevant on this issue:

         "4.  I feel constantly tired even as I am  giving  this  statement,
         when I do the dialysis I feel great but shortly after the  dialysis
         is complete.  I slowly feel worse and worse over time. I would  not
         even be fit to travel to  China  in  my  present  condition.   From
         Glasgow to my hometown Fuqing City it is  30  hours  to  travel  by
         plane.  This is not including any waiting time  and  not  including
         any possible delays during the trip or any problems at the borders.
          I need to transfer from Glasgow via  London,  then  Amsterdam  and
         then Beijing and then my hometown of Fuqing city - this  length  of
         travel is not compatible with my medical condition.

         5.   Given the fact that I must do dialysis  about  every  2  days,
         this length of travel would have a negative impact on me and  would
         potentially represent risk to my life.  If I do not do the dialysis
         on time my body will get poisoned and I may die as a result.  Also,
         I would not be able to arrange with a Chinese hospital to  give  me
         the dialysis as required, particularly within the short  timeframes
         involved.  Furthermore, I would need money to get this  done  -  in
         China all healthcare is private and costs money.

         6.   My medical condition is preventing me from being able to  work
         sometimes faint and feel dizzy - I would not  be  able  to  sustain
         myself, let alone pay for dialysis.  The payment policy in  Chinese
         hospitals is very strict.  They would  not  treat  me  without  any
         payment in advance.  I have also completely lost sight in  my  left
         eye and my sight in my right eye  is  starting  to  deteriorate  as
         well.  The problems with my eyesight,  I  suspect  are  due  to  my
         diabetes, but I have had diabetes for many years and have  been  on
         medication for many years and all of a sudden, I lost my  eyesight.
         I had surgery a few times on both my eyes  but  I  still  lost  the
         eyesight in my left eye.   I  am  attending  regular  check-ups  to
         review my right eye's health.  I would not be able to receive  this
         support in China and this would potentially led  to  me  losing  my
         right eye's sight completely.

         7.   Since I travelled back to China in 2008 I kept in  touch  with
         my  family  in  China  until  2009.   During  2009  sometimes  they
         contacted me.  They kept changing their phone number so  they  were
         difficult to reach.  They  do  not  use  e-mail  or  social  media.
         Afterwards, I have lost contact with them - I cannot trace them - I
         tried to phone them and also sent family friends to my hometown  to
         try to find them and they were unable to do so - no one is in touch
         with them.  The neighbour also tried to make contact with them  but
         nobody could find them.  My remaining family in China  consists  of
         my mother and my father.  I am not sure they are still alive  as  I
         have not heard from them in 8 years.   I  do  not  have  any  other
         relatives in China.  I do not have anyone else  back  in  China  to
         look after me.

         8.   Because of my medical conditions I would not be able  to  work
         back in China, if I cannot work I cannot  afford  medical  care.  I
         cannot afford accommodation in China as I do not have savings and I
         would  not  even  able  to  survive.  My   health   condition   has
         deteriorated over time since my health problems started.  I am  now
         on a kidney transplant waiting list and my condition is now at  the
         stage where I must have a  transplant.   I  would  never  get  this
         transplant in China - it is impossible because I do not have  money
         for this treatment.  If I go back to China I only have one choice -
         to wait for my death.  Furthermore, I will  probably  not  have  to
         wait for long as I will be dead soon.   I  would  not  be  able  to
         survive if I was required to return to China."

29.  We observe that the "30 hours" which the Appellant says it  would  take
    to travel to China appears lengthy even assuming that she was  required
    to do the journey in one rather than taking breaks between the  various
    stages.  Her supplementary statement refers to a  flight  of  13  hours
    from Glasgow to China (not including waiting times or changing flights)
    which  appears  more  realistic.   We  wonder  therefore  whether   the
    reference to "30 hours" was a typographical error.  Even if it was not,
    the Appellant does not explain why she would be obliged to travel  from
    Glasgow to her home area in one go, why she could not break her journey
    or why she could not stop in Beijing for treatment.    The  Appellant's
    evidence offers no reason why she could not make arrangements for  some
    initial dialysis treatment in China before return.

30   Dealing with the contact which the Appellant says  she  does  not  have
    with her family in China, her evidence in this regard is set out by the
    Judge at [7(vi)] of the Decision.  His conclusion in  that  regard  (at
    [18] of the Decision) is that the Appellant does have family  in  China
    (even if she is not presently in contact) and also  has  friends  there
    who the Judge says could help her.   The Judge  therefore  clearly  had
    regard to her evidence on this point.

31.  In terms of the other evidence put forward on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    before Judge Green  concerning  her  medical  condition,  that  was  as
    follows:

         (1)  Letter from NHS Greater  Glasgow  and  Clyde  Renal  Services,
         Dialysis Unit dated 22 June 2017 ([AB/9-10])  which  confirms  that
         the Appellant attends dialysis for four hours, three times per week
         and is being assessed for renal transplantation.  The regularity of
         attendance is confirmed by the hospital in a letter  dated  24  May
         2017 ([AB/11]).  The letter  from  NHS  Renal  Services  makes  the
         following observations about return to China:

             "... If she were moved to China, she would require to continue
             hospital haemodialysis on a regular basis as  detailed  above.
             I am uncertain whether that treatment is available for all  in
             China.  Without renal replacement therapy she would die within
             1-2 weeks.  She would be able  to  travel  but  only  a  short
             distance and dialysis therapy would need to  be  arranged  for
             visits ..."

    Although Mr Winter relied upon the latter sentence to  corroborate  the
    Appellant's account that she would be  unable  to  undertake  the  long
    journey to China, on our reading, this relates only  to  travel  within
    China following return and says nothing  about  whether  the  Appellant
    would be fit to undertake the return  flight  to  China  in  the  first
    place.

         (2)  A further letter from the renal services department  dated  20
         July 2017 ([AB/7]): this confirms consideration  of  the  Appellant
         for a kidney transplant but says that  "[t]here  are  a  couple  of
         issues which need to be addressed before this can  happen".   Judge
         Green was therefore entitled to note at [13] of the  Decision  that
         "[t]here is some confusion over whether she has been listed  for  a
         kidney transplant in this country".

         (3)  An  article  entitled  "Health  and  Medical  Care  in  China"
         published on the site  of  China  Expert  International  Ltd  which
         indicates that  it  is  an  organisation  providing  "Services  and
         Solutions for Doing Business in China, with China and for Expats in
         China" ([AB/15-16]).  The content of the document  is  targeted  at
         foreigners visiting China or  living  in  China  who  may  or  will
         require private health insurance.  It does not  deal  with  Chinese
         nationals.  As such,  what  it  has  to  say  about  the  need  for
         insurance and payment is not relevant.  It also says nothing  about
         services for kidney dialysis.

         (4)  An article entitled  "Chinese  farmers  set  up  DIY  dialysis
         clinic in battle to reform crumbling  healthcare  system"  ([AB/17-
         18]).  This is an article published by the Telegraph dated in April
         2009; there is no basis for saying that it is a reliable source  of
         information in general terms many years later.

         (5)  An  article  written  for  the  World  Kidney  Forum  entitled
         "Peritoneal Dialysis in China: Meeting  the  Challenge  of  Chronic
         Kidney Failure" which appears to date back to 2014/15 ([AB/19-23]).
          This is both more recent and more relevant.  Its starting position
         is that China has "an increasing  prevalence  of  end-stage  kidney
         disease and relatively insufficient medical and economic resources,
         particularly in rural and remote areas".   The  study  states  that
         "[p]roviding dialysis treatment to patients with  end-stage  kidney
         disease is a public health challenge that  puts  a  large  economic
         burden on individuals and health care resources".  Thereafter,  the
         study looks at and  advocates  the  benefits  of  using  peritoneal
         dialysis as a less expensive form  of  treatment.    Of  particular
         relevance is the  section  dealing  with  the  "Chinese  Government
         Policy" for treatment which states as follows:

             "The Chinese government has paid increasing attention  to  the
             treatment available for patients with end-stage kidney disease
             in the past few  years.   Uremia  is  1  of  8  major  serious
             diseases covered by  National  Social  Medical  Insurance.   A
             joint  document  developed  in  2012  by  relevant  government
             departments specified that coverage provided by the New  Rural
             Cooperative Medical Care plan should reach 70%  of  the  total
             medical costs of these major  diseases.   Recently,  with  the
             advancement of health  care  system  reform  in  China,  basic
             medical  insurance  now  covers  >95%  of  urban   and   rural
             residents, and a high-reimbursement  policy  for  catastrophic
             diseases  including  end-stage   kidney   disease   has   been
             established."

    Mr Winter relied on one section of the report which speaks of the  cost
    of treatment.  However, as is clear from the report read  as  a  whole,
    this concerns the overall cost to the State and not to the  individual.



32.  Leaving  aside  the  paucity  of  relevant  evidence  produced  on  the
    Appellant's  behalf,  the  Judge  relied  in  his  findings  concerning
    availability of treatment at  [16]  of  the  Decision   on  information
    coming from the Respondent as set out at [50] to  [65]  of  the  letter
    giving the reasons for the decision under appeal.  The  relevant  parts
    of that letter read as follows:

         "53. I have considered the treatment available  in  China.   It  is
         noted that objective evidence shows that there is  kidney  dialysis
         and treatment available.  An article in the Oxford Journal  on  the
         website [details given - dates from 2014] notes that:

             'Renal replacement therapy is rapidly expanding in  China  and
             two-times weekly dialysis is  common,  but  detailed  data  on
             practice patterns are currently limited...

             Dialysis access and prescription

             A native arteriovenous (AV) fistula for HD access was used  by
             88% of China DOPPS patients compared with 91% in Japan, 58% in
             North America and 70% in Eur-A/NZ (Table 1).  The mean  number
             of prescribed HD sessions per week was lower  in  China  (2.8)
             than in the other DOPPS countries (range  3.0-3.1)  (Table  1,
             Figure 1A).  Twenty-six percent of HD patients in  China  were
             dialyzing less than three times weekly (88% of this group were
             undergoing two-times weekly dialysis) compared  with  1-6%  in
             other DOPPS countries.  The median Chinese  facility  reported
             26% of patients dialyzing less than three  times  weekly  (22%
             two times weekly) compared with a range of 0-4% for the median
             facility in other DOPPS countries (Figure 1B).

             Dialysis-related prescriptions, laboratory values and  quality
             of life associated with two-times weekly HD in China

             Patients dialyzing two times weekly (versus  three  times)  in
             China were much more likely to be prescribed  session  lengths
             >270 or 300+ min (Table 3).  On a weekly basis, these patients
             were dialyzed for an average of 8.4h compared with  12.0h  for
             patients dialyzing three times  weekly.   Average  blood  flow
             rates and vascular access were  similar.   Patients  dialyzing
             two times weekly (versus three times)  in  China  had  similar
             erythropoietin-stimulating agent prescription rates (95%)  but
             were less likely to be prescribed intravenous iron (33  versus
             43%), vitamin D (48 versus 60%)  or  a  phosphate  binder  (52
             versus 60%)

         55.  The website [details given -  dates  from  2015]  contains  an
         article referring to the Shunjing Renal Hospital which is a private
         hospital in Jian:

             'DaVita Kidney Care, the dialysis  arm  of  DaVita  HealthCare
             Partners, is forming what the company is calling  a  first-of-
             its-kind joint venture kidney care specialty hospital chain in
             north eastern China to expand its global operations.

             The chain, which will be in the  Shandong  province,  will  be
             owned by DaVita and Xiaoyi Zhang, president of Shunjing  Renal
             Hospital.  Shunjing is the only private hospital approved  for
             dialysis services in the province's  capital  city  of  Jinan,
             China.  Unlike a dialysis center,  the  renal  hospitals  will
             attempt  to  mitigate  or  delay  the  need  for  dialysis  by
             addressing conditions like hypertension and obesity  that  are
             common among chronic kidney disease patients.'

         56.  The website Kidney Service China [details given] notes:

             'In China,  kidney  disease  patients  have  more  alternative
             treatment.  Apart from Dialysis and Kidney  Transplant,  there
             are many Traditional Chinese Medicine techniques  and  natural
             remedies are available for patients...

         57.  The website [details  given]  has  a  feature  on  Shijiazhung
         Kidney Disease Hospital and this is described as:

             'Shijiazhuang  Kidney   Disease   Hospital   is   located   in
             Shijiazhung, the capital  city  of  Hebei  Province.   It  was
             founded in 1986 and  has  already  been  a  modern  Nephrology
             Institution with a system of medical treatment,  teaching  and
             research after 28 years' development.

                  Part I The Condition of the Infrastructure

                   1.  The  scale  of  the  hospital.   Shijiazhung  Kidney
                      Disease  Hospital  is  the  largest  kidney   disease
                      specialized   hospital   with   the   most   complete
                      equipments in China. The construction of the hospital
                      was designed and projected according to the  standard
                      of fully-good first class specialized hospital of the
                      government... There are 1320 staff members  and  1090
                      open  beds.   Our  hospital  is  one  of  the  kidney
                      specialized hospitals with the largest scale and  the
                      most abundant medical power.'

         58.  Another website [details given] describes this  same  hospital
         as having some of the most advanced treatments for  Kidney  disease
         in the world:

             'Shijiazhung Kidney Disease Hospital is very  famous  both  in
             China and many other countries.   So  far,  patients  from  68
             countries have received treatment  here.   Other  doctors  and
             patients wonder why so many foreigners prefer to come here for
             treatment regardless of  long  distance  and  cost.   This  is
             because this hospital has five superiorities: 1. Beautiful and
             comfortable environment 2. The most  advanced  equipments  all
             over the worlds 3. Professional and experienced kidney  expert
             team  4.  All-around  service  and  independent  international
             department 5. Systemic and effective  treatment  plans  louder
             than any word'

         ...

         60.  You have also been advised of the Voluntary Returns Scheme who
         could  assist  you  with  accessing  suitable  treatment  for  your
         condition upon return to China as well as financial  assistance  if
         required.  While it is noted that you have  parents  residing  with
         you in China and it is noted that you have provided no evidence  as
         to why they could not assist you with any support upon return."

    The documents underpinning the citations in the decision letter  appear
    in the Respondent's bundle.

33.  Although we accept that the material relied upon by the Respondent  and
    by the Judge when reaching his findings at [16] of  the  Decision  says
    very little about the cost of and funding for treatment in China, there
    is a complete lack of evidence about  this  on  the  Appellant's  side.
    There appears to be no reliable evidence supporting the assertion  that
    she would be obliged to pay for  treatment  and  would  not  obtain  it
    otherwise.  We observe that she has not been back to China  for  twelve
    years and was not suffering from renal failure when she was last there.
     She gives no source for her assertion about the cost of, and  need  to
    pay for, treatment.

34.  That then leads us on to make certain observations about  the  evidence
    which has been produced since the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   As  we
    indicated at [11] above, the parties were  invited  to  adduce  further
    evidence about treatment in China,  and  have  done  so.   As  we  have
    already noted, it was accepted that this evidence could  not  be  taken
    into account when considering whether the Judge had made  an  error  of
    law but it could be relevant to the materiality of any error.

35.  The Appellant places reliance on a report of Dr Thi Lan  Anh  Tran  who
    is a researcher into human rights law in "socialist political  systems"
    including China.  She has a PhD in law obtained at  the  University  of
    Leeds.  She has worked for the Vietnamese Government and as a  research
    assistant for the United Nations' Specialist  Rapporteur  to  Cambodia.
    She  is  currently  a  consultant  and  managing  partner  at  VietBrit
    Consulting.  She has made "numbers of research and consultant trips  to
    China" but does not say when she was last there.  Dr Tran was  provided
    with the Decision and the Appellant's statement as  well  as  a  letter
    from the Appellant's doctors and "other relevant documents and  related
    cases".  It  is  not  clear  whether  that  includes  the  Respondent's
    decision letter and articles relied upon (as set out above).

36.  Dr Tran says that she has used her "own research and  data"  about  the
    issues,  including  the  Chinese  healthcare  system  and   the   Hukou
    registration  system.   She   has   relied   upon   information   about
    availability and cost of treatment in China "with the  assistance  from
    [her]  colleague  in  China  and  two  UK's  residents   with   Chinese
    nationality who recently received medical  treatment  in  China  during
    their trips in China in the year 2017 and March  2018."  She  has  also
    relied upon a phone interview with a Czech  national  who  underwent  a
    kidney transplant in China in  2016.   It  is  not  clear  to  us  what
    relevance the position of a Czech  national  can  have  to  that  of  a
    Chinese national.  Dr Tran does not say what are the qualifications  of
    her "colleague in China" to offer information about the workings of the
    Chinese healthcare system. It  is  not  said  what  treatment  the  two
    Chinese nationals were seeking.

37.  We make the following general  observations  about  Dr  Tran's  report.
    First, we somewhat doubt the value of the opinion of an expert in human
    rights law on the workings of a healthcare system in  a  country  where
    she has never apparently lived or worked or needed to  seek  healthcare
    herself: the opinion would derive neither from her experience nor  from
    her expertise.  Second, as we have noted, she does not say who  is  her
    colleague  and  whether  he/she  is  someone  with  greater  first-hand
    knowledge of how the healthcare  system  operates  or  whether  his/her
    information is also provided merely from research of publicly available
    documents. Third, many of the assertions made in  the  report  are  not
    underpinned by reference to documents or are  referenced  to  documents
    which are of some antiquity (for example, footnotes 2-5 all  relate  to
    documents from 2010).

38.  Dr Tran has included  a  section  about  "Health  insurance  policy  in
    China".  However, that deals with developments only  up  to  2009/2010.
    The following section concerning "State-run health insurance in  China"
    is more up to date and explains how state-funded health insurance works
    in China.  It is clear that,  contrary  to  the  Appellant's  evidence,
    there is insurance in place including for persons  who  are  unemployed
    (see [1.17]).

39.  Having accepted that the Appellant would be  able  to  enrol  into  the
    insurance program following Hukou re-registration (see below), Dr  Tran
    makes the rather surprising and  unreferenced  assertion  that  "[w]ith
    this insurance, very likely, the  Appellant  will  be  refused  by  the
    hospital due to her  serious  illness".   The  only  support  for  this
    appears to be an article from a doctor dating back to  2017  that  this
    type of insurance plan "may lead to hospitals rejecting  patients  with
    serious illnesses" or provided "an incentive to doctors  to  use  cheap
    drugs and  low-cost,  low-quality  treatments".    We  note  that  this
    section of Dr Tran's report ([1.13] to [1.17] with the exception of her
    assertion which we have  noted  above)  is  lifted  directly  from  the
    article referenced at footnote [15]  which  is  written  by  a  Chinese
    individual living in  the  US  comparing  his  experiences  of  the  US
    healthcare system with the Chinese one.  It is not clear from where  he
    has obtained his knowledge and the article which has led Dr Tran to her
    conclusion about the availability of treatment for the Appellant is  at
    best double hearsay based on an article written by a journalist relying
    on another article written by one doctor.

40.  Dr Tran also says that the Appellant would not be able  to  access  any
    healthcare  insurance  until  she  is  re-registered  as   her   "Hukou
    registration is likely to  have  been  deleted/removed  from  household
    registration".  That assertion is unreferenced either there or  in  the
    section dealing with that issue (part 4 and not part 3 as stated).   We
    accept that Dr Tran may be right to say that, without a  hukou,  it  is
    very difficult to access public services (based on what is said in  the
    "Country Policy and  Information  Note  China:  Background  information
    including actors of protection and internal relocation"  -  March  2018
    [ABS/31-79] - "the 2018 CPIN").  However, the 2018  CPIN  says  nothing
    about the lapsing of a hukou or need to re-register after a  particular
    period.  What it does say at [16.1.3] is that "[h]ukous do not  expire,
    but the supporting documentation  (such  as  identity  cards)  must  be
    renewed every 10 years, otherwise they do expire".  It may be that this
    is what Dr Tran had in mind.  In any event, however, as we pointed  out
    to Mr Winter in the course of submissions, whether it is the  hukou  or
    identity card which has to be renewed, there is no evidence  that  this
    cannot be done from outside China, in other words before the  Appellant
    returns.   There may be some constraints on this given the  Appellant's
    protection claim but we see no reason why her representatives would  be
    unable to source general information about  this  option  even  if  the
    Appellant were unwilling to approach the authorities  herself  at  this
    stage.

41.  Finally, Dr Tran makes a number of  unsupported  assertions  about  the
    Appellant's travel to China which go way  beyond  her  expertise  as  a
    lawyer and into the  realms  of  assertions  about  medical  conditions
    which, so far as we can see, she is entirely unqualified to make  (see,
    by way of example, the assertion in the conclusion that  the  Appellant
    "will face with the death risk at  any  time  during  the  journey"  to
    China).  We accept that there is a further letter from the  Appellant's
    GP dated 22 September 2020 which refers to "a significant risk to  [the
    Appellant's] health if she were to travel back to China or  be  removed
    back to China" which might conceivably be meant as a comment about  the
    journey itself but the letter does not go so far as to say that she  is
    presently unfit to fly and  in  any  event  we  would  not  expect  the
    Respondent to put an individual  on  a  plane  if  there  were  medical
    evidence of unfitness to travel.

42.  Having considered the Decision, and in particular what is said at  [16]
    of the Decision alongside the evidence which was before Judge Green, we
    are not persuaded that there is any error of law in  the  Decision.  We
    come back to our earlier conclusion that the Judge's findings are based
    on there being evidence that the Appellant  would  be  able  to  access
    treatment in China such that there was not a real risk of her suffering
    ill-treatment which would reach the "high threshold required to trigger
    Article 3 ECHR".  Although we accept that the Supreme  Court  has  held
    that Paposhvili makes  more  than  modest  changes  to  the  previously
    accepted case law and that N is no longer to  be  followed,  the  Court
    nonetheless noted that the threshold to be demonstrated by an appellant
    remains one which is not "undemanding".  In other words, it  remains  a
    high threshold.  Whatever the  trigger  point  for  the  engagement  of
    Article 3 in a health case, therefore, the  burden  was  still  on  the
    Appellant to make out a real risk.  It is her failure to  do  so  which
    led the Judge to find as he did at [16] of the Decision.

43.  We have already remarked on the paucity  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    which was before Judge Green and the evidence which the Respondent  had
    put forward and on which Judge Green relied.  There is no error of  law
    in his finding based on that evidence.  We are therefore satisfied that
    the second ground is not made out.

44.  Our primary conclusion, therefore, is that  the  Decision  contains  no
    error of law on either ground.  Even if  we  had  been  persuaded  that
    there was an error in  the  Judge's  reliance  on  case  law  prior  to
    Paposhvili, we would have reached the conclusion that the  error  could
    not make any difference based in particular on the evidence  which  was
    before the Judge.  As we have already identified, the Applicant  failed
    to provide sufficient evidence to show  that  treatment  would  not  be
    available to her in China.  Even if the Judge had before him Dr  Tran's
    report, we are satisfied that the evidence put forward could  not  make
    any difference to the finding that the Appellant has failed to  show  a
    real  risk  of  a  breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  due  to  the  lack  of
    substantiated evidence  about  the  availability  (including  cost)  of
    treatment in China.  Finally, even if we  had  been  persuaded  to  set
    aside the Decision, we would have concluded on the  evidence  presently
    available that the outcome should be the  same  as  the  Appellant  has
    failed to discharge her burden of showing that there is a real risk  of
    ill-treatment in China based on the lack of available treatment for her
    medical conditions in that country.

45.  We have made a number of  observations  about  Dr  Tran's  report  with
    which we did not need to deal in light of our conclusions regarding the
    lack of any error of law.  We  have  done  so,  however,  in  order  to
    identify the gaps and deficiencies in  her  report  and  to  assist  in
    showing the sort of evidence which the  Appellant  would  need  to  put
    forward in support of her case.

46.  As  Mr  Winter  accepted,  it  may  well  be  that,  in  light  of  the
    observations which we made about Dr Tran's report, the Appellant  would
    be better served by making further submissions to the Respondent  based
    on different evidence or at least fully referenced evidence which plugs
    the gaps we have identified.

47.  Mr Jarvis very helpfully conceded that if the  Appellant  were  to  put
    forward the sort of evidence which is now needed post AM (Zimbabwe)  to
    show a real risk that Article  3  would  be  breached  on  return,  the
    Respondent would, at the very least, treat the further submissions as a
    fresh claim which would give the Appellant a further right  of  appeal.
    Indeed, he gave an undertaking to that effect.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  AMS  Green
promulgated on 5 August  2017  does  not  disclose  an  error  of  law.   We
therefore uphold that decision.


Signed:  L K Smith     Dated: 26 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

