
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12343/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th February 2018                      |On 28th February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [f g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Olorunfemi (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya born on [ ]  1981.   The  Appellant
    has an extensive immigration history which is set out at  paragraph  16
    of  the  Secretary  of  State's  detailed  reasons  for  refusal.   The
    Appellant's application for asylum  was  based  upon  a  fear  that  if
    returned to Libya his life would be at risk due to the present  country
    situation and that he had a claim pursuant to Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    that would be breached if removed as he had been in  the  UK  for  over
    twelve years.  His application was refused by the Secretary of State by
    notice dated 24th October 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Henderson sitting at Bradford on 24th  May  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  13th  June  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 22nd June 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds tended that rather than  considering
    the Appellant's individual circumstances the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    appeared to conclude that anyone returning to Libya at the current time
    regardless of their circumstances, would be at risk of an Article 15(c)
    breach by simple virtue of their presence.  It was submitted that  that
    contradicts  the  Secretary  of  State's  latest  Country  Policy   and
    Information Note on Libya.  Further it was contended  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had fallen into error in  failing  to  resolve  his
    ultimate decision with the  substantial  findings  on  the  Appellant's
    general incredibility.

 4. On 27th September 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Boyes  granted
    permission to appeal.  There does not appear to have been any  rule  24
    response lodged in this matter.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Olorunfemi.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.  I note that this is an  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State.  For the  sake  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process the Secretary of State is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Respondent and [FG] as the Appellant.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Bates accepts that the Grounds of Appeal are limited  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's challenge is to the grant by way of  a  Convention
    reason.  He takes me to paragraph 38 and the Appellant's claim that his
    family are religious and to the acceptance by the judge therein when he
    states:

         "I accept however that having spent thirteen years in this  country
         he regarded himself as a westernised individual and that the events
         of the last few years in Libya have served to  undermine  that  his
         lack of religious beliefs and  his  westernised  lifestyle  are  no
         longer something which will be tolerated in the current  conditions
         in Libya where tribal, religious and political delineations are all
         important."

    Mr Bates points out that nowhere  within  the  determination  does  the
    Appellant state that he is secular and he fails to see  how  the  judge
    has drawn that specific conclusion.

 7. He accepts that the judge  has  in  fact  pre-empted  the  most  recent
    authority of ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 (IAC) and the
    latest Country Policy  and  Information  Note  on  Libya  published  in
    January 2018 and that  consequently  following  that  authority  it  is
    likely that my decision will be the same but he still wishes  to  point
    out that the judge has still made a finding under a  Convention  reason
    when he should not.

 8. Mr Olorunfemi points out that the Appellant's credibility was  assessed
    at paragraphs 28 and 29 and that  the  judge  found  him  credible  and
    therefore that he qualified for refugee status and that he was entitled
    to reach his conclusions.

Country Guidance

 9. This is now to be found in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya  CG  [2017]   UKUT
    00263 (IAC).  That country guidance  of  the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal is authority for the following proposition:

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

The Agreement

10. Mr Bates indicates that if there is a  withdrawal  by  the  Appellant's
    legal representative seeking to find the Appellant's appeal  should  be
    allowed for a Convention reason and he is prepared to concede that  the
    Appellant should, following ZMM, have his appeal allowed on  the  basis
    of humanitarian protection.  He points that this will have no effect of
    time for which an Appellant's grant is made.

11. On that basis, and on  the  request  of  Mr  Olorunfemi  that  this  is
    recorded in writing, he is prepared to accede to such a request and  to
    withdraw his Convention appeal on the Secretary of  State's  concession
    that the Appellant's appeal from the Entry Clearance Officer is allowed
    pursuant to Article 15(c).  It seems to me as a matter of law  that  is
    the correct approach to this case and I endorse it.

Notice of Decision

12. It being conceded by the Secretary of State that the Appellant's appeal
    succeeds following country guidance authority  pursuant  to  his  claim
    under Article 15(c) of Directive 2004/83 the  Appellant  withdraws  his
    Convention appeal from the Notice of Refusal of the Secretary of  State
    and the appeal is allowed  pursuant  to  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Article 15(c) of Directive 2004/83.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




