
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/12347/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 5 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     M H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1.  FtT  Judge  Rose  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 February 2020.

 2. On 31 March 2020, FtT Judge Fisher granted permission to appeal to  the
    UT, because at [19] Judge Rose took section 8 of the 2004  Act  as  the
    starting point.  There was also concern over [21], where the judge said
    he would have  expected  independent  verification  of  documents  from
    Bangladesh.

 3. In submissions dated 10 June 2020, the respondent accepts that the  FtT
    materially erred in law on section  8,  because  although  that  was  a
    relevant factor, it was not the starting point.

 4. The concession is correctly made.

 5. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 6. There is a presumption that the UT will proceed to remake decisions, of
    which parties are reminded in  directions  issued  with  the  grant  of
    permission.  However, the nature  of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Rose.

 8. The anonymity direction made by the FtT is preserved at this stage.

 9. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman      Date: 28/7/2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





