
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12555/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2018                             |On 2nd May 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     h h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dickson, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male  citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  [  ]  1999.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the  UK  via  Turkey,  Greece,  Germany  and
    France on 3rd May 2016.  On that day the Appellant applied for  asylum.
    That application was  refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  an  Asylum
    Decision dated 28th October  2016.   The  Appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge (the Judge) sitting
    at Birmingham on 27th April 2017.  He decided to dismiss the appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  for  the
    reasons given in his Decision dated 1st May 2017.  The Appellant sought
    leave to appeal that decision and on 2nd October 2017  such  permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found the Appellant's account
    of events in Iraq not to be credible as the Judge stated  in  paragraph
    17 of the Decision.  He found the Appellant's account to be implausible
    despite a report from an expert, Dr George, indicating to the contrary.



 4. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Dickson  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    application and argued that the Judge had erred  in-law  in  coming  to
    this conclusion.  The Judge had relied excessively on what he found  to
    be the implausibility of the Appellant's account, and did not  put  his
    concerns to the Appellant during the course of the hearing.   This  was
    contrary to the decision in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037.   Further,
    the Judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  evidence  of  the  expert.
    Whereas the Judge had acknowledged the age of the Appellant, he had not
    given him the benefit of any doubt.  There had been no reference to the
    fact  that  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness,  nor  to   the
    Presidential Guidance relating to such witnesses.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni submitted that there had been no such  error  of
    law.   The  grounds  of  application  amounted  to  no  more   than   a
    disagreement with the decision of the Judge.  The Judge had  considered
    all the relevant evidence and had made findings open to him  upon  that
    evidence.  He had given adequate reasons  for  his  findings,  and  had
    referred to the Appellant's age at paragraph 38 of the  Decision.   The
    Judge had also considered the expert's report, and had directed himself
    appropriately.

 6. I find a material error of law in the decision of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  The Judge's decision is based entirely  upon  his
    finding that the Appellant was not credible.   However,  the  Appellant
    was still 16 years of age when he arrived in the UK, and was two months
    short of his 18th birthday at the time of the hearing before the Judge.
     He was therefore a vulnerable witness.  It  is  true  that  the  Judge
    referred to the Appellant's age at paragraph 19 of the Decision, and at
    paragraph 38 stated that he  had  borne  in  mind  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was a minor.  However,  the  Judge  made  no  finding  as  to
    whether the Appellant was a vulnerable witness, and made  no  reference
    to the Presidential Guidance relating to such witnesses.  It  therefore
    cannot be said that the Judge treated the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness when considering credibility, nor that he applied the  contents
    of the Guidance.  This alone is a  sufficient  error  of  law  for  the
    Judge's decision to be set aside.

 7. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal.  That  decision
    will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with 7.2.(b) of
    the Practice Statements as  there  remains  a  considerable  amount  of
    judicial fact-finding to be done.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  order  for  anonymity  which  I  continue
considering the age of the Appellant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date  30th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

