
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 21st May 2018                             |On 9 November 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                    SASS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms S. Khan, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born in 1993. He pursues  before
    this Tribunal his appeal against a decision to refuse him protection.




    Anonymity Direction


 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Case History


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom  in  May  2016  and
    asserted a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia arising from his
    ethnicity and imputed political opinion: he claimed to be a  member  of
    the Ashraf minority who was at risk of recruitment by Al-Shabaab.


 4. By a decision dated 3rd November 2016 the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department rejected the claim in  its  entirety,  finding  several
    reasons to disbelieve the Appellant's account,  including  his  claimed
    clan affiliation.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. He  and  his  father
    gave live evidence. The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cohen)  did  not
    accept the Appellant's evidence and in its determination dated the 24th
    April 2017 explained why. Nor  was  the  Tribunal  prepared  to  attach
    weight to the evidence of the Appellant's father, since  that  evidence
    was in material respects in conflict  with  the  Appellant's  own.  The
    appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant sought, and  on  the  5th  September  2017  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to this Tribunal. The matter came before me on the
    21st November 2017. Several grounds  were  pursued,  and  rejected:  my
    'error of law' decision  is  appended  to  this  determination.  I  was
    however satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
    approach to the  prevailing  security  and  humanitarian  situation  in
    Somalia. The Appellant's representative before the First-tier  Tribunal
    had made detailed submissions urging the First-tier Tribunal to  depart
    from the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  on  Article  15  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  She had  referred  the  Tribunal  to  country
    background  evidence  which,  it  was   submitted,   was   capable   of
    demonstrating that the situation had deteriorated to  the  extent  that
    MOJ should no longer be followed.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  failed
    to address any of this evidence or submissions, and had simply  applied
    the ratio of MOJ.   Given the nature of the submissions I was satisfied
    that this was an error, and that  the  Tribunal  had  been  obliged  to
    address evidence specifically relied upon before it.  I  therefore  set
    that part of the  decision  aside  and  directed  that  the  matter  be
    relisted for further hearing.


 7. There then followed a prolonged delay whilst consideration was given to
    whether this case was a suitable vehicle for new 'country guidance'  to
    be issued. Neither party having expressed any enthusiasm for that idea,
    the matter was eventually listed before me in Manchester, with Ms  Khan
    now appearing for the Appellant. The parties have my apologies for  the
    delay that has followed thereafter.



    The Matter in Issue

 8. The central matter left in issue in this appeal is whether this passage
    from the headnote in MOJ holds true, for this Appellant, today:


         Generally, a  person  who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
         associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government  or
         official administration or any NGO or  international  organisation)
         on returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will  face  no
         real risk of persecution  or  risk  of  harm  such  as  to  require
         protection under Article 3 of the ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive.


 9. I am further asked to consider  whether  the  Appellant  qualifies  for
    protection  with  reference  to  Article  15(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive  on  the  grounds  that  he  would  likely  face  destitution
    amounting to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  In  addressing  these
    questions  I  am  obliged  to  consider  the   Appellant's   individual
    characteristics against  the  available  country  background  material.
    Before I do so I remind myself of the pertinent findings in MOJ.




    The Findings in MOJ (Somalia)


10. The live evidence in MOJ was heard in February 2014 with an  update  in
    September of that year. The most recent  written  material  before  the
    Tribunal was dated January 2014. The judgment was handed  down  on  the
    24th September 2014.


11. As noted above, the central  finding  in  MOJ  was  that  there  is  no
    'Article 15(c) risk' to ordinary civilians in Mogadishu.  The  Tribunal
    found there to have been  a  durable  change  in  that  al-Shabaab  had
    completely withdrawn from the city. Although the statistics on civilian
    death and injury were unreliable the Tribunal was satisfied that  there
    had been a significant reduction in casualties  since  2011,  with  al-
    Shabaab being limited to attacks on governmental and military  targets.
    Ordinary civilians could limit the risk to  their  person  by  avoiding
    such potential targets, ie by not being outside  government  buildings.
    Inter-clan violence was no longer a feature of life in Mogadishu.

12. Individuals returning to Mogadishu from the West could be  expected  to
    turn to their family for support; if they have no immediate family they
    would be able to turn to their clan, given  that  the  clans  were  now
    providing social support mechanisms for their  members.   There  is  an
    economic boom in Mogadishu and it would be for  the  individual  facing
    return to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  benefit  from  the
    resulting opportunities.  Those with  relatives  abroad  could  receive
    remittances.  For the individual with no immediate family, however, the
    Tribunal considered that the following matters would still be  relevant
    to the individual's ability to re-establish himself in the city:

            . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
            . length of absence from Mogadishu;
            . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
            . access to financial resources;
            . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
              or self-employment;
            . availability of remittances from abroad;
            . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
            . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
              enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

13. If, having considered all  of  those  factors,  it  appeared  that  the
    individual in question would not be able to support himself, the likely
    outcome would be relocation to an IDP  camp.  The  Tribunal  held  that
    conditions  in  such  camps  were  likely  to  fall  below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards.




    The Appellant


14. The facts accepted by the First-tier Tribunal are  that  the  Appellant
    was born in Mogadishu in 1993. When he was  14  he  was  taken  by  his
    mother to Ethiopia, where they lived  with  his  siblings  until  2015.
    During the approximately eight years that the Appellant was in Ethiopia
    he was living in a refugee camp.  The Appellant's own evidence is  that
    he returned to Somalia in 2015. He stayed for approximately 2-3  months
    before travelling  on  to  the  United  Kingdom  via  Kenya,  Malaysia,
    Indonesia and China.  The Tribunal rejected the Appellant's claim to be
    from a minority clan.


15. In his witness statement dated the 12th  December  2016  the  Appellant
    states that whilst in Somalia he lived with his  cousin  in  Mogadishu.
    He claims to have now lost contact with this cousin, and that he has no
    living relatives in  Somalia:  this  was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. His father states that the Appellant  has  an  elder  brother
    still in Somalia.   I have not been given  any  information  about  the
    Appellant's work or education history other than that provided  by  the
    Appellant when he was interviewed by  an  immigration  officer  in  May
    2016: he said that he had completed high school in 2010 (presumably  in
    the refugee camp in Ethiopia) and that he has never had a job.   Whilst
    the family were in Ethiopia they  were  supported  by  the  Appellant's
    father, who was by then in the United Kingdom.  Whilst  in  Somalia  he
    was supported by his cousin.  Whilst in Kenya (en route to  the  United
    Kingdom) he was supported by friends of his cousin.   The  same  cousin
    paid for his trip to the United Kingdom.



    The Country Background Evidence


16.  Ms Khan helpfully produced a  bundle  of  updated  country  background
    material in which relevant passages had been highlighted.  She  divided
    her submissions on the evidence into two sections: first, she addressed
    the security situation, then the  general  living  conditions  and  the
    prospects for economic survival of a returnee.


    Security Situation


17. Ms Khan identified three areas which she submitted  to  have  undergone
    significant change since the Tribunal made its decision in MOJ.

18. The first related to the activities of al-Shabaab and  related  Islamic
    extremists.  At the time of MOJ  the  group  had  been  comprehensively
    routed from the city and had been driven back into the rural hinterland
    of southern Somalia. Its capacity to operate  within  the  capital  had
    been reduced to isolated attacks. Ms Khan pointed to recent evidence to
    the effect that the group  has  managed  to  continue  and  expand  its
    activities:

               . In May 2018 the UNSG[1] reported that  a  series  of  small
                 improvised-device explosions and targeted assassinations in
                 January 2018 had escalated in February when an estimated 40
                 people  were  killed  and  20  injured  in   twin   suicide
                 bombings[2], for which al-Shabaab  claimed  responsibility.
                 They carried out three further attacks on the outskirts  of
                 the city in March. Since then the number of  assassinations
                 attributed to the group has increased.


               . In March 2018 the 'monthly briefing' produced by UNISOM and
                 OHCHR[3] stated that in February 2018 there had been a 225%
                 increase in al-Shabaab related  abductions  since  January,
                 and a 37%  increase  in  casualties  caused  by  al-Shabaab
                 attacks.

               . In January 2018 Human Right Watch[4] reported  as  accurate
                 UNSOM figures of 1,228 civilian  fatalities  for  the  year
                 2017, of which approximately half were  attributed  to  al-
                 Shabaab attacks. This figure appears to be  for  the  whole
                 country, but special mention is made of increased  violence
                 in Mogadishu, including the October 2017 truck  bomb  which
                 killed at least 358 people in a market in central Mogadishu
                 - the deadliest single attack in the country's history.

               . The Home Office CPIN[5] of July 2017 acknowledges that  al-
                 Shabaab appear to  be  increasingly  capable  of  launching
                 larger, more complex targeted attacks than in 2014-15  with
                 vehicle  born  explosions  occurring  every  few  weeks  in
                 Mogadishu. Attacks have included suicide assaults on hotels
                 used by the international community, drive-by shooting  and
                 assassinations.   The CPIN  cites  the  Danish  Immigration
                 Service report for 2017 which concludes that  although  al-
                 Shabaab have no permanent presence in Mogadishu the city is
                 under "constant threat" from the group which  now  has  the
                 'reach' to launch attacks at will. Several sources reported
                 to the DIS that al-Shabaab  have  infiltrated  institutions
                 such  as  Villa  Somalia  and  the  international  airport.
                 Although the overall number  of  attacks  is  smaller  than
                 previously, the attacks  themselves  are  larger  and  more
                 complex ie multi-person suicide attacks instead of a single
                 hand grenade.  In October 2016 the chair of the UN Security
                 Council reported that  between  2016  and  2017  al-Shabaab
                 attacks  took  120   lives   including   those   of   three
                 parliamentarians and one government minister.


               . The July 2017 CPIN cites various sources to the effect that
                 al-Shabaab car bombs/suicide attacks killed  28  people  in
                 Mogadishu during January 2017, 34 people  in  February,  28
                 people in March,  6 in May and over 20 in  June.    Various
                 other -greater -figures are cited for the overall death and
                 injury rate but it is unclear whether these relate  to  the
                 country as a whole.  Landinfo estimate that during 2016 al-
                 Shabaab killed 399 people in Mogadishu, with a further  186
                 fatalities being attributed  to  'unknown'  actors,  94  by
                 government forces and 2 by clan militias.

19. The  second,  connected,  area  of  evidence  related  to  the  general
    political volatility in  Mogadishu.  In  MOJ  the  Tribunal  had  found
    political violence in the city  to  have  largely  abated,  and  to  be
    confined to isolated attacks on specific  targets.  Ms  Khan  submitted
    that in the four years since that case was heard the stability  evident
    in 2013-14 had  been  significantly  undermined.  In  addition  to  the
    violence perpetrated by terrorist actors, the UNSG reported in May 2018
    that  a  political  stand-off  between  the  Federal   Parliament   and
    Government had resulted in militiamen being deployed to the streets  by
    both sides, with the crisis only being averted when the speaker of  the
    House of the People resigning to avoid further escalation.

20. The third  point  was  that  recent  evidence  flatly  contradicts  the
    conclusion in MOJ that inter-clan violence is a thing of  the  past  in
    Somalia. The 2017 CPIN cites research by the Danish Immigration Service
    which concluded that clan violence due to  disputes  over  land,  blood
    revenge or political control is "widespread". The DIS believe that many
    attacks attributed to al-Shabaab or similar groups are in fact  clashes
    between different clan  factions.  The  Director  of  one  humanitarian
    agency interviewed believed that clan violence presents a greater  risk
    to civilians than al-Shabaab attack. Amnesty International continue  to
    report a high  level  of  human  rights  abuses  carried  out  by  clan
    militias. In May 2018 the UNSG reported that inter-clan  tensions  were
    inflamed during the political crisis in March-April 2018 and that inter-
    clan fighting by members of the Somali security forces was reported  in
    Mogadishu.

    Socio-Economic Situation


21. The UNSG (May 2018) reported that the economy continued  to  grow,  but
    not sufficiently to improve the lives of average Somalis.  Drought  has
    led to an increase in food  prices.  Famine  was  averted  in  2017  by
    international donations but it remains a looming  risk  throughout  the
    country.  Although  the  business  environment  remained  'structurally
    weak' the UNSG considered that the private sector continued to  have  a
    key role in creating growth, in particular in providing jobs for  young
    people.  A separate CPIN[6] published in  July  2017  reported  on  the
    humanitarian situation in central and southern  Somalia.   Although  Ms
    Khan properly cautioned that the Tribunal was not bound by  any  policy
    statements therein, she relied on the document insofar as it provided a
    more recent snapshot of the economy in Mogadishu.




    Discussion and Findings


22.  The Appellant is by any measure an "ordinary  civilian".  He  has  not
    shown himself to  have  any  particular  vulnerabilities.  In  MOJ  the
    Tribunal held that such a person, absent specific risk, would  face  no
    real risk of serious harm.


23. The Appellant submits that the conclusions reached  in  MOJ  no  longer
    hold good, because the facts on the ground have changed.

24. I accept that the situation in  Mogadishu  has  significantly  worsened
    since the decision in MOJ. Ms Khan has shown that  in  respect  of  the
    three key indicators she identified, the Tribunal's  decision  was,  it
    can be said in retrospect, unduly optimistic.  Al-Shabaab have not been
    defeated: in fact they are mounting   large and complex attacks in  the
    city, resulting in many hundreds of civilian deaths  during  2017-2018.
    Political stability has not  been  achieved:  tensions  remain  to  the
    extent that a recent stand-off  between  parliamentarians  resulted  in
    armed men being deployed to the streets.  Clan warfare has not  ceased:
    all observers  concur  that  it  remains  widespread,   and  that  clan
    militias continue to perpetrate human rights abuses.

25. As for the socio-economic situation the  most  significant  development
    since the Tribunal heard MOJ is that there was a drought in 2016-17 and
    that this has led to  an  increasing  risk  of  famine  throughout  the
    country. I was not shown any evidence to indicate  that  the  'economic
    boom' in the private sector in Mogadishu has ended.  As of May of  this
    year the UNSG considered that it still  has  a  key  role  to  play  in
    creating opportunities for young people in the city.

26. Applying those findings to the position of this  Appellant  I  find  as
    follows.

27. The Appellant has little experience of life in Mogadishu. Apart from  a
    short stay of 2-3 months in 2015, he has only lived there has a  child.
    He therefore has very limited 'insider knowledge' of how  things  work,
    of areas to avoid, or how best to go about getting  work.   He  has  no
    work experience and there is no evidence before me indicating  that  he
    has any skill-set that might enhance his chances of finding a job.

28. What he does have, however, are close family members in the city. It is
    the Appellant's evidence that when he returned to Mogadishu in 2015  he
    lived with a cousin, who subsequently paid for his trip to  Europe  and
    facilitated his accommodation, with friends, whilst he  was  in  Kenya.
    The First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's evidence that  he  has
    subsequently lost touch  with  this  cousin.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    further noted that the Appellant's father had  given  evidence  to  the
    effect that the Appellant has an elder brother in Mogadishu.   Even  if
    the father's evidence on this  matter  is  discounted,  it  remains  an
    undisturbed finding of fact that the Appellant has a cousin  living  in
    Mogadishu who has previously gone to  considerable  lengths  to  assist
    him. I am unable to conclude that this cousin would  not  do  the  same
    again, should the Appellant return  there  today.    I  note  that  the
    Appellant also has close family members living  in  this  country:  his
    father supported the family by way of remittances whilst they  were  in
    Ethiopia, and there is no credible evidence to suggest  that  he  would
    not be able to do so again.  I am therefore satisfied that there is  no
    real risk of the Appellant being forced to reside in an IDP  camp  upon
    arrival in Mogadishu. He has - at least - a cousin  with  whom  he  can
    stay, and can look to his family in the United  Kingdom  for  financial
    support.  Although he has no work experience or qualifications to speak
    of, the appellant is a healthy young man and there is no reason why  he
    would be unable, in time, to find employment and support himself.


29. The question remains: would the Appellant be at risk of harm by  virtue
    of his presence as a civilian in Mogadishu?


30. I cannot be satisfied that the Appellant is at any risk of being caught
    up in clan violence. The evidence indicates that the clashes  occurring
    are between rival militias, and there is nothing to suggest that he  is
    in, or wishes to join, such a militia.   He is not from a minority clan
    and the evidence does not establish that a  single  male  member  of  a
    majority clan, personally uninvolved in clan disputes, would be at  any
    risk from the militia of another clan.   He has failed  to  demonstrate
    that he faced a real risk of harm during the period that he was last in
    Mogadishu.   The fact that there is increasing political instability in
    Somalia generally is not capable of establishing that there is  a  risk
    of indiscriminate violence to this appellant.  There continues to be  a
    functioning government, and security service.

31. The real focus of Ms Khan's  submissions  was  the  undoubted  rise  in
    violence  perpetrated  by  Islamic  extremists.   I   note   that   the
    Appellant's claims to have been at risk from al-Shabaab  in  2015  have
    been roundly rejected:  I can find nothing in the evidence before me to
    suggest that he would be at risk of forced recruitment today.   Nor  is
    there anything to suggest that the Appellant would be at risk from  one
    of the targeted assassinations and abductions being carried out by  the
    organisation.   The  country  background  material  provided   by   the
    Appellant's representatives demonstrates however that  al-Shabaab,  and
    related Islamic extremists, have mounted several large-scale attacks in
    the past year, and that the true targets  notwithstanding,  these  have
    resulted in mass civilian casualties. Various estimates are made of the
    number of dead and injured.  UNSOM and  HRW  report  that  there  were,
    countrywide, 1228 fatalities as a result of political violence in 2017,
    and of these killings, approximately half are attributed to  al-Shabaab
    militants.   This would certainly include the 358 people killed by  the
    October 2017 market bomb in central Mogadishu, but for the  purpose  of
    this decision I am prepared to assume that all of the approximately 615
    people murdered by al-Shabaab in 2017 were killed in the city. That  is
    a rate, averaged, of approximately 50 per month, and this appears to be
    consistent with the evidence going into 2018 which indicates a  similar
    level of fatalities.


32. I accept Ms Khan's submission that Article 15(c) is not to be  measured
    by the sole determinant of deaths,  but  that  other  casualties,  both
    physical and mental, must also be weighed in the  balance.    I  accept
    that where terrorist organisations are mounting attacks such  as  truck
    bombs in public places, and  planting  IEDs,  there  is  likely  to  be
    amongst the population at large an apprehension of violence and a  fear
    of being caught up in it.

33. I have had regard to the figures of the dead and injured,  and  to  the
    fact that the political situation in Somalia is not as  stable  as  the
    Tribunal found it to be in 2014 when MOJ was heard.   I  bear  in  mind
    that contrary to the conclusions reached in that case, clan warfare  is
    not a thing of the past in Somalia. I am  however  unable  to  conclude
    that the situation has deteriorated to the extent that Article 15(c) is
    engaged.   That is because Mogadishu is a  city  of  over  2.5  million
    inhabitants. Even if the fatality figures were to be multiplied by 5 to
    take account of the injured,  that still means that on a monthly  basis
    the percentage of those directly affected by violence would still  only
    be  0.01%  of  the  population.  That  is  not  a  figure  capable   of
    establishing that the Appellant, by virtue simply of  his  presence  in
    the city, would face a real risk of being subject to a  threat  to  his
    life or person. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.




    Decision


34. The appeal is dismissed.


35. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         20th September 2018


                           -----------------------
[1] United Nations, Report of the Secretary General on Somalia, 2nd May
2018
[2] In the documents before me figures cited for the deaths in this
incident varied between 13 and 40. In submissions Mrs Aboni accepted that
this was likely due to deaths amongst the injured increasing as time went
by.
[3] United Nationals Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 'Human Rights
and Protection in Somalia - Monthly Brief' 23rd March 2018
[4] Human Rights Watch World Report: Somalia 18th January 2018
[5] Home Office Country Policy and Information Note 'Somalia (South and
Central) Fear of al-Shabaab' 17th July 2017
[6]Home Office Country Policy and Information Note 'Somalia (South and
Central) Security and Humanitarian Situation 27th July 2017

