
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12416/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On December 6, 2017                   |On December 8, 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MRS R H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on April 17, 2016 and claimed asylum.

 3. The respondent refused his protection claim on December 12, 2016  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  November  8,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  GRJ  Robson
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on March 31, 2017 and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on April 24, 2017 the  Judge  refused  her  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed the article 8 ECHR  decision  on  May  8,  2017.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Dineen on August 30, 2017. The respondent lodged  a  Rule  24  response
    dated September 14, 2017 in which she accepted there was  an  error  in
    law because the Judge had  applied  the  wrong  test  at  [84]  of  his
    decision. When considering article 8 ECHR he applied an "insurmountable
    obstacles" test as against a "reasonableness" test.

 6. The matter came before me on the above  date.   The  appellant  was  in
    attendance with her husband and three children. Since the last  hearing
    the appellant had given birth to their third child.

 7. The appellant's representative lodged an application under Rule  15(2A)
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules   2008   seeking
    permission to adduce  further  evidence.  This  evidence  included  the
    appellant's son's birth certificate  dated  September  5,  2017  and  a
    council tax bill which demonstrated  her  husband  lived  at  the  same
    address that she did.

 8. Mr Harrison confirmed that the respondent accepted there  had  been  an
    error in law in respect of the article 8 claim for the reasons given in
    the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission.

 9. I asked Mr Harrison what the respondent's position was in light of  the
    fact the appellant now had three British children and the  respondent's
    own policy entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)  and  Private
    Life: 10 Year Routes."

10. This particular policy states-
         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano."

11. The policy goes on to explain
         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer. In such cases it will usually be  appropriate  to
         grant leave to the parent or  primary  carer,  to  enable  them  to
         remain  in  the  UK  with  the  child,  provided  that   there   is
         satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship. It may, however, be appropriate to  refuse  to  grant
         leave where the conduct of the parent or primary carer  gives  rise
         to considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
         child could otherwise  stay  with  another  parent  or  alternative
         primary carer in the UK or in the EU."

12. Mr Harrison accepted the appellant's  children  and  her  husband  were
    British citizens. The young children were settled in this  country  and
    the youngest had been born here. Given their situation I  am  satisfied
    it was in the children's best interests  for  them  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. However, the "best interests" assessment does not automatically resolve
    the reasonableness question. If it did then parliament would have  said
    as much when drafting the legislation. It therefore follows  that  even
    where the children's best interests are to remain, it may still be  not
    unreasonable to require either the children or the appellant to leave.

14. Neither the appellant nor her husband have a criminal  record  and  she
    claimed asylum on arrival in the United  Kingdom.  No  adverse  factors
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act were raised by Mr Harrison.

15. Mr Harrison accepted that the correct test under either Section EX.1(a)
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or  article  8  ECHR  (applying
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act)  was  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK".

16. Applying the respondent's aforementioned policy and in the  absence  of
    any submissions to the contrary, I am satisfied  that  removal  of  the
    appellant would be unreasonable  and  would  breach  her  rights  under
    article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the
    article 8 assessment did involve the making of an error on a  point  of
    law.  I set aside that decision and I remake that decision.

18. I allow the appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR.

Signed                              Date     06.11.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was paid.

Signed                              Date     06.11.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
