

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal no:
PA/12698/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At  Field House                 |      Decision and Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                        |
|On 26 March 2019                      |      On 12 April 2019             |


                                   Before:

            LORD UIST (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                HASSAN AHMED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:       Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:    Miss Nicolaou of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
Miller LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M A Khan) dated 28 January 2019 to allow
    the appeal by the respondent,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  10
    September 1996, against the decision of the appellant dated 10  October
    2017 to deport the respondent as a foreign criminal whose  presence  in
    the United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good.

 2. The basis of the appeal  is  that  there  is  no  evidence  within  the
    determination that the judge considered the mandatory  requirements  of
    sections 117A to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("the 2002 Act") although he stated at paragraph 60  that  he  had
    considered section 117A and 117B of the 2014 (sic) Act. He should  have
    first ascertained whether the appellant was a foreign criminal in terms
    of section 117D and, if he was, whether exceptions 1 and 2  of  section
    117C were met. In respect of exception 1 he failed to consider  whether
    the respondent was socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
    Kingdom and whether  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Bangladesh.  In  particular,  he  failed  to  apply  the
    reasoning in the case of Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. In respect of  exception  2  under  section
    117C(5) he failed  to  ask  whether  the  effect  of  the  respondent's
    deportation on his partner would be unduly  harsh.  He  also  erred  in
    finding that deportation would be disproportionate in the circumstances
    under article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. In reply the respondent submitted that, while it is correct to say that
    the judge  did  not  explicitly  make  reference  to  the  words  "very
    significant obstacles to reintegration" that test was  referred  to  in
    the respondent's skeleton argument, which the judge said  at  paragraph
    25 of his determination that he had taken into account. In light of the
    evidence accepted by the judge and his findings there could be no doubt
    that he found the respondent to be culturally integrated in the UK  and
    that he would find  very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in
    Bangladesh. The judge had engaged with the requirements of section  117
    in his determination , having made extensive  reference  throughout  to
    the public interest in deportation (paragraphs 55-58) and  specifically
    referred to section 117 at paragraph 60.

 4. Further and in the alternative, if the judge did  make  errors  in  law
    they were not material.  As  stated  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  IA
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    323, an error of law will be regarded as material unless the  decision-
    maker must have reached the same conclusion without the error.

 5. In our opinion it is plain, from a  reading  of  the  judge's  decision
    that, for the reasons given in the submission  by  the  appellant,  the
    judge did make a material error of law by not  carrying  out  the  core
    exercise which he required to carry out under section 117C of the  2002
    Act. It is not possible to read into this decision that  there  was  an
    assessment of whether the appellant  met  the  exceptions  set  out  in
    section 117C and also not possible to conclude that the appeal  had  to
    be allowed notwithstanding that error of law. We  shall  therefore  set
    aside his decision and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    fresh hearing before a different judge.



    Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside  to  be  re-made  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

       Signed: [pic]
       Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
       pp LORD UIST (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
    Dated: 10 April 2019

