


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12468/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 16th August 2017                     |On: 21st August 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     AMN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
                       Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Somalia  born  in  1985.    He  has
    permission to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge OR Williams) to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse him protection.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum at port on the 30th April 2016. He claimed
    to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia  for  reasons  of
    his ethnicity (membership of a non-majority clan) and imputed political
    opinion (refusal to join Al-Shabaab).


 4. In her letter dated 25th October 2016 the Respondent refused  to  grant
    protection.  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Wanlaweyn in the Lower Shabelle and that he was a member of the  Shanta
    Alemood clan, otherwise known as the Shanta Caleemood.   This  is  part
    of the Digil confederation, distinguished from nomadic Somali clans  by
    the fact that they are connected not just by  common  ancestry  but  by
    alliances and adoption.  The Appellant's clan has been prominent in the
    Lower Shabelle, and "fairly secure" there, since 2006.  It  is  one  of
    the major clans in the area.  The Respondent evaluated the  Appellant's
    account against the background information on his home area  and  found
    the two to be mutually inconsistent. It was not accepted  that  he  was
    reasonably likely to have suffered oppression at the hands  of  a  more
    significant clan, or that Al-Shabaab would have  repeatedly  threatened
    him after he refused to join them.  It was his account  that  they  had
    visited his farm between 20 and 30  times.  The  Respondent  considered
    that it was implausible that this group would have  exhausted  so  much
    time and energy trying to recruit a single reluctant farmer.

 5. The Appellant appealed and it a decision dated 10th February  2017  the
    First-tier Tribunal rejected his historical account and  finding  there
    to be no current risk of harm, dismissed the appeal. The  key  findings
    were:

              i) That the Appellant was a member of a  majority  clan  which
                 had demonstrated strong financial and community stability;


             ii) The description of forced  recruitment  by  Al-Shabaab  was
                 implausible and contradictory and therefore not  worthy  of
                 belief;

            iii) The Appellant would be able to return to Mogadishu where he
                 would have family and clan support, and where he  would  be
                 able to support himself using his skills as a farmer.

 6. The grounds of appeal were lodged in time, and permission  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on the 5th June 2017.  The  grounds
    of challenge are:


              i) That the determination is  based  on  errors  of  fact,  in
                 particular:


                      a) The Appellant is not part of a 'majority' clan  in
                         the sense that it is understood in anthropological
                         terms in respect of Somalia (and reflected in  the
                         background information and caselaw);


                      b) The Appellant's clan do  not  have  a  significant
                         presence in Mogadishu;

                      c) The Tribunal has misunderstood what relatives  the
                         Appellant has and where.


             ii) The Tribunal has  failed  to  take  material  matters  into
                 account, in particular:


                      a) The evidence that when  the  Appellant  previously
                         went to Mogadishu, he was forced to live in an IDP
                         camp outside the city.




    Discussion and Findings


 7. I need not address all of the grounds, since Mr Diwnycz  conceded  that
    the errors of fact alleged  were  made  out,  and  that  they  must  be
    material to  the  overall  decision.   For  instance,  central  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant would be able to live  in  Mogadishu  was
    the finding at [30] that the he has family in the city to whom he could
    turn. Ms Warren submitted, and Mr Diwnycz accepted, that  the  Tribunal
    had here misunderstood the position. Contrary to the suggestion in  the
    determination the Appellant has two ex-wives. One lives with her  uncle
    in the Shabelle.  The other has remarried and is believed  to  live  in
    Mogadishu but the Appellant does not  know  where.  The  basis  of  the
    finding at 31 that his ex-wife/uncle would be able  to  assist  him  is
    therefore unclear.  Mr Diwnycz further accepted that the  Tribunal  had
    omitted to direct itself to the evidence that the Appellant  had  spent
    time as an IDP in a camp on the outskirts of Mogadishu, and  that  this
    was plainly relevant to the question of whether internal flight  was  a
    reasonable option: MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC).

 8. In view of the Respondent's concession I find that the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for error of  law.   I  would
    just like to deal briefly with the position of  the  Appellant's  clan.
    The Shanta Alemood /Caleemood are a sub-clan of the Rahanweyn, part  of
    the Digil confederation of clans.  They  are  an  agriculturalist  clan
    grouping based in, amongst other places, the Shabelle.   The First-tier
    Tribunal correctly noted that this group are in the 'majority' in  that
    area, in that they live there  in  significant  numbers,  greater  than
    those of other clans  around  them.   This  was  the  finding  made  at
    paragraphs 20-22 of the determination,  where  the  Tribunal  concludes
    that in that area this group  is  able  to  provide  its  members  with
    "strong financial and community stability". No issue is taken with that
    finding. Where the Appellant criticises the  determination  is  in  its
    transposition of the term 'majority', from its use in ordinary English,
    to its conclusions at 23 and 33 that the clan was a 'majority' clan  in
    the sense that this term is used in anthropological studies of Somalia,
    and in asylum law.   The term 'majority clan' has historically in these
    contexts been used interchangeably with the term 'noble' to denote  one
    of the four large clan groupings which have dominated the country since
    at least the fall of Siad Barre.  The term 'noble' derives  from  their
    claimed descent from the Prophet Mohammad. See for instance at  [4.1.1]
    of the Country Policy and Information Note Somalia: Majority clans  and
    minority groups in south and central Somalia  (Version  2.0,  published
    June 2017):

         'The 'noble' clan families trace their origin back to a mythical
         common
         ancestor called Samaal, who is said to be descended from the
         Prophet
         Mohammed. These groups are nomadic pastoralists. The clan family is
         the
         highest level of clanship. Its members can count up to 30
         generations back
         to a common ancestor. The four "noble" (Samaale) clan families are
         the
         following:

            . The Darod are usually divided into three major groups:
              Ogaden, Marehan
              and Harti. The Harti are a federation of three clans: the
            Majerteen are the
              main clan in Puntland; the Dulbahante and Warsangeli live in
            the
              disputed border areas between Puntland and Somaliland. The
            Ogaden
              are the most important Somali clan in Ethiopia, but also
            quite influential in
              both Jubba regions, while the Marehan are present in South
            and Central
              Somalia.
            . The Hawiye mainly live in South/Central Somalia. Their most
              influential
              subdivisions are the Abgal and Habr Gedir, which are both
            dominant in
              Mogadishu.
            . The Dir settle mainly in western Somaliland and in some
              pockets of
              South/Central Somalia. The main clans are the Issa, Gadabursi
         (both in
              Somaliland and bordering regions of Ethiopia and Djibouti)
         and the
              Biyomaal (in southern Somalia).
            . The Isaaq are the main clan family in Somaliland. According
              to some
              scientists and Somalis, they are considered part of Dir clan
         family.

 9. The designation 'noble' or 'majority' assumed  significance  in  asylum
    law  because  these  clans  operated  their  own   powerful   militias,
    considered to be capable of offering a  sufficiency  of  protection  to
    their members. This was in contrast to the members of 'minority' groups
    who did not claim 'noble' lineage and  who  did  not  have  either  the
    numbers or arms to effectively protect themselves during the civil  war
    and its aftermath.   As  can  be  seen  from  the  extract  above,  the
    Appellant's clan does not feature in the list of noble clans.


10. For the sake of completeness I should note Ms Warren's concession  that
    the Rahanweyn are not - conversely -  a  minority  clan,  that  is  one
    considered to be particularly vulnerable. The CIG cited above describes
    them as a "separate caste" of agriculturalists living in the  Shabelle.
    Ms Warren submitted that due to their particular origins and occupation
    they are an 'intermediate' group outside of the traditional Somali clan
    hierarchy familiar to this Tribunal. I accept that  this  would  be  an
    accurate description. In SH (Rahanweyn not a minority clan) Somalia  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00272 Upper Tribunal Judge Storey held  them  to  hold  an
    "intermediate position between the main Somali clans and minority clans
    proper....".

11. I find it was  an  error  of  fact  to  describe  the  Rahanweyn  as  a
    'majority' clan. In this determination that error was material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal, since it is clear from  the  reasoning  that  it
    underpinned the Tribunal's conclusion that  the  Appellant  would  have
    their protection and  support  upon  return,  including  in  Mogadishu.
    There would appear to be no evidential basis for  the  conclusion  that
    these farmers in the Shabelle would have either the capacity or numbers
    in the city to  provide  the  Appellant  with  support.  Similarly  the
    finding that the Appellant would be able to work as a farmer on  return
    to Mogadishu is not supported by evidence to that effect.



    Conclusions


12. The Respondent agrees that the determination contains  errors  of  fact
    that have infected the reasoning overall and that as such the  decision
    must be set aside. The parties before me agreed  that  the  appropriate
    remedy was for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    the matter to be heard afresh.






      Decisions


13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error
    of law and it is set aside.


14. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.


15. There is an order for anonymity.



    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     15th
                                 August 2017










