
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12778/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  mr r.a.h.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born 7th October 1988.   He  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  He appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Graves) dismissing his appeal against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant his protection claim.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 9th February 2010  clandestinely  by
    lorry.   He  claimed  asylum  the  same  day,  citing  various  grounds
    including claimed membership of the KDPI and  exiting  Iran  illegally.
    Suffice to say for the purposes of this decision, his initial claim  to
    asylum was rejected by the Respondent as not credible.  The Appellant's
    subsequent appeal against that refusal was dismissed and by  June  2010
    it appears the Appellant became an overstayer.

 3. On 29th June 2018 the Appellant submitted a fresh claim for protection,
    the central plank of which  was  that  he  had  engaged  in  sur  place
    activity, primarily in the form of  significant  quantities  of  public
    Facebook posts challenging the Iranian regime.  The Respondent rejected
    the  claim  and  the  subsequent  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The FtT heard the appeal on 4th December  2018  but,  having
    been alerted to the fact that the publication of  the  CG  case  in  HB
    (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)  was  imminent,  did  not
    promulgate the decision until 20th February 2019. Following publication
    of HB the FtTJ invited written submissions from the parties and in  [52
    - 55] of her decision  reviewed  her  findings  in  the  light  of  it.
    Nevertheless even though the judge reviewed HB, she made findings  that
    whilst she  accepted  that  the  Iranian  government  operate  a  "hair
    trigger" (low threshold/high risk) approach to returning asylum seekers
    who are Kurdish, that on the particular facts and evidence before  her,
    the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof  to  establish  he
    would be at risk on return.  She dismissed the appeal.

Onward Appeal

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on one ground. The grant of  permission
    which is set out below succinctly sets out the argument before me

         "The sole ground of application relates to the Appellant's internet
         activity and whether or not this would bring him to  the  attention
         of the authorities.  The Judge  may  in  fact  be  right  that  the
         Appellant would not have left a trail of evidence that  identifies,
         and puts at risk, the Appellant and his family.  However,  what  is
         arguable is whether or not  the  Appellant  would  be  required  to
         disclose his previous blogging activity when  interrogated  at  the
         airport.  The Judge's findings that he  would  not  appears  to  be
         contrary to the country guidance  as  set  out  in  AB  and  Others
         (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT  0257  and
         HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  UKUT  00430  as  set  out  in  the  grounds.
         Permission to appeal is granted."

    No Rule 24 response was served by the Respondent

 5. Thus the matter comes before me to determine if the decision of the FtT
    discloses such error of law that it must be set aside and remade.



Error of Law Hearing/Remaking the Decision

 6. Before me Mr Spurling appeared for the Appellant,  Mr  Tarlow  for  the
    Respondent.  At the outset of  the  proceedings  Mr  Tarlow  sought  to
    address me on two points.  He indicated  that  having  had  discussions
    with Mr Spurling it was accepted by  the  Respondent  that  the  FtTJ's
    decision disclosed a material error and accordingly he would  not  seek
    to defend the decision.  He said that if I was satisfied  after  having
    heard from Mr Spurling that the decision  contained  a  material  error
    requiring it to be set aside, then it was the view of both parties that
    the decision could be remade by me in that there was  no  challenge  to
    the evidence provided in the form of numerous pages  displaying  shared
    Facebook posts.

 7. Mr Spurling addressed me in the following terms.  He drew my  attention
    to [55] of the FtTJ's decision.  He asked me to look at [55] which  was
    set out in the grounds in full.  In [55], Mr  Spurling  submitted,  the
    FtTJ had discounted the argument which was put before her that even  if
    the Appellant said when interrogated that he had set up a  fake  social
    media identity and sent some posts, that would nevertheless  place  him
    at risk.  The FtTJ's reasoning for discounting this point is  contained
    in the following extract:

         "He has plainly lied about various documents  he  has  been  issued
         with and has set  up  at  least  three  social  media  accounts  in
         different identities, and pursued an asylum  claim  in  a  date  of
         birth he now says is not his own.  He is resourceful and capable of
         manipulating evidence to suit his ends and I do not believe that he
         would have left a trail of evidence that would lead to him and  his
         family and place their lives at risk.  I find that he would equally
         not be required to alert the authorities to any  previous  blogging
         activities.  I therefore find that  while  the  Iranian  government
         operates a hair trigger approach to returning  asylum  seekers  who
         are Kurdish, that on the particular facts and evidence  before  me,
         that the appellant has  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  to
         establish he would be at risk on return."

 8. Mr Spurling submitted that this  finding  was  plainly  wrong.   It  is
    contrary to the approach established in both AB and HB which  makes  it
    clear that blogging and Facebook activities are common amongst  Iranian
    activists and the authorities are unhappy about  this.   The  Appellant
    could not be expected to lie upon return to Iran and there would  be  a
    pinch point on return as [464 - 471]  of  AB  refers.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that the Appellant left Iran illegally so he would need  to  be
    documented by the Iranian Embassy in the UK.

 9. Drawing on [114 - 116] of HB, Mr Spurling  continued  that  a  returnee
    without a passport is likely to be questioned on return.   There  is  a
    likelihood that such a  person  would  be  asked  whether  they  had  a
    Facebook page and it would be checked.  They would be asked to log onto
    their Facebook and email accounts.   Looking  at  the  content  of  the
    Appellant's Facebook account, he would undoubtedly be perceived  to  be
    political and anti-regime.  He  has  consistently  called  the  Iranian
    state "a terrorist state" and expressed support for  Kurdish  activism.
    The Respondent does not challenge the evidence that the Facebook  posts
    are  highly  critical  of  the  Iranian  regime.   The  fact  that  the
    Appellant's claim is opportunistic is not likely  to  lessen  the  risk
    because the Iranian authorities are not concerned  so  much  with  what
    people's motivation for criticising the regime are; they are  extremely
    sensitive to the criticism itself.  The decision should  be  set  aside
    and remade allowing the appeal.

10. I find I am satisfied that there is force in Mr Spurling's  submissions
    and note that Mr Tarlow did not seek to defend the FtTJ's decision.   I
    find therefore that the FtTJ erred in making the finding that  she  did
    to the effect that the Appellant would not be  required  to  alert  the
    authorities to any previous blogging activities.  Indeed, I find to the
    contrary that he would be someone at heightened risk.  I set aside  the
    decision and remake it.

Remaking the Decision

11. I have viewed the Facebook material which the Appellant relies upon and
    which was before the FtT.  It is undoubtedly  highly  critical  of  the
    authorities in Iran accusing them of  repression  towards  the  Kurdish
    population and of lying in general.   I  take  into  consideration  the
    updated background evidence set  out  in  HB  which  informs  that  the
    authorities demonstrate what could be described  as  a  "hair  trigger"
    approach (low threshold/high  risk)  to  those  who  are  perceived  as
    critical of the regime.  Consequently I find that there is a real  risk
    that the Appellant's  support  for  Kurdish  rights  via  social  media
    particularly Facebook posts,  albeit  opportunistic,  may  have  become
    known to the Iranian authorities through monitoring  the  internet  and
    Facebook.  Given that the Appellant would be  returned  to  Iran  as  a
    failed asylum seeker and a Kurd who will be perceived as someone who is
    highly critical of the regime and who has espoused support for  Kurdish
    rights, I find in light of HB that he would be at risk  of  persecution
    on the basis of his ethnicity  and  perceived  political  opinion.   He
    would be at risk of facing arrest, detention and ill-treatment contrary
    to Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT promulgated on 20th February 2019 is set  aside  for
material error.  I hereby  remake  the  decision.   The  Appellant's  appeal
against the Respondent's decision refusing his protection claim is  allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     17 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
