
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12979/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2019               |On 29th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    P H M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih, Counsel instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction has previously been made by FtT Judge  Maka  and
    as the appeal concerns a claim for asylum and international protection,
    in my judgement, it is  appropriate  for  the  anonymity  order  to  be
    continued under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  PHM is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  him.
    This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.


 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He claims to  have  left  Iraq  in
    2008 and claims that he lived in Iran with his mother and stepfather in
    Iran, until February 2018.   He  claims  to  have  left  Iran  on  10th
    February 2018 and travelled, via Turkey, to the UK.  He arrived in  the
    UK on 2nd May 2018 and claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 29th October 2018, and his appeal against  that  decision
    was dismissed by FtT Judge Maka for the reasons set out in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5th February 2019.


 3. The appellant claims that he was born in Dookan, Iraq and is of Kurdish
    ethnicity. He claims that when he was very young, the family  moved  to
    Qaladze.  The appellant claims that his father was taken by the PUK  in
    2004, when the appellant was about 10 years  old.  After  his  father's
    disappearance, the appellant, his mother and his sister moved to  Koya.
    His brother did not go with them, but left Iraq because the appellant's
    mother considered it was too dangerous for him to remain in  Iraq.  The
    appellant believes that his brother left Iraqi and came to the UK.  The
    appellant claims that after they  had  lived  in  Koya  for  about  six
    months, his mother remarried. She married an Iranian national  who  was
    living in Iraq, and the family moved to an area just outside Koya.   It
    was uncontroversial that Qaladze, where the  appellant  was  born,  and
    Koya, where the appellant claims he last lived in Iraq with his family,
    are in the IKR.


 4. The events that the appellant claims led to his departure from Iraq and
    subsequently from Iran, are summarised at paragraphs [14]  to  [22]  of
    the decision.  The appellant's evidence  is  summarised  at  paragraphs
    [35] to [45] of the decision.


 5. The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [47]  to
    [65] of the decision. The judge accepts that the appellant is an ethnic
    Kurd with Iraqi nationality.


 6. At paragraphs [49] and [50] of his decision, the judge states:


         "49. Beyond this, I confess, I have concerns about this appeal even
         with the low standard of proof.  I  have  read  all  the  documents
         carefully including the appellant's asylum  interview  and  witness
         statements. I find his account to  be  internally  inconsistent  as
         well as externally inconsistent. I do not  accept  the  appellant's
         father was involved with the Ba'ath party or was taken by  the  PUK
         in 2004. ... even allowing for the appellant's age, I am  satisfied
         if his father was genuinely involved with the Ba'ath party and  had
         some important position, it would have been something known to  him
         and his family given the prestige and honour of those  involved  in
         the Ba'ath party and the  associated  privileges  that  would  have
         flowed from that membership, rank and role.


         50.  ... I am satisfied if his father was  genuinely  involved  and
         was a person of interest, the PUK would not have waited until  2008
         to take him away given the disdain with which Kurds were treated by
         Saddam Hussein and  his  Ba'ath  party  and  the  retribution  that
         quickly followed of Baathists after the downfall of Saddam Hussein.
         I note the registration, ID and the requirements for Kurds  in  the
         IKR. Given the appellant does not mention his father was living  in
         hiding in the IKR, I am satisfied, if  he  was  involved  with  the
         Ba'ath party, would have been a person of interest well before 2008
         and would reasonably have been questioned and  taken  away  by  the
         authorities to determine whether he  should  stand  trial  for  his
         crimes as someone involved with the regime in Baghdad."


 7. At paragraph [51], the judge refers to the appellant's claim  that  the
    family moved Qaladze to Koya.   The  judge  states:  "...  I  note  the
    appellant's brother left Iraq in  2008  (Q.22),  although  his  witness
    statement inconsistently said he left in 2004 before the  family  moved
    to Koya... Whatever the true position, I am satisfied  the  appellant's
    mother would also have sent the appellant  with  his  brother,  if  she
    genuinely felt he was also at risk despite his young age.".  The  judge
    refers to the appellant's account that he was allegedly  beaten  up  in
    2008, by men who swore to him about his father.  The judge did not find
    the account given by the appellant to be plausible.


 8. At paragraph [52] of his decision, the judge addressed the  claim  made
    by the appellant that his mother had re-married.  The judge states:


         "The appellant's mother re-married an Iranian national. It was  put
         to the appellant in cross-examination his stepfather had no  status
         in Iraq and would therefore not have been able to purchase property
         and/or the factory he allegedly purchased in Iraq. I do not  accept
         the appellant's response that "this was normal" and his  stepfather
         was able  to  purchase  the  property.  The  appellant's  objective
         evidence (see page 129) shows the  discrimination  Kurds  faced  in
         Iran. I  do  not  accept  it  is  reasonably  plausible  given  the
         discrimination of Kurds in Iran and the  registration  requirements
         in the IKR, that the appellant stepfather,  as  an  Iranian,  would
         have been able to live and work freely in the IKR (no incident  has
         been mentioned by the appellant) and be able to marry a  Kurd  (his
         mother) as well, without any incident or claim  of  persecution  or
         discrimination against him or his family. I  find  the  Appellant's
         stepfather would only have been able to live and work freely in the
         IKR, if he had some official paperwork to do so given  his  Iranian
         background. "


 9. The judge found, at [53], that it is not plausible that  the  appellant
    was targeted in 2008 or  at  all.  The  judge  noted  that  during  his
    interview the appellant  claimed  that  the  assault  had  taken  place
    between Erbil and Koya, along the road going to Erbil, whereas  in  his
    witness statement the appellant claimed that the  road  joined  another
    road which went to Howler and Koya.  The  judge  noted  also  that  the
    appellant could not describe his attackers beyond saying that they were
    adults and one or two had a beard. The judge did not find it  plausible
    that the appellant would only have injuries to his head and leg, if  he
    had been attacked in the way he claimed.  The judge states, at [54]


         "On the appellant's own admission, his attackers  did  not  mention
         his father being involved with the Ba'ath party ... Nor was he able
         to say how his attackers recognised him as his father's son  ...  I
         do not find this plausible... I am satisfied given the  appellant's
         age at the  time  his  father  was  allegedly  taken  in  2004,  if
         anything, those wishing retribution would be more interested in his
         mother and stepfather rather than the appellant who they would  not
         have seen (the appellant was at school at the  time  ...)  and  who
         they would not have recognised as his father's son."


10. At paragraph [55], the judge noted that the appellant's  account  about
    how he saw his house and farm being burnt down is implausible, and  the
    account given by the appellant in his witness statement contradicts his
    oral evidence.  At paragraphs [56] and [57], the  judge  addresses  the
    appellant's account of events in Iran.  At paragraph  [58],  the  judge
    noted that the appellant  himself  has  no  political  affiliations  or
    interests. The judge did not find it plausible that the appellant  only
    speaks a little  Farsi,  given  the  difficulty  conversing  openly  in
    Kurdish in Iran, and the suspicions with which Kurds are viewed  there.
    The Judge states:


         "... I am  satisfied  I  am  not  being  told  the  truth  by  this
         appellant. I also do not find plausible the authorities would  have
         been aware of the appellant in Iran seeing they did  not  have  his
         details as he claimed he was illegal there. I do  not  accept  they
         would have been able to obtain a photograph of him. I find the call
         made by  the  appellant  to  his  stepfather  from  Turkey  is  not
         plausible given his stepfather was more involved than the appellant
         in the distribution of leaflets  and  this  much  would  have  been
         evident from any raid on the family home and/or integration  family
         members which the Iranian authorities would reasonably have done. I
         also note his mother is still living with his  stepfather  in  Iran
         despite being illegal there.


11. At paragraph [59], the judge concluded as follows:


         "I do not accept the appellant's claim of encountering problems  in
         Iraq and Iran. I reject his account. I do not accept his account of
         his documents being burnt including his CSID.  I  find  this  (sic)
         evidence on this self-serving. I am satisfied the appellant, as  an
         Iraqi Kurd will be able to obtain his  CSID  or  even  a  new  one,
         either with the assistance of his mother or  using  a  proxy  or  a
         lawyer. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd, speaks the language and  is
         from the KRG. I note there are flights from Baghdad to Sulaymaniah.
         I am satisfied the appellant will be able to obtain a CSID prior to
         his travel or reasonably soon upon arrival  in  Iraq.  I  find  the
         appellant knows the page and volume number of the book holding  his
         CSID and that of his family and can use their assistance  on  this,
         if necessary.  I  am  also  satisfied  he  will  be  able  to  find
         employment in Iraq  and  seek  the  assistance  of  his  family  if
         necessary. I am satisfied he remains in contact with  them  despite
         stating otherwise. On his own evidence, his  stepfather  wanted  to
         return him back to Iraq despite being  aware  of  the  incident  he
         encountered in 2008. I am satisfied he only said this  because  his
         stepfather knew he would not encounter any problems in Iraq.  I  am
         satisfied just as the appellant showed great fortitude in coming to
         the UK, equally, with such resilience, he will be able to establish
         himself back in Iraq, if need be with the assistance of  a  returns
         package allowing him sufficient time to  obtain  his  CSID  and  ID
         documents. I do not accept his account his documents are not  there
         or have been destroyed."


12. The judge refers to the  relevant  country  guidance  decision  and  at
    paragraphs [61] and [62], the judge states:


         "61. ... I find the appellant can be returned  to  the  KRG  if  he
         wishes, where he has lived for 14 years and where he is  from,  for
         the reasons I have already given. I find he has some  wider  family
         there, who he  can  make  contact  with,  through  his  mother  and
         stepfather if necessary. I do not accept his risk on return since I
         have found he does not have a well-founded subjective fear in Iraq.
         I find the appellant is just  a  normal  Kurdish  Muslim,  who  can
         return to Iraq. I am satisfied he also has a CSID card and has,  in
         any case, his family can assist him on return  given  the  ease  to
         which on his own  evidence  they  travelled  from  one  country  to
         another. I do not accept he is undocumented.


         62.  I note AA  states  an  appellant,  pre-cleared  with  the  IKR
         authorities can return there. I am satisfied  this  appellant,  who
         originates from IKR can rely upon this to return. I do  not  accept
         he is at  any  risk  in  his  home  area.  The  issue  of  internal
         relocation therefore does not arise. I do not accept he  faces  any
         risk on the evidence before me."


The appeal before me


13. The appellant claims that the FtT judge made  several  mistakes  as  to
    fact that  impact  upon  his  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant,  and  his  claim.   Furthermore,   the   judge   refers   to
    inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account   when   there   is   no
    inconsistency, but a misunderstanding of the  evidence.  The  appellant
    claims the judge has failed to properly assess the  risk  upon  return,
    and whether the appellant could obtain a new CSID  without  having  had
    proper regard to the relevant country guidance.


14. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Bulpitt  on  12th  March
    2019 and the matter comes before me to determine  whether  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of FtT Judge Maka, and if so,  to
    remake the decision.


15. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Masih submits that the  judge  proceeds,
    at [50], upon the mistaken premise that the PUK would not  have  waited
    until 2008 to take the appellant's father away, whereas  the  appellant
    has consistently claimed that his father was taken away in 2004.  That,
    she submits, undermines the adverse credibility  finding  made  by  the
    judge.  Furthermore, at [51], the judge refers to the appellant  having
    claimed in interview that his brother left Iraq in  2008,  whereas  the
    appellant has consistently maintained that his brother  left  in  2004.
    The reference to '2008', at question 22  of  the  record  of  interview
    disclosed by the respondent, is an error. The appellant has provided  a
    supplementary bundle and at pages 96 and 97, there is a  transcript  of
    the interview, which confirms that the answer given  by  the  appellant
    was "I do not know when he entered but he left Iraq in 2004".  Ms Masih
    submits  that  in  finding,  at  [53],  that  the  appellant  has  been
    inconsistent as to the road referred to by  the  appellant,  the  judge
    disregarded the appellant's evidence that 'Erbil' and 'Howler'  are  in
    fact one and the same place. 'Howler' is the Kurdish name for  'Erbil'.




16. Ms Masih submits that the  judge's  conclusion,  at  [54],  that  those
    wishing retribution would be more interested in the appellant's  mother
    and stepfather fails to acknowledge that the  appellant's  brother  had
    left Iraq in 2004 to avoid retribution.  It is said in the  grounds  of
    appeal that "his mother had not married his stepfather  at  the  time",
    and this is an indication that  the  judge  failed  to  appreciate  the
    timeline of events.


17. In so far as the risk upon return is concerned, Ms  Masih  submits  the
    judge erred at [60], in his conclusion that the appellant could, if  he
    wished, return to Iran.  The judge concludes that he is satisfied  that
    the appellant lived in Iran with  the  consent  and  knowledge  of  the
    Iranian authorities and had official residence  documentation  to  show
    this. The judge did  not  accept  the  appellant  was  living  in  Iran
    illegally. The  respondent  had  conceded  in  paragraph  [59]  of  the
    decision dated 30 October 2018, that the appellant has "no legal status
    in Iran", and  therefore  he  could  not  be  returned  to  Iran.   The
    respondent had not withdrawn that concession, and the finding  made  by
    the judge as to the appellant's status in Iran, is unsafe for  lack  of
    reasoning based upon cogent evidence before the Tribunal. In any event,
    the appellant had not understood the fact that  the  appellant  has  no
    legal status in Iran to be in issue and was  given  no  opportunity  to
    address  the  submission  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    appellant could return to Iran if he wished, with evidence.


18. Finally, Ms Masih submits that the judge failed to properly engage with
    the country guidance in his assessment of the  appellant's  ability  to
    return to Iraq.  She submits the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's evidence and the  judge  irrationally  concluded  that  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID because he  knows  the  page  and  volume
    number of the book holding his CSID, when  there  was  no  evidence  to
    support such a conclusion.


19.  In reply, Mr Howells  accepts  that  the  judge  made  errors  in  the
    decision, but, he submits, the errors are immaterial.  He  submits  the
    judge properly noted at [14], the appellant's account that  his  father
    was taken by the PUK in 2004.  The  appellant's  account  is  that  his
    father was taken because he was a member of the Ba'ath party.  At [49],
    the judge did not accept the appellant's account that  his  father  was
    involved with the Ba'ath party, and the judge set out his  reasons  for
    rejecting that claim. In the  circumstances,  whether  the  appellant's
    father had been taken in 2004 or 2008, was immaterial.


20. Mr Howells submits that the inconsistency identified by  the  Judge  at
    [51] regarding the year in which the  appellant's  brother  left  Iraq,
    even if mistaken, is immaterial because the judge went on to  say  that
    "whatever the position", he was satisfied that the  appellant's  mother
    would also have sent the appellant with his brother, if  she  genuinely
    felt he was also at risk despite his young age.  The  reasons  provided
    by the judge for rejecting the appellant's account are not  based  upon
    the inconsistency as to the year in which the appellant's brother  left
    Iraq, but whether the account is plausible.


21. Mr Howells accepts that 'Erbil' and  'Howler'  are  one  and  the  same
    place. He submits  that  although  the  judge  found  there  to  be  an
    inconsistency in paragraph [53], at paragraphs [53] and [54], the judge
    sets out a number of reasons why the appellant's account of  his  being
    attacked, and his account of what happened thereafter,  is  simply  not
    plausible.  Mr Howells accepts that, at  [54],  the  judge  appears  to
    proceed upon the basis that those wishing  retribution  would  be  more
    interested in his mother and stepfather, without acknowledging that the
    appellant's mother and his stepfather were not married at the time.


22. Mr Howell also concedes that the judge appears  to  reach  inconsistent
    views as to the appellant's position in Iran, and whether the appellant
    could  lawfully  return  to  Iran,  but  submits   that   the   judge's
    observations  and  findings  regarding  the  position   in   Iran   are
    immaterial, because, as the judge accepts at [60], the appellant is not
    being returned to Iran.


23. Mr Howells submits that notwithstanding the mistakes as to fact  relied
    upon by the appellant, it was open to the FtT Judge to  find  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk upon return, and to dismiss the  appeal.
    The mistakes as to fact were peripheral  and  would  not  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.


 Error of Law


24. The judge had  plainly  identified,  as  he  noted  at  [7],  that  the
    credibility of the appellant, and his account of  events,  was  at  the
    heart of the appeal.  Beyond accepting that the appellant is an  ethnic
    Kurd of Iraqi nationality, the judge found that the appellant is not  a
    credible witness and that his account of events is inconsistent,  vague
    and implausible.


25. In assessing the credibility of the appellant and the claim advanced by
    him, the judge was required to consider  a  number  of  factors.   They
    include, whether the account given by the appellant was  of  sufficient
    detail, whether the account is  internally  consistent  and  consistent
    with any relevant specific and general country information, and whether
    the account is plausible.  Some of those factors may be  more  relevant
    in an individual case than others.  If  an  account  is  littered  with
    internal inconsistencies that may be enough for a judge to dismiss  the
    evidence of an appellant as incredible.  The assessment  of  the  claim
    and the credibility of the appellant is fact sensitive.


26. If the mistake relied upon by the appellant had simply been in relation
    to the year in which the appellant's father had been taken by the  PUK,
    I would have had little hesitation in agreeing with the submission that
    is made by Mr Howells, that the mistake is  immaterial.   Although  the
    judge does, at [50], refer to a concern that the PUK appeared  to  have
    waited until 2008 to take the appellant's father away, I note  that  at
    [54], the judge refers to the appellant's age at the  time  his  father
    was allegedly taken in 2004. I would have been prepared to  accept  the
    submission that the judge was aware that the appellant claims that  his
    father was taken in 2004, and in any  event,  whether  his  father  was
    taken in 2004 or 2008 is immaterial, given the other  reasons  provided
    by the judge for rejecting that claim.


27. The perceived inconsistency as to the year  in  which  the  appellant's
    brother left Iraq was not an inconsistency in the account given by  the
    appellant,  but  arose  because  of  an  incorrect  transcript  of  the
    interview record.


28. The mistakes of fact identified by the appellant and  accepted  by  the
    respondent, taken together, have in my  judgement,  played  a  material
    (not necessarily decisive) part in the judge's reasoning.   Although  I
    accept that it may still have been open to  the  judge  to  reject  the
    account and find that the appellant is not credible  for  many  of  the
    other reasons set out in the decision, I am satisfied that the mistakes
    played a material part in the judge's assessment of the claim.


29.   In my judgment, even though there were sound  reasons  for  rejecting
    the appeal, the series of material factual errors, constitute an  error
    of law. The essential question for me is whether this appellant  had  a
    fair hearing of the claim that he made.  As part of that fair  hearing,
    the judge was required to take into account conscientiously, the  claim
    being made when considering arguments that are deployed in favour of  a
    finding that the appellant is telling  the  truth,  as  well  as  those
    arguments against.


30. My concern however is that the decision contains a number  of  mistakes
    as to fact, and in the end, when taking all of those mistakes together,
    I can have no confidence  that  the  judge  properly  understood  claim
    advanced by the appellant and the relevant timeline,  in  reaching  his
    decision.  I am persuaded by Ms Miah that the judge made mistakes as to
    the account being advanced by the applicant as set out in  his  witness
    statement and interview, when reaching his findings and conclusions.


31. In my judgment, the decision of the FtT contains a material error of
    law and should be set aside.


32. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT, or to re-
    make the decision myself.  I consider that where a first instance
    decision is set aside on the basis of an error of law involving the
    deprivation of the appellant's right to a fair hearing, the appropriate
    course will be to remit the matter to a newly constituted FtT for a
    fresh hearing.  In any event, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012, the
    nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be
    extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in due course.


 NOTICE OF DECISION


33. The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maka  promulgated  on  5th
    February 2019 is set aside.


34. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing,  with
    no findings preserved.


Signed                                  Dated             22nd November
2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD

I have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remitted  the
matter to the FtT for rehearing.  In  any  event,  as  no  fee  is  paid  or
payable, there can be no fee award.


Signed                                   Dated               22nd   November
2019


         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

