
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/12863/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 September 2017                   |On 3 October 2017              |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                            MARYAM ROOSTAMI MORAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Wilkins counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 1 May 1984 and is a national of Iran.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 17  May  2017  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  8
   November 2016 to refuse her protection claim .
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were  in  essence  that
   it was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
   Christianity.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision .
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that :
   a) His approach to the evidence of the miracle was flawed.
   b) His concern about how the Iranian authorities found that the Appellant
      had attended the house church failed to consider the possibility  that
      members of the church would have been asked about other congregants.
   c) The Judge failed to give any reasons for finding that the that it  was
      not credible the Appellant would  have  maintained  contact  with  her
      mother when her father had disowned her.
   d) The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for dismissing the witnesses
      evidence that the Appellant was a genuine convert.
   e) The Judge failed to consider the risk on return to the Appellant as  a
      result of her baptism.

8.  On 12 June 2017 Designated Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf  gave  permission  to
   appeal in the following terms:
   a) The Judges reasons for rejecting the Appellants claimed account of the
      raid on her parental home by the authorities is  arguably  inadequate.
      He arguably failed to explain why or how the Appellants explanation is
      sufficiently  muddled  and  evasive  to   call   into   question   her
      credibility.
   b) The  Judge  accepted  the  testimony  of  the  two  church  witnesses,
      including  the  Appellants  Pastor,  but  arguably  failed   to   give
      sufficient reasons for doubting her Christian life.
   c) It  is  arguable  he  erred  in  attaching  too  much  weight  to  the
      circumstances of her conversion rather than the evidence into practice
      Christianity, whereby in Iran or the United Kingdom.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Wilkins  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Judges assessed the plausibility of her account that she had  been
      the subject of a miracle. While plausibility may be an issue  in  many
      cases are not matters of faith different. To analyse what occurred  in
      that way is to  ask  whether  what  she  claimed  was  rational.  Many
      intelligent people believe in miracles,  it  was  difficult  to  be  a
      Christian and not believe in miracles. What she claimed  had  happened
      was  not  inherently  implausible.  The  Judge  therefore   found   it
      implausible that she would attribute her recovery  to  anything  other
      than a descent to a lower altitude although in fact hat was not  quite
      what she said and in that respect the Judge made a mistake of fact.

   b) There was no dispute that the Appellant had been to the base  camp  of
      Everest  and  now  attended  Church:  can  this   be   outweighed   by
      implausibility and the application of a test of rationality.

   c) The Appellant had adduced evidence that she lived  a  Christian  life:
      she attended Church, classes and attended services regularly  and  had
      been baptised. Reliable evidence would need  to  adduced  to  outweigh
      this.

   d) The Judges finding that she would not be in contact  with  her  mother
      was not rationally reasoned.

   e) The Judge failed to consider whether the Appellant would be exposed to
      risk as a result for being baptised. There is no consideration  as  to
      whether the authorities would consider Baptism an affront to Islam.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Bates submitted that :

   a)  The  Appellants  motivation  for   first   becoming   interested   in
      Christianity is a significant issue given that it is the spark for her
      decision to attend the house Church.

   b) The Judge found her answers vague on this issue. He  was  entitled  to
      consider why as a well-educated person who was an experienced  climber
      would attribute her recovery to a miracle rather than acclimatisation.
      The Judge found her evidence on this issue was evasive.

   c) The Judge was entitled to note that in the asylum interview when asked
      what she did on return to Tehran to practise Christianity she made  no
      refence to attending a house until Q91.

   d) In relation to the Dorodian  witnesses  he  found  them  credible  but
      considered that their opinions were formed without being in possession
      of all the facts.

   e) In relation to the risk on return the Judge was entitled  to  consider
      the risk based on the truth as found by the Tribunal and that she  had
      been baptised as an opportunistic endeavour and therefore she would be
      able to satisfy the Iranian authorities that she was not a Christian.

11. In reply Ms Wilkins on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) The Iranian authorities would take baptism seriously.

   b) The Dorodian witnesses believed  that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine
      Christian and attested to her regular attendance at Church:  this  was
      the best evidence of  conversion.  The  Judge  had  to  give  rational
      reasons for rejecting that evidence.

   c) In relation to how the Iranian authorities knew of the Appellant  they
      arrested her friend who had a text from her. It was plausible that the
      authorities would find out about her even if she does not know exactly
      how.

   d) In relation to whether the Appellant referred to her attendance  at  a
      house Church late in the AI she  had  already  confirmed  her  friends
      arrest in her screening interview.

   e)  The suggestion that the Appellant was evasive at paragraph 23 of  the
      decision in how she dealt  with  altitude  sickness  was  unreasonable
      given that she described behaviour  in  conformance  with  the  advice
      given in the NHS document that was before the court.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

13. In this case the Appellant  claimed  that  she  was  the  subject  of  a
   miracle during an expedition to the base camp of Mount Everest  when  she
   was suffering from altitude sickness and a  Christian  friend  prayed  to
   Jesus for her and told her that she should ask Jesus for help  and  there
   was a 'strange feeling', the blood vessels in her nose burst open and she
   had  'cracks'  on  her  lips.  This  incident  sparked  an  interest   in
   Christianity which the Appellant followed up  by  attending  at  a  house
   church in Iran which was eventually raided causing her flight to the  UK.
   The Appellants case is then that she arrived in the UK on 14 May 2016 and
   within a week of her  arrival  had  started  regularly  attending  Gorton
   Church in Manchester. I note as an aside that neither the refusal  letter
   nor the Judge gives any weight to the fact that at the time of the asylum
   interview in November 2016 the  Appellant  was  asked  numerous  detailed
   questions about Christianity and there is no suggestion that any  of  her
   responses were factually incorrect.

14. Ms Wilkins argues that  the  Judges  approach  to  her  account  of  the
   miracle, which then impacted adversely on  all  his  other  findings  and
   clearly weighed very heavily on the Judges mind, was fundamentally flawed
   in that he assessed the plausibility of her account and  approaching  her
   evidence in that way was asking whether her account was rational which in
   the context of a religious experience was inappropriate. I  start  of  by
   reminding myself of helpful and relevant advice given  in  the  House  of
   Lords case of R  (Williamson  and  Others)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for
   Education and Employment [2005] UKHL 15  where  Lord  Nicholls  addressed
   the issue of religious beliefs very well, warning judges that great  care
   must be taken assessing the value of faith and beliefs to  another  human
   being:
   "Typically, religion involves belief  in  the  supernatural.  It  is  not
   always  susceptible  to  lucid  exposition  or,  still   less,   rational
   justification. The language used  is  often  the  language  of  allegory,
   symbol and metaphor. Depending on the subject matter, individuals  cannot
   always be expected to express themselves with cogency or  precision.  Nor
   are an individual's beliefs  fixed  and  static.  The  beliefs  of  every
   individual are prone to change over his lifetime."

15. The Judge addresses the claimed  miracle  at  paragraphs  22-25  of  the
   decision and at paragraph 24 summarises his approach to her  evidence  in
   this way:

   "I  find  it  implausible  that  an  experienced  mountaineer  with   the
   appropriate  training  and  advice  and  with  no  previous  exposure  to
   Christianity and  with  a  high  degree  of  education  would  draw  such
   conclusions from her experience and recovery from mountain sickness.'

16. Ms Wilkins argued that in  making  this  assessment  the  Judge  firstly
   based it on a factual error in that she had followed the standard  advice
   to prepare for such a climb and therefore did not expect to be  sick  and
   that while she did indeed move to a lower altitude she still did not feel
   well and returned to the group who were higher up but  nevertheless  only
   felt well after the 'encounter' with Layla.  Thus  she  argued  that  the
   Judge was not entitled  to  conclude  that  she  recovered  by  following
   altitude sickness advice and should have realised that because  that  was
   not her case. In fact I note that the Judge recognised that the Appellant
   was still felling unwell when she climbed back up to  re-join  her  group
   (paragraph 23) and therefore his  conclusion  that  her  health  improved
   because she followed advice given is inconsistent with his own findings.

17. I find merit in Ms Wilkins argument that to suggest it  was  implausible
   that the Appellant would not believe in a miracle because, in  part,  she
   was well educated and an experienced climber flies in  the  face  of  the
   clear evidence of many intelligent members of religious faiths who accept
   that miracles occur and that her case is that  she  improved  only  after
   speaking to Layla not as a result  of  following  advice  about  altitude
   sickness.

18. The Judge also makes an adverse credibility finding in relation  to  her
   inability to explain how the Iranian authorities came to  know  that  she
   attended the house church (paragraph 32). Given the  background  material
   before him about intelligence led raids on house churches and the use  of
   torture and ill treatment during detention and the fact that her case was
   that Layla, her friend, was arrested and had a phone with a text from the
   Appellant on it I am satisfied that this adverse credibility finding  was
   inadequately reasoned and contrary to the background material.

19. The Judges approach to the Dorodian  witnesses  is  also  challenged  in
   that having accepted the 'honesty and sincerity' of the Church  witnesses
   (paragraph 40) who confirmed that the Appellant attended Church regularly
   and had been baptise4d he rejected their evidence that she was a  genuine
   Christian because  her  claim  was  'fatally  undermined  by  the  almost
   complete lack of credibility in her account of  events  in  Iran'  noting
   that the Church witnesses knew little about her life in Iran. I note that
   there is no suggestion that the witnesses were given the  opportunity  to
   consider whether their view of the Appellant would be different  if  they
   were told about the claimed miracle or her account of attending  a  house
   church in Iran. I am satisfied that in those  circumstances  the  reasons
   given for rejecting witnesses whose evidence he had found  to  be  honest
   and sincere was inadequate if their lack of knowledge about her  previous
   life was the sole basis for rejecting their opinion.

20. I also find that given my concerns about  the  Judges  approach  to  her
   claimed miracle and the very significant  weight  he  gives  to  that  in
   undermining her  claim  and  in  assessing  the  genuine  nature  of  her
   manifestation of faith his rejection of the Dorodian  witnesses  evidence
   is inadequately reasoned.

21. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
    All matters to be redetermined afresh.

22. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

23. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  as  the
   findings about the core of the Appellants account of her  conversion  are
   unsustainable. I consequently remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal sitting at Manchester before me on a date to be fixed.

24. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing:

       . List for 3 hours

       . Farsi Interpreter

Signed                                                              Date
1.10.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


