
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/12941/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 January 2018                    |On 26 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     RA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Mughal, Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on [ ] 1999.  This appeal
    arises from the decision of the respondent dated 7 February 2017 to
    refuse his protection claim.  The appellant's subsequent appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal was heard by Judge Walker who, in a decision
    promulgated on 23 August 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is
    now appealing against that decision.



Background

 2. The appellant claims to face a risk on return to Albania both because
    of a blood feud and because of human trafficking.

 3. The appellant claims, inter alia, that:

      a) His family has been in a blood feud since July 2009 when his
         father's paternal uncle killed someone.

      b) In 2009, shortly after the murder, his father fled to Greece.

      c) In September 2013 his older brother went into hiding.

      d) In October 2014 he was approached by two men who beat and
         threatened to kill him when he did not tell them the whereabouts of
         his father and father's uncle.

      e) Shortly after being attacked, he went to stay with an uncle of his
         mother, in another town.

      f) He left Albania, assisted by his mother's uncle, and met his father
         in Kosovo. He then travelled with his father to Belgium where his
         father left him with agents. The agents took him to a small house
         with other Albanians where he was forced to work as a translator
         for an Albanian gang in their dealings with a gang of Belgian drug
         dealers.

      g) He was beaten and sexually assaulted whilst being forced to work
         for the Albanian gang in Belgium.

      h) He escaped from the gang by running from the house to the port in
         Gent, which was about thirty minutes away (on foot). He had his
         passport with him. He came across an Albanian couple who were
         waiting to board a lorry bound for the UK. He joined them and
         travelled by lorry to the UK.

   4. The appellant's brother applied for asylum in the UK without success.
      The appellant claimed at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
      not to know about this or to have been in contact with his brother.




   5. The respondent rejected the appellant's application.  It was not
      accepted his family were involved in a blood feud or that he was the
      victim of trafficking.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge did not find the appellant credible and rejected his account
    in its entirety.  The judge gave multiple reasons for finding the
    appellant not credible.  These included the following:

      a) The appellant contradicted himself by stating in his asylum
         interview that he had spoken to his mother whilst in Belgium but
         denying any contact with his family since leaving Albania in his
         witness statement.

      b) The appellant's account of his father leaving Albania in 2009,
         shortly after the blood feud was said to have started, was
         contradicted by the evidence from the Albanian authorities
         (obtained from the British embassy in Tirana) that the appellant's
         father did not leave Albania in 2009. The evidence from the
         Albanian authorities was that his father was outside Albania from
         28 November 2014 to 12 December 2014.

      c) No explanation was given as to why the appellant's father would
         take him to Belgium simply to leave him there rather than arrange
         for them to live together in Greece.

      d) The appellant failed to explain why, if there was an ongoing blood
         feud, his father would return to Albania.  The judge commented, at
         paragraph 48 of the decision, that:

             "It is highly  unlikely  that  the  appellant's  father  would
             willingly return from safety to live in Albania if he were  to
             return to a situation where he was forced  to  live  in  self-
             isolation as a result of a persistent threat to his life."

      e) The appellant stated in his asylum interview that his family did
         not have problems before October 2014 but later said that his
         brother was threatened in September 2013.

      f) There was no evidence of any other deaths or injuries resulting
         from the feud even though it was said to have been ongoing for over
         eight years.

      g) It is highly unlikely the gang in Belgium would need to rely on a
         15 year old boy who fell into their control by chance to serve as
         their translator; or that the two gangs in question would occupy
         the same premises, as claimed by the appellant.

      h) The appellant's account of his escape was not plausible as it was
         very unlikely the gang would allow him to keep his passport or that
         he would happen upon an Albanian couple boarding a lorry bound for
         the UK just at the time he was escaping. Nor was the appellant's
         account of the gang paying him so he could buy himself food
         considered plausible given his claim to be held captive by them.



Grounds of Appeal

 7. Multiple grounds are raised in the grounds of appeal.  They are as
    follows:

      1) The judge did not consider the evidence of the appellant in
         accordance with his age and circumstances or recognise that because
         of his age he was less likely to give a coherent account.

      2) At paragraph 38 the judge erred by failing to give reasons for
         finding the appellant was in contact with his father when the
         appellant's evidence was that contact had been lost.

      3) At paragraph 48 the judge failed to deal with the issue of "closed
         lives" with regard to the appellant's father returning to Albania.

      4) At paragraph 39  the judge rejected that the appellant would be
         useful to the criminal gang in Belgium due to his age when it was
         his age that made him useful to them because that would help him
         avoid being stopped or charged by the police.

      5) The judge failed to take into account that the appellant would be
         particularly vulnerable to re-trafficking.

      6) The judge did not give adequate reasons as to why internal
         relocation was viable.



Submissions

 8. Before me, although Ms Mughal stated that all grounds were relied upon,
    she only submitted arguments in respect of the first ground which
    concerns the appellant's age.  She argued that although the judge had
    properly directed himself about the appellant's age, in practice it was
    not taken into consideration.  She maintained that the appellant's
    account did not in fact contain inconsistencies; rather the issues
    identified by the judge were a reflection of how the appellant's
    understanding of what he had experienced had changed as he matured.

 9. I asked Ms Mughal to clarify if she was saying that there were
    inconsistencies but these could be explained by the appellant's age and
    immaturity or that there were no inconsistencies.  She made clear that
    her contention was that when the appellant's age is taken into account
    it is apparent that there are not, in reality, inconsistencies between
    what he said in his asylum interview (when he was substantially
    younger) and in his later statements and at the hearing.

10. Mr Walker's response was that the judge had properly directed himself
    as to the appellant's age and had reached a conclusion on credibility
    that was properly open to him given the clear inconsistencies in the
    evidence.



Analysis


  11. The judge was required, when assessing the appellant's credibility, to
      take into consideration his age and maturity. This is made clear at
      Paragraph 351 of the Immigration Rules, which states:

         "A person of any age may  qualify  for  refugee  status  under  the
         Convention and the criteria in paragraph 334 [dealing with Grant of
         Asylum] applied to all cases.  However, account should be taken  of
         the applicant's maturity and in assessing the claim of a child more
         weight should be given to objective indications of risk than to the
         child's state of mind  and  understanding  of  his  situation.   An
         asylum application made on  behalf  of  the  child  should  not  be
         refused only because the child  is  too  young  to  understand  the
         situation or have formed a well-founded fear of persecution.  Close
         attention should be given to  the  welfare  of  the  child  at  all
         times."


12. The circumstances of the appellant are that he was 15 when he left
    Albania and applied for asylum in the UK. In terms of his maturity,
    there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to suggest his
    maturity was other than would be typical for a person of his age. There
    was no evidence of learning difficulties and the uncontested finding of
    the judge (at paragraph 75 of the decision) was that the appellant was
    doing well at school, speaks three languages (including English) and
    "has no medical problems which are relied upon."

13. The judge identified that the appellant's age was relevant to the
    assessment of credibility. At paragraph 9 the judge stated:

         "Throughout my consideration of the facts of this case  I  bear  in
         mind that great care must be taken before making  adverse  findings
         of credibility and that such findings should  only  be  made  where
         they are justified in the light of the particular circumstances  of
         the case under consideration.  I bear in mind  that  the  Appellant
         was just 15 years old when  he left Albania and was not yet 16 when
         he had his substantive asylum interview.  I bear in mind that  when
         assessing his credibility regard must be had to this  and  that  in
         such a case it is appropriate to apply a more liberal  use  of  the
         benefit of the doubt." (emphasis added)

  14. Moreover, the judge explicitly stated, when reaching his conclusion,
      that he took the appellant's age into account. At paragraph 53 the
      judge stated:

         "Taking all this together I am not satisfied,  even  to  the  lower
         standard  and  even  having  given  the  Appellant's  evidence  the
         required additional benefit of the doubt in view of his  age,  that
         there is any blood feud between  the  Appellant's  family  and  the
         Tafani family." (emphasis added)

15. Ms Mughal recognised that the judge had directed himself correctly in
    respect of the appellant's age and maturity. Her argument was that
    notwithstanding the correct direction, the judge had, when grappling
    with the substance of the case, ignored the significance of the
    appellant's age and as a consequence found inconsistencies where there
    were none. I disagree. The judge found multiple inconsistencies in the
    appellant's account which cannot reasonably be explained by his
    age/maturity. For example, the appellant initially claimed to have had
    contact with his mother from Belgium but later stated that he had no
    contact with her after he left Albania. This is not a complicated point
    which would have been impacted by the appellant's age/maturity. He gave
    two different - and contradictory - accounts of his contact with his
    family. The judge was entitled to take this into consideration in
    assessing credibility.

16. Similarly, the appellant's age/maturity does not explain why the
    objective evidence contradicted his account of his father leaving
    Albania in 2009. This is not an issue where the appellant being 15
    would make it unreasonable to accept what he said at face value.

17. In a well reasoned decision, the judge set out a range of reasons for
    rejecting the appellant's credibility. This included internal
    inconsistencies in the account, lack of plausibility and consideration
    of objective evidence which undermined the account. There is nothing in
    the decision to suggest that the judge failed, when making the adverse
    credibility findings, to keep in mind the appellant's age. On the
    contrary, the judge has been very clear as to the relevance of the
    appellant's age. Accordingly, the appellant's challenge to the decision
    on the basis that proper regard was not had to his age and maturity
    cannot succeed.

18. The other grounds of appeal (which were not pursued at the hearing)
    attempt to challenge particular aspects of the judge's findings. They
    have no merit.

19. The second ground argues that the judge failed to give reasons at
    paragraph 38 for finding that the appellant lost contact with his
    father. It is unclear what point is being made, particularly as
    paragraph 38 does not concern this issue. However, what is clear is
    that at paragraph 48 the judge gave clear reasons for finding that the
    appellant's father returned to Albania.

20. The third ground submits that at paragraph 48 the judge failed to deal
    with the issue of "closed lives" with regard to the appellant's father
    returning to Albania. This is not the case. It is clear that the judge
    appreciated that the appellant's father could live in self-isolation.
    This is stated explicitly in paragraph 48.

21. The fourth ground questions the judge's finding about the appellant's
    claimed role as a translator for a criminal gang. The judge's analysis
    (at paragraph 56, not paragraph 39 as stated in the grounds) is clear
    and well reasoned.  The appellant's account seems to suggest that
    criminal gangs relied on the chance appearance of the appellant to
    enable them to communicate with each other. The judge was entitled to
    find this lacked plausibility and there is nothing in the grounds to
    show why such a conclusion was not open to the judge.

22. The fifth ground of appeal contends that the judge failed to deal with
    the issue of the appellant's vulnerability to re-trafficking. However,
    this issue was considered at paragraph 73 of the decision. The judge
    found that the appellant is relatively well-educated and that there is
    no medical evidence to show particular medical problems. He also noted
    that the appellant was not lured into leaving Albania by traffickers
    and that he has family who can provide them with support. On any
    legitimate view, it was open to the judge to conclude that the
    appellant was not at risk of re-trafficking.

23. The final ground of appeal submits that the judge did not give adequate
    reasons as to why internal relocation was viable. This ground has no
    relevance as the judge was entitled to find, for the reasons I have
    explained above, that the appellant's account lacked credibility and
    therefore that he had not established that he would be a risk on return
    to Albania irrespective of where in the country he decides to live.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  21 February 2018     |

