
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12452/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2017                               |On 1 August 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     K M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain instructed by Virgo Consultancy Services
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya who was born on 19 March 1980.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in 2009.   He  entered  with
    leave and that leave was extended, first as a student  and  then  as  a
    Tier 1 Highly Skilled Migrant and then as a Tier 2 Skilled worker until
    24 October 2016.

 3. On 4 May 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis  of  his  claim
    was that he is gay and would be at risk of persecution if  returned  to
    Kenya.

 4. On 31 October 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 19 December  2016,  Judge  C  J  Woolley  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was gay but did not accept that there  was  a  real  risk  of
    persecution due to criminal prosecution for consensual same-sex conduct
    between adults or, on the basis of  the  background  evidence,  arising
    from societal intolerance of gay men.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that, in dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  and
    under Art 8 of the ECHR, the judge had failed properly to consider  the
    background evidence concerning the risk to gay  men  in  Kenya  and  by
    taking into account that the appellant had been able to live  in  Kenya
    whilst in a gay relationship free from persecution without also  taking
    into account that the appellant had concealed his sexual orientation in
    order to avoid persecution.

 7. On 23 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Nightingale)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 5 April 2017, the Secretary of  State  lodged  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Swain  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account the background evidence  to  which  he  was
    referred,  in  particular  passages  from  the  Home  Office,  "Country
    Information  and  Guidance,  Kenya:  Sexual  orientation   and   gender
    identity" (22 March 2016)".  Mr  Swain  referred  me  to  a  number  of
    paragraphs in that document including paras 2.3.7, 5.1,  5.1.5,  5.2.4,
    6.3 and 6.2.1.  These passages, he submitted, demonstrated a  level  of
    intolerance and violence (including mob violence which the appellant in
    his evidence specifically feared).  Mr Swain also  drew  attention,  in
    relation to the risk of prosecution, to the prosecution referred to  in
    para 5.2.2 of two gay men in February  2015  for  "unnatural  offenses"
    under the Kenyan Penal Code.  He submitted that the judge had erred  in
    law in reaching his finding that the appellant had  not  established  a
    real risk of persecution by failing to take into account this evidence,
    together with that of violence and police inactivity and the  targeting
    of gay people by the press.

10. In addition, Mr Swain submitted that the judge had been wrong  in  para
    35 of his determination to take into account  that  the  appellant  had
    been able to live previously in Kenya whilst in a gay relationship free
    from persecution because the appellant's evidence had been that he  had
    lived discretely in order to avoid  persecution.   Mr  Swain  submitted
    that the judge had  wrongly,  in  effect,  reasoned  that  because  the
    appellant  had  experienced  no  problems  previously  then  he   would
    experience no problems in the future.  That was impermissible reasoning
    because it would require the appellant to  live  discretely  which  was
    something he could not be required to do in order to avoid persecution.



11. Finally, in his reply, Mr Swain submitted that the judge had also erred
    in his adverse finding under  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended) and Art  8  by  failing  properly  to  assess
    whether there were "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Kenya.  He submitted that the judge had, again, failed
    to take into account the background evidence and had simply been  wrong
    in para  43  of  his  determination  to  state  that  "homosexuals  are
    integrated" in Kenya.  The evidence showed that they plainly were  not.



12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    properly directed himself in accordance with HJ (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2010]
    UKSC 31 at para 20 of his determination.  Mr Mills submitted  that  the
    judge had accepted that the appellant was gay and that finding was  not
    now challenged  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   Thereafter,  Mr  Mills
    submitted,  the  judge  had  properly  and  adequately  considered  the
    background evidence in paras 32 and 36 of his determination.  Mr  Mills
    submitted that it was not necessary for the judge to set  out  all  the
    evidence.  He had set out sufficient and in para 36 had stated that  he
    had  "considered  the  wider  country  evidence  on  the  position   of
    homosexuals in Kenya".  Mr Mills submitted that the judge was  entitled
    to find  that  the  appellant  had  not  established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.  He accepted that the  background  evidence  was
    ambiguous and that another judge could have made a  different  decision
    but the judge's finding was not irrational.

13. Mr Mills accepted that the judge's reference to  the  appellant  having
    been able to live previously in Kenya free from persecution in para  35
    "muddied the waters".  Nevertheless,  he  submitted  that  it  did  not
    affect the judge's finding based upon the background evidence.

14. As regards Art 8, Mr Mills submitted that the judge had  been  entitled
    to find that there were not "very significant obstacles" and  that  his
    reasoning in para 43 was adequate to sustain that finding  even  though
    the judge's reference to homosexuals being "integrated"  in  Kenya  was
    troubling.  Nevertheless, given the judge's adverse finding in  respect
    of the appellant's international protection claim, namely that he could
    safely live openly as a gay man in Kenya,  there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence to reach the high  threshold  set  by  the  "very  significant
    obstacles" test.

Discussion

    The Asylum Claim

15. In reaching his adverse decision, the judge  correctly  identified  the
    approach to be followed in determining the appellant's claim based upon
    him being at risk as a gay man in Kenya as set  out  in  Lord  Rodgers'
    judgment in HJ(Iran) at [82] (see para 20 of  the  determination).   Mr
    Swain did not suggest otherwise.

16. The first issue, which the judge determined in the appellant's  favour,
    was that he accepted the appellant was gay  (see  paras  22-28  of  the
    determination).

17. The judge then went on to consider the second issue namely whether  gay
    men who lived openly in Nigeria would be  liable  to  persecution  (see
    paras 29-37).

18.  At  para  37,  having  concluded  that  there  was  no  real  risk  of
    persecution, the judge correctly observed that it was  unnecessary  for
    him to consider any of the further issues identified in HJ  (Iran).   I
    point that up because, although Mr Swain initially appeared to  contend
    to the contrary, what the judge says in para  35  about  the  appellant
    having previously lived in  Kenya  in  a  gay  relationship  free  from
    persecution, did not involve a  consideration  of  a  further  question
    identified in HJ (Iran), namely whether the appellant would  on  return
    live openly and, if not, why he would not do so.  I will return  to  Mr
    Swain's submission in relation to para 35 of the judge's  determination
    shortly.

19. There were, before the judge, two limbs  to  the  appellant's  argument
    that he faced a real risk of persecution on return to Kenya  as  a  gay
    man.  The first was that he would be at real risk  of  prosecution  and
    conviction for consensual same-sex conduct with a  partner.   Secondly,
    he would be at risk from societal attitudes and intolerance  (including
    violence) directed against gay men.

20. As regards to the first limb, it was  common  ground  that  the  Kenyan
    Penal Code prohibited  and  criminalised  consensual  same-sex  conduct
    between adults.  The appellant's (then) Counsel accepted that the  mere
    existence of legislation criminalising homosexual  acts  could  not  in
    itself amount to persecution applying the CJEU's decision  in  Minister
    voor Immigratie en Asiel v X and Y; Z v  Minister  voor  Immigratie  en
    Asiel (Cases C-199/12 to C-201/12) [2014] Imm AR 440 at [55].  At  [56]
    the CJEU stated that:

         "However, the term of imprisonment which accompanies a  legislative
         provision which, like those  at  issue  in  the  main  proceedings,
         punishes homosexual acts is capable, in itself of  constituting  an
         act of persecution within  the  meaning  of  Article  9(1)  of  the
         Directive, provided that it is actually applied in the  country  of
         origin which adopted such legislation."

21. That was the approach which the  judge  was  invited  to  take  by  the
    appellant's (then) Counsel.  At para 32 of his determination, the judge
    dealt  with  the  background  evidence  not   only   in   relation   to
    criminalisation and prosecution of  gay  men  for  consensual  same-sex
    conduct but also in relation to societal attitudes to gay men.  For the
    present, I need only set out the former:

         "The recent Country Guidance report on Kenya summarises the most up
         to  date  information.   In  the  Policy  summary  at  page  8   it
         acknowledges that same-sex activity is criminalised for  men.  ....
         At page 15 (para 5.2) the report considers arrests and prosecutions
         for same sex activity.  As Mr Joseph conceded, the  information  on
         this is far from clear.  Some reports suggest that between 2012 and
         2014 there were 8 prosecutions of gay men on indecency charges.  It
         is however difficult to read across the situation accurately  since
         many charges are for 'unnatural offences' which  include  rape  and
         bestiality and  appear  to  conflate  these  with  cases  involving
         consensual sex.  At 5.2.2 it is commented 'it  is  unclear  whether
         anyone has ever  been  convicted  for  consensual  adult  same  sex
         relations in Kenya', while  the  National  Gay  and  Lesbian  Human
         Rights Commission (NGLHRC) at the time  of  writing  'had  not  yet
         determined whether there were in fact any convictions on the record
         based on consensual same-sex conduct'.  At  5.2.5  it  is  reported
         that there had been few prosecutions under any of these Penal  Code
         provisions in recent years ..."

22. The judge returned to the background evidence at paras 33-34:

         "33.     The respondent has referred to further extracts from  this
             report in her letter of refusal.  There has been real progress
             in the recognition given to LGBT  groups  -  for  instance  on
             April 25th 2015 the Kenyan High Court ruled  that  the  NGLHRC
             should be allowed to officially register.  Kenya has  promised
             to review its penal code to align it  with  the  constitution.
             The Kenyan government has generally respected LGBT  activists'
             right to freedom of expression, even though  there  have  been
             some efforts  to  stifle  them.   The  Health  Minister  James
             Macharia has in fact made  a  statement  in  support  of  LGBT
             rights.

         34.  It is common ground that the Penal Code at sections  162,  163
             and 165 prohibit and criminalise consensual  same-sex  conduct
             between adults.  The penalty for same-sex conduct does include
             imprisonment.  According to the ECJ case this however  is  not
             enough to reach the threshold of persecution.   What  must  be
             shown is that the relevant state  imposes  imprisonment  as  a
             penalty in practice.  Mr  Joseph  was  in  difficulty  at  the
             hearing in pointing me to any evidence that  imprisonment  was
             imposed in practice.  He argued the other side  of  the  coin,
             namely that there was no evidence that  imprisonment  was  not
             imposed for such same-sex conduct.  Such an argument faces,  I
             find, insuperable  objections.   To  begin  with  the  country
             evidence  suggests  that  same  sex  activity  is   not   even
             prosecuted (see the NGLHRC report quoted above).  If same  sex
             activity is not even prosecuted  it  is  not  surprising  that
             there is no evidence either way as to whether imprisonment was
             ever imposed for same-sex conduct.  More fundamentally  it  is
             for the appellant in protection appeals  to  produce  evidence
             that he or she is likely to be persecuted, and this cannot  be
             done simply by referring to an absence of evidence."

23. Then at para 36, the judge concluded in relation to this  limb  of  the
    appellant's case as follows:

         "Assessing all the evidence in the round I find  that  it  has  not
         been shown that imprisonment is imposed in  practice  for  same-sex
         conduct, even if such a penalty may be  on  the  statute  book.   I
         apply the ECJ  ruling  in  finding  that  this  is  not  enough  to
         constitute  persecution.   The  mere  fact  that  an  activity   is
         criminalised with a custodial penalty is not enough  to  constitute
         persecution, in the absence of evidence  that  such  a  penalty  is
         imposed."

24. In his submissions, Mr Swain placed some weight upon the report at para
    5.2.2 of the Home Office document relating to the arrest and charge  of
    two gay men for "unnatural offences".  He told me that  there  was  new
    material on that, submitted in a bundle before the Upper Tribunal,  but
    he accepted that that evidence had not been before the judge.  It  was,
    in those circumstances, clearly not relevant in assessing  whether  the
    judge had erred in law.

25. I do not accept that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  instance  of
    arrest and "charge" of two gay men in February 2015.  He made  specific
    reference to para 5.2.2 in para 32 of his determination as I  have  set
    out above.  As Mr Mills submitted,  as  set  out  in  the  Home  Office
    document, this was a case in which the two men had been involved in the
    trafficking of "obscene material".  And, further, as para 5.2.2  points
    out  it  is  unclear  whether  "anyone  has  ever  been  convicted  for
    consensual adult same-sex relations in Kenya."

26. In my judgment, the judge's finding that the appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that there was a real risk  of  prosecution  and  conviction,
    amounting  to  persecution,  for  consensual  same-sex  conduct  if  he
    returned to Kenya was properly open to the judge on the  basis  of  the
    background evidence to which he was referred and the gist of  which  he
    sets out in paras 32, 34 and 36 of his determination.

27. Consequently, I reject Mr Swain's submissions challenging  the  judge's
    adverse finding on the first limb upon which the appellant  claimed  to
    be at risk of persecution.

28. Turning now to the second limb, Mr  Swain's  principal  submission  was
    that the judge had failed to take into account the background  evidence
    concerning the intolerance, societal  attitude  and  violence  directed
    against gay men in Kenya  and  that  the  police  condone  or  actually
    contribute to it.

29. As I have already indicated,  the  judge  referred  to  the  background
    evidence concerning the "wider"  situation  in  Kenya  at  para  32  as
    follows:

         "There have been some reports of harassment of LGBT persons.   LGBT
         persons  face  widespread  discrimination,  especially  those  LGBT
         members involved in sex-work.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  the
         appellant would be vulnerable on this account.  At 3.1.3 the report
         concludes 'There is no  evidence  of  systematic  persecution  from
         state and non-state actors'.  Any individuals who claim  to  be  at
         risk of persecution need to demonstrate that they are at real  risk
         and each case needs to be considered on its individual merits. ....
         there are well documented reports of  police  harassment  (e.g.  at
         5.2.3 it is said that the police arrested more than 60 people at  a
         gay-friendly nightspot in Nairobi) which conduct often seems to  be
         motivated by blackmail.  At 5.3.1 it is reported  that  the  police
         play an ambiguous role - on occasion protecting  LGBT  people  from
         mob violence but not bringing the perpetrators to  book;  while  on
         other occasions they have failed in their duty to protect."

30. I have already set out at para 33 of the judge's determination where he
    refers to "real progress in the recognition given to LGBT  groups"  and
    that the Kenyan government generally respect LGBT activists'  right  to
    freedom of  expression.   Then,  at  para  36  the  judge  reached  his
    conclusion as follows:

         "I have considered the wider county evidence  on  the  position  of
         homosexuals in Kenya.  It is clear that there are many places where
         gays can congregate openly (e.g. in gay friendly nightspots and  in
         coastal resorts) and the very fact that these exist say much  about
         the position  on  Kenya.   While  I  accept  in  part  Mr  Joseph's
         submission that the toleration given to LGBT NGOs may  reflect  the
         position at the  higher  level,  this  toleration  is  nevertheless
         relevant  to  the  changing  attitude   of   the   authorities   to
         homosexuality even if the bulk of the populace may  be  hostile  to
         gay rights.  Even though gays may  be  harassed  and  discriminated
         against in Kenya this does not mean that they  are  persecuted.   I
         have considered the appellant's individual circumstances  and  find
         that they have not shown that a person in  a  gay  relationship  is
         likely to be persecuted."

31. It is clear that the judge had well in mind the material  to  which  he
    was referred.  In addition to material I  have  set  out,  at  para  16
    (dealing with Counsel's submissions) he noted that the  evidence  shows
    "90% of Kenyans are anti-gay".

32. The material to which Mr Swain drew my attention  in  the  Home  Office
    document, in truth, adds nothing of a significantly  different  flavour
    to  the  evidence  to  which  the  judge  expressly  referred  in   his
    determination.  As he accepted, the evidence showed that gay men may be
    harassed, discriminated against and the police may on  occasion  arrest
    gay men and "mob violence" can occur against which the  police  may  or
    may not provide protection.  That is the flavour  of  the  material  to
    which I was referred, and which I have set out above.

33. The experienced judge expressly stated  that  he  had  "considered  the
    wider  country  evidence"  at  para  36  of  his  determination.    The
    appellant, therefore, is faced with an  onerous  task  of  establishing
    that the judge, in fact, ignored the background evidence  in  the  very
    document from which he cited and which he relied upon.  In my judgment,
    the appellant fails to establish that to be the case.

34. Further, in my judgment, the appellant has failed to establish that the
    judge's finding, based upon the background evidence, that the appellant
    would not face a real risk of persecution on the basis  of  the  second
    limb relied upon, was not a finding properly open to the judge and  was
    irrational.

35. Article 9 of the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC)
    sets out the definition of "acts of persecution" as follows:

         "Article 9

         Acts of persecution

         1.   Acts of persecution within the meaning of article  1A  of  the
             Geneva Convention must:

             (a)  be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)   be  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).

         2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph  1,  can,  inter
             alia, take the form of:

             (a)  acts of physical or mental violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;

             (b)  legal, administrative, police, and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory manner;

             (c)  prosecution or punishment, which is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;

             (d)    denial   or   judicial   redress   resulting    in    a
                  disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;

             (e)  prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military
                  service in a conflict, where performing  military  service
                  would include crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion
                  clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

             (f)  acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.

         ... "

36. There, as is made clear, persecution require a  "sufficiently  serious"
    interference or violation of an individual's human rights.

37. In Sepet and Another v SSHD [2003] UKHL  15,  Lord  Bingham  emphasised
    that "persecution" is a "strong word" (at [7]).  In Amare v SSHD [2005]
    EWCA Civ 1600, Laws LJ at [27] stated that:

         "... the violation, or rather perspective or apprehended violation,
         must attain a substantial level of seriousness if it is  to  amount
         to persecution."

38. In HJ (Iran), Lord Hope at [13]  cited  with  approval  Lord  Bingham's
    words in Sepet and Another, cited Art 9 of the Qualification  Directive
    (at [12]) and cited with approval from  the  judgments  of  McHugh  and
    Kirby JJ in the Australian High Court decision of Appellant S395/2002 v
    Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (2003) 216  CLR  473
    at [40] that:

         "Persecution covers many forms of harm ranging from  physical  harm
         to the loss  of  intangibles,  from  death  and  torture  to  state
         sponsored or condoned discrimination in social life and employment.
          Whatever form the harm takes, it will constitute persecution  only
         if, by reason of its intensity or duration, the  person  persecuted
         cannot reasonably be expected to tolerate it."

39. More recently, the Court of Appeal in MI (Pakistan) and MF  (Venezuela)
    v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 826, having cited Lord Bingham's speech in Sepet
    and Another and Lord Hope's judgment in HJ  (Iran)  concluded  at  [63]
    that those:

         "Clearly demonstrate, the concept of persecution for  the  purposes
         of the Geneva Convention (and indeed the Directive)  requires  that
         the past or apprehended harm to the asylum  seeker  must  attain  a
         substantial level of seriousness.  Similar considerations apply  to
         the  demonstration  of  serious  harm  for  the   purposes   of   a
         humanitarian protection claim or an Article  3  claim.   Family  or
         social disapproval in which the state has no part lies outside  his
         protection.  Discrimination against members of a particular  social
         group in the country of origin is  not  enough,  even  though  such
         discrimination might be contrary to the standards of  human  rights
         prevailing in the state in which asylum is sought."

40.  In  my  judgement,  although  the  background   evidence   undoubtedly
    established a level of  intolerance,  discrimination  and  even  actual
    hostility towards gay men in Kenya, it was not irrational for the judge
    to find that exposure to that society would not create a real  risk  of
    "persecution" to the appellant on the basis that it  had  not  attained
    the necessary level  of  severity  (cumulatively  or  individually)  to
    engage the Refugee Convention's protection.

41. That then leaves Mr Swain's final argument in relation  to  the  second
    limb of the appellant's claim to be at risk of persecution.  That seeks
    to challenge the judge's reasoning in  para  35  of  his  determination
    which was as follows:

         "Adopting the advice of the recent Kenyan COIS an assessment of the
         individual circumstances of the appellant should be undertaken.  In
         respect of this hearing the appellant said that he lived  with  [E]
         at his sister's house in Kenya for a period of some 2 years  -  two
         years first then a break up, then for a period in 2009  before  the
         appellant came to the UK.  In the 2011 hearing he gave a  different
         account - that he had lived with [E] from 2003  to  2004  and  then
         from 2005 until the appellant came to the UK in 2009 i.e. a  period
         of 5 years.  While  in  Kenya  they  had  changed  address  on  one
         occasion.  On any account this  is  a  long  period  in  which  the
         appellant was living in a gay relationship  in  Kenya  without  any
         reported problems.  More significantly he was  asked  at  the  2011
         hearing what he would do if the appeal was refused and the  present
         appellant said that he would go  back  to  Kenya  to  be  with  the
         appellant.   These  are  not  the  words  of  someone   who   fears
         persecution on account of his homosexuality in  Kenya,  but  rather
         show that  he  foresaw  no  difficulty  in  going  back  to  a  gay
         relationship  in  Kenya.   On  an  assessment  of  the   individual
         circumstances of this appellant I find that he has  not  shown  any
         particular factor that would place him at risk of persecution,  but
         instead find that he had lived  in  a  gay  relationship  in  Kenya
         previously without any instances of persecution."

42. Mr Swain's contention is that this reasoning materially undermined  the
    judge's finding that the appellant had not established a real  risk  of
    persecution on return and the reasoning was unsustainable  because  the
    judge has failed to take into account that the appellant's evidence was
    that he was able to live free of persecution  because  he  deliberately
    lived  discretely  in  a  gay  relationship  in  order  to  avoid  that
    persecution.

43. It is clear from reading the judge's determination as a whole  that  he
    was aware that that was the appellant evidence (see para 8) and it  was
    expressly part of the submissions made on behalf of the appellant  that
    he only lived discretely out of fear of persecution (see para 15).   In
    the light of that, the judge's reasoning is,  at  least,  questionable.
    However, the judge's reasons, which are detailed between paras  29  and
    37 of his determination, must be read fairly and as  a  whole.   It  is
    plain in doing so, in my  judgment,  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish a real risk of persecution based, not
    upon the fact that he had been able to live safely by  being  discrete,
    but because the background  evidence  did  not  show  a  real  risk  of
    persecution based either upon prosecution and conviction for consensual
    same-sex activity or as a result  of  Kenyan  society's  attitudes  and
    response to gay men.  It was not  founded,  as  Mr  Swain's  contention
    would require, at least in part on the judge's finding in para 35  that
    the appellant had been free of persecution when he lived in Kenya.  The
    judge's finding would, in my judgment, have been precisely the same  if
    para 35 is excised from his reasoning.

44. For these reasons, I do not accept  Mr  Swain's  submissions  that  the
    judge materially erred in law in reaching his adverse finding that  the
    appellant had failed to establish a real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason on return to Kenya.

    The Art 8 Claim

45. I now turn to consider Art 8.  Mr Swain's first submission was that the
    judge  had  been  wrong  to  reach  his  findings   both   under   para
    276ADE(1)(vi) that there were not "very significant obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Kenya and that there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules  because  he  had  failed  to  consider
    properly the background evidence concerning the position of gay men  in
    Kenya.  For the reasons I have already given, the judge did not err  in
    his consideration of  that  evidence  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    international protection claim and for those reasons also did not  fail
    to take into account the relevant background evidence in  reaching  his
    adverse conclusion under para  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  Art  8  outside  the
    Rules.

46. Mr Swain's additional submission was that the judge was in error in his
    assessment of whether there were "very significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into Kenya in applying para 276ADE(1)(vi).   In
    particular, Mr Swain took issue with the judge's assessment in para  43
    of his determination which is in the following terms:

         "The appellant's rights under Paragraph  276ADE  fall  next  to  be
         considered.   The  respondent  considered  this  paragraph  in  her
         reasons for refusal.  He has not lived in the UK for 20  years  nor
         has he spent at least half his life  in  this  country.   Paragraph
         276ADE(vi) has been amended by HC532 to include  the  words  'there
         would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration
         into [with] the country to which he would have to go if required to
         leave the UK'.  The test put forward in Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new
         rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) is therefore now obsolete and I
         must determine if there are 'very significant obstacles'.   I  have
         not accepted that the appellant is at risk in Kenya.  He arrived in
         the UK in 2009 and the community and society  from  which  he  came
         will not have changed significantly in that  period.   He  is  very
         well educated and has not only achieved his education in the UK but
         has also worked in his specialism.  He said at the hearing that  he
         would be able to get  employment  in  Kenya  where  he  has  worked
         before.  I find that he has every prospect of  finding  employment.
         He still has  family  in  Kenya.   Above  all  he  must  show  very
         significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  Kenya.   Mr  Joseph
         argued that his homosexuality was such a significant  obstacle.   I
         have however found above that homosexuals are able to  live  openly
         in Kenya and that the country information when  taken  as  a  whole
         does show that homosexuals are integrated in that country.  I  find
         that  he  has  not  shown  'very  significant  obstacles'  to   his
         integration.  He lived in Kenya until he was aged  29  with  a  gay
         partner and would be able to do so again.  I find  that  he  cannot
         qualify for leave to remain under Paragraph 276ADE."

47. It is trite law that the issue of whether there are  "very  significant
    obstacles" to integration imposes a high threshold.  Mr Swain,  in  his
    submissions, made reference  to  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  R
    (Agyarko and Another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 that the  test  had  to  be
    applied in a realistic rather than absolute way.  In fact, Agyarko  was
    concerned with the phrase in para EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules
    relating to "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing with a
    partner outside the UK.  In his judgment,  Lord  Reed  (with  whom  the
    other Justices agreed) in interpreting that latter phrase said that  it
    must:

         "be understood in a practical and realistic sense, rather  than  as
         referring solely to obstacles which make  it  literally  impossible
         for the family to live together in the country of origin of the non-
         national concerned."

48. Lord Reed added at [43] that it imposed a "stringent test".

49. I am content to accept that the  interpretation  of  the  phrase  "very
    significant  obstacles"  also  requires  it  to  be  understood  in   a
    "practical and realistic sense" but also that it is a "stringent" test.



50. In this case, the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellant  before
    Judge Woolley was that the appellant's homosexuality was a  significant
    obstacles to his integration.  It was in that context that  the  judge,
    applied his finding (which I have found to be sustainable)  in  respect
    of the appellant's international protection claim, that  the  appellant
    could live openly as a gay man in Kenya without facing a real  risk  of
    persecution.  Whilst Mr Swain took issue  with  the  judge's  statement
    that "homosexuals are integrated" into Kenya, in my judgment  that  has
    to be seen in the light of the judge's adverse finding in  relation  to
    the international protection claim and the fact that gay  men  live  in
    Kenya as part of its society.  Mr Swain's submission may  have  at  its
    core a premise  that  integration  requires  total  acceptance.   That,
    however, would be to require too  much  to  demonstrate  "integration".
    The Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813  at  [14]  set
    out the position as follows:

         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

51. Of course, the test in para 276ADE(1)(vi) addresses the  issue  not  of
    whether the individual will integrate into their own country but rather
    whether there are "very substantial obstacles" to that being  achieved.
    In my judgment, it was properly open to  Judge  Woolley  to  find  that
    given the appellant's history  and  in  the  light  of  the  background
    material that, despite societal attitude to gay men, it  had  not  been
    established  that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant living and participating in  Kenyan  society  to  the  extent
    identified in [14] of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Kamara.

52. Finally, in his reply, Mr Swain  raised  an  issue  about  the  judge's
    decision  under  Art  8  outside  the  Rules.   As  I  understood   his
    submission, he criticised the  judge's  decision  that  there  were  no
    "compelling circumstances" sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest
    on the basis that the  judge  had  not  dealt  with  the  risk  factors
    relevant to the appellant and  had,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    private  life  in  Kenya,  simply  identified   that   the   background
    information showed that "gay friendly venues" existed in Kenya.

53. The judge's consideration of Art 8 outside the Rules  is  detailed  and
    careful running to over six pages.  He sets  out  in  some  detail  the
    legal approach based upon Razgar  ([2004]  UKHL  27)  and  the  factors
    relevant to the  public  interest  under  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It is not necessary, in my  view,  to
    set out the judge's factual assessment, dealing with the  evidence,  at
    pages 19 and 20 of his determination under the  para  heading  of  para
    52B(i)-(vi).

54. In truth, it is difficult to see  what  further  factors,  outside  the
    consideration of the Rules, could have led the judge to find there were
    sufficiently "compelling circumstances".  At  para  52B(v),  the  judge
    refers to the "risk" issue put forward by  the  appellant,  namely  his
    circumstances as a gay man in Kenya.  Again, the judge  refers  to  the
    fact that he has found that the appellant could live openly  as  a  gay
    man in Kenya without risk of persecution even though  gay  men  may  be
    discriminated against.  The judge's reference to the existence of  "gay
    friendly venues" in Kenya is in response to the appellant  raising  the
    issue of whether he would be able to  find  a  new  partner  in  Kenya.
    Again, the judge's determination must be read fairly as  a  whole.   It
    was not incumbent upon the judge to cite repetitively the evidence  and
    findings that he had made throughout his determination.  A fair reading
    of his judgment entails a recognition that the judge took into  account
    the  matters  that  he  had  found  and   considered   throughout   his
    determination in reaching his adverse finding under Art 8.

55. In the light of those findings, and the matters set out in para 52B(i)-
    (vi) of his determination, there is no reasonable basis upon which  the
    appellant could have succeeded under Art 8 outside the Rules.

56. For these  reasons,  the  judge  did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Art   8,   including   his
    consideration of the relevant Art 8 Rules.

Decision

57.  Accordingly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  That decision stands.

58. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 28 July 2017
