







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12457/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 23 April 2019                    |On: 09 May 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                     MNS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, counsel, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born  on  15  June  1964.  He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Conrath, promulgated on 18 February 2019, dismissing  his  appeal
    against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse   his   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims.


 2. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    stated that it is arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's medical condition when assessing his credibility;  that  he
    failed properly to appreciate the way in which the adverse interest  in
    the appellant arose; that he failed 'to properly consider  the  medical
    evidence of suicide risk and to fully engage with  that  evidence'  and
    finally that he  erred  in  the  approach  to  and  the  assessment  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


 3. Mr Swain, who did not represent the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, relied on the three  grounds  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.


 4. First, with  regard  to  the  asylum  claim,  he  submitted  that  when
    assessing the appellant's credibility, no consideration  was  given  to
    the  medical  evidence.  The  appellant  had  asserted  that   he   had
    accommodated some Tamil men who were accused with  being  LTTE  members
    who had carried out the bombing against the Dalada Maligawa  Temple  in
    1998. Suspicion had developed against him  in  his  home  area  and  he
    feared that should he return home he would be attacked by people in his
    village and would reported to the authorities after he escaped from his
    home area.


 5. There had been a diagnosis  of  both  depression  and  PTSD  which  was
    associated with a specific trauma which was being revisited  and  which
    was causing flashbacks. That was linked to a specific event. The  Judge
    failed to assess the possibility that the event was likely  to  be  the
    1998 bombing and its aftermath.


 6. The appellant was not immediately identified, and it appeared that that
    it took the authorities time to identify the perpetrators and  then  to
    look and identify who might have helped them. He  had  not  claimed  to
    have been in the village for the whole period of six months  after  the
    bombing, but that he was travelling there from time to  time.   He  had
    moved to Colombo and the villagers did not know where he was. The  fact
    that he was not identified at that stage did not mean that he would not
    be identified now. Even if he was not aware of any actual  interest  in
    him, and it was his case that he is not, this did  not  mean  that  the
    authorities would not actually know this.  Consideration of his  mental
    health was also important in assessing that factor.


 7. It is also contended that the Judge did not properly assess the suicide
    risk, having devoted a single paragraph to its assessment. It  did  not
    appear that he had looked at both reports of Dr Lawrence.  Dr  Lawrence
    first saw him in 2015.  He examined him again in  2018.  He  considered
    that his condition had been deteriorating since he  first  saw  him  in
    2015. There would be a further deterioration if he were to be  detained
    or removed. Mr Swain submitted that the Judge should have undertaken  a
    full suicide risk assessment.


 8. Further, his assessment of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  was  insufficient.
    The Judge did  not  address  the  issues  cumulatively.  He  failed  to
    consider whether his subjective fears would have an impact on  what  he
    could do in Sri Lanka, and in particular whether  he  could  integrate.
    The factors that the Judge referred to in [66] do  not  fully  consider
    the issue.


 9. In reply, Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds amount to a disagreement
    with the decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. He has made
    proper findings.


10. The appellant made a claim for asylum in 2016 after his application for
    permission to remain on the basis of private life had been refused. The
    authorities would have had ample opportunity to locate him and harm him
    during the period  that  he  remained  in  the  village  following  the
    bombing, or in the subsequent two years that he spent in Colombo  [51].
    Those were findings open to the Judge.


11. He also made a sustainable finding that the appellant has not  given  a
    satisfactory explanation as to why he did not claim asylum  earlier  if
    the claim is genuine, having taken over 15 years to approach  the  Home
    Office.


12. He was entitled to find at [58] that he had embellished and exaggerated
    his fear when he saw Dr Lawrence in January 2018.


13. Finally, he dealt with the mental health issues that were  raised.  Any
    error of law would not be material. His finding that there would not be
    very serious obstacles to his re-integration into  Sri  Lanka  is  also
    sustainable.


    Assessment


14. The appellant's appeal based on  the  grounds  of  his  long  residency
    and/or private life, had been dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Traynor on 20 November 2013. Judge  Conrath  noted  that  although  the
    issue of asylum had been raised by the appellant in those  proceedings,
    the Court was not on that occasion  really  concerned  with  an  asylum
    appeal [4].


15. The appellant's asylum claim was based on his  assertion  that  he  had
    accommodated some Tamil men who were accused of being LTTE members  who
    had carried out the bombing of the temple in 1998. Suspicion  developed
    against him in his home area. He feared that if he returned  there,  he
    would be attacked by the villagers  and  it  was  likely  that  he  had
    already been reported to the authorities after he escaped from his home
    area.


16. The Judge noted that it  was  not  suggested  that  the  appellant  has
    suffered any form of harm in the past. He has never been  arrested  and
    detained by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka,  nor  had  been  threatened
    directly by the villagers. The appellant did not appear to be  claiming
    that the authorities were searching for him. The reality  was  that  he
    had no difficulty in obtaining a visitor visa   to leave Sri Lanka  and
    come to the UK on more than one occasion in and around 2000  and  2001.
    He had no difficultly  re-entering  Sri  Lanka  in  2001.   He  himself
    'expressed' that he intended to  return  to  Sri  lanka  as  he  had  a
    property and business there [48].


17. He stated at [49] that the reality is that he only  made  a  claim  for
    asylum in November 2016, which he maintained was prompted by  a  letter
    from his sister that he would be in danger if he was  to  return.  That
    letter was dated a month after his private life  application  had  been
    refused. He said that in order to determine the weight he could  attach
    to that letter he  had  to  first  determine  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's credibility of his claim [50-51].


18. He did not accept that the appellant is still at risk from a  group  of
    villagers more than twenty years after the bombing  of  the  temple  in
    1998. If they were seriously looking  for  him  there  had  been  ample
    opportunity to locate and harm him during the period he remained in the
    village or the next two years he spent in Colombo  thereafter.  Nothing
    happened to his parents whose property  it  was  that  the  Tamils  who
    caused the bombing had been renting. Nor  had  his  sister  or  brother
    experienced any issues. His sister made no mention  in  her  letter  of
    threats against her family if the authorities found out  the  appellant
    was in the country.


19. Judge Conrath  also  noted  that  the  appellant  initially  stated  at
    interview that his sister and brother had not  experienced  any  issues
    due to the bombing of the temple, which he found to be  truthful.  That
    had been an unprompted response to the question he was  asked  and  his
    subsequent retraction only took place when he had time to  think  about
    what he was being asked [53].


20. He found it to be more than  co-incidental  that  his  sister's  letter
    happened to be written within a month of  the  appellant's  application
    for leave to remain on private  life  grounds  was  refused.  That  was
    effectively the only document that he had to support his claim. It  was
    a document he asked his sister to provide  to  support  his  subsequent
    claim for asylum. He found that it was therefore a purely self  serving
    document [54].


21. He  stated  that  even  if  he  accepted  that  certain  'unidentified'
    villagers were still interested  in  him,  they  are  merely  non-state
    actors. There would be sufficiency of protection in Sri Lanka to enable
    him to return without undue risk of harm.  He  could  live  in  Colombo
    where his sister and family  are  already  living,  and  where  he  too
    managed to live unimpeded and without difficulty for almost  two  years
    after the bombing incident [55].


22. I find that the Judge has given sustainable reasons for dismissing  his
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims.


23. In the assessment  of  the  appellant's  mental  health  problem  under
    Article 3, the  Judge  found  that  he  had  somewhat  exaggerated  and
    embellished his fear when he saw Dr Lawrence in 2018 [58]. He stated at
    [59] that it is right to point out that Dr Lawrence considered that his
    mental state had deteriorated since he last saw him  and  that  he  had
    more symptoms of depression.  He was clinically more  anxious  than  he
    was the last time. He also had regard to what Dr Lawrence indicated  in
    his report about medication and treatment being available in Sri Lanka.




24. The appellant told him that he had received Group Therapy for about two
    to three months, some eighteen months prior to the hearing, but was not
    receiving any treatment at the time of the  hearing  in  November  2018
    [60].


25. In considering whether there would be a breach of his Article 3 rights,
    the Judge had regard to the suicide risk that the appellant  presented.
    He stated at [62] that Dr Lawrence stated in his report that suicide is
    notoriously difficult to predict, and he is not currently a high risk.


26. The Judge did not refer to Dr Lawrence's conclusion in his 2015 report,
    that the risk would definitely  be  increased  if  the  appellant  were
    returned to Sri Lanka  where  he  is  without  support  and  vulnerable
    because of his depression. By the time he came to assess him in January
    2018,  he  concluded  that  his  material  health   had   significantly
    deteriorated. Whilst suicide risk is difficult to predict, it was clear
    that if the appellant were removed to Sri Lanka, or if he were detained
    in the UK before he was removed there, it is  highly  likely  that  his
    suicide risk would increase.


27. As submitted on behalf of the appellant, the  Judge  did  not  properly
    consider what this  evidence  meant.  The  appellant  had  contemplated
    suicide in 2015 and there would be a further deterioration  if  he  was
    detained and removed.  In those circumstances there should have been  a
    full suicide risk assessment made in accordance with the guidelines  in
    J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, which were set  out  in  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


28. Finally, with regard to the  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  assessment,  the
    Judge did not follow the guidance  referred  to  in  Miah  [2016]  UKUT
    00131, and did  not  look  at  issues  cumulatively.  There  the  Upper
    Tribunal stated at [17] that the public law duty  engaged  is  to  take
    account of all material considerations, weighing them in the round.  In
    this context, they recorded that in response to  a  question  from  the
    bench, it was acknowledged on behalf of the Secretary of State that the
    age, gender, educational achievements and linguistic abilities  of  the
    person concerned are (inexhaustively) all material considerations.


29. The Judge did not adequately consider his subjective, but firmly  held,
    fears which could have an impact upon what he could do in Sri Lanka and
    whether he could integrate.


30. I cannot find as Mr Tarlow urged that any error was immaterial. I  thus
    cannot find that the same decision would inevitably have  been  reached
    had a proper assessment under Articles 3 and 8 been made.


31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to the appellant's  Articles
    3 and 8 claims involved the making of an error on a point of law. I set
    aside it aside. It will have to be re-made.


32. I am satisfied that the  amount  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision to be re-made is extensive. In  the
    circumstances, it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error on a point of
    law and is set aside.


    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for  a
    fresh decision to be made.


    Anonymity direction continued.






    Signed   Date 2 May 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

