






Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12219/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |On 31st May 2019                |
|On 13th May 2019                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                              Mr Shahid Mehmood

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J Parker promulgated on the 18th December 2018 whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and relief otherwise under Articles 2 and 3 and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Doyle on 27th February 2019.  Thus,  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

    Factual Background

 4. The appellant was born in Pakistan on 1 January 1973. In 2006 he bought
    a business with a friend, Mr Baber who was allegedly  a  clerk  in  the
    Lahore Development Authority, and as part of that business purchased  a
    plot of land from the friend for Rs.250,000. However it transpired that
    the land was not owned by his friend and the paperwork for the land was
    fake.

 5. The appellant  sought  to  recover  his  money  from  his  friend.  The
    appellant seems to have taken legal proceedings [see paragraph 23,  3rd
    indent paragraph] and to have been unsuccessful. Despite that Mr  Baber
    promised to pay him some money.

 6. However his friend then informed on the appellant to the ISA (ISI),  an
    arm of the security services in Pakistan. The ISA seized the appellant,
    detained him for 2 weeks and beat him up,  including  a  claim  by  the
    appellant that he was raped.

 7. 2 or 3 weeks after his release from detention  the  appellant  went  to
    hospital. There is a hospital note, dated admission  27th  April  2007,
    which indicates that the appellant had been involved in a road  traffic
    accident. The appellant claims that he had to make that assertion as it
    was the only way in which  he  could  get  medical  treatment  for  his
    injuries.

 8. The appellant claims that he sought to complain to the police but  they
    said that they could not  take  any  action  against  the  agency.  The
    appellant claims that Mr Baber is part of a Mafia and is a DOM (Don)  a
    leader of the group. Mr Baber is always surrounded by  bodyguards  with
    guns.

 9. The appellant then claims that he left  Pakistan  on  the  6th  or  7th
    August 2008.  After  the  detention  and  mistreatment,  the  appellant
    remained in Pakistan for over 1 year and 5 months an does not  describe
    anything else happening in that time.

10. The appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK on the 1st January 2009
    by plane.  The appellant only claimed asylum on the 18th April 2018. By
    notice dated the 5th October 2018 the appellant's claim to  asylum  was
    refused.

11. The appellant appealed and the appeal was listed to  be  heard  on  the
    19th November 2018. The notice of hearing was  sent  out  on  the  22nd
    October 2018.

12. A Pre-hearing review was conducted on the papers and at that stage  the
    appellant's representatives were claiming that they  were  waiting  for
    medical reports. No application for an adjournment was  made.   At  the
    hearing a note from the appellant's GP stated that certain scars on the
    appellant were cigarette burns but such reports did not comply with the
    Istanbul Protocol.

13. At the hearing Mr Karnik applied for an adjournment on the  basis  that
    they wished to instruct a medical expert to consider the burn scars  on
    the appellant. The judge considered the application and refused it.

14. The grounds of appeal seek to suggest that the judge in accordance with
    the case of Naigwe 2014 UKUT 00418 should have granted  an  adjournment
    and the failure to grant an adjournment is an error of law in that  the
    judge could not deal with the appeal fairly and justly  with  the  case
    without the medical report. It is claimed that the judge's approach  to
    the availability of the  medical  evidence  has  infected  the  judge's
    findings on credibility generally.

15. Firstly, I would note that as a part of  the  decision  the  judge  had
    noted that the appellant had not raised any risk in any other  part  of
    Pakistan and that the appellant had at the time of his leaving Pakistan
    an internal relocation option. It had not been shown that it would have
    been unduly harsh for  the  appellant  to  have  internally  relocated.
    Further  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  still
    internally relocate within Pakistan without it being  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to do so. [see paragraphs 40  &  41]  .  Thus,  whether  the
    appellant had been subjected to mistreatment the judge found  that  the
    appellant was not at risk in other parts of Pakistan.

16. The appellant had remained in Pakistan for 1 year and 5 months and  had
    not had any further problems. Whilst he claimed to have tried to  lodge
    a complaint against the ISA or ISI, he states that he was told he could
    not lodge a complaint against them. However, nothing  had  happened  to
    the appellant for a significant period of time.

17. The finding on internal relocation alone would be sufficient to dispose
    of the appeal on the basis of protection.

18. Further I would not that the issues raised do not raise any  convention
    reason as required in asylum.

19. With regard to the application for an adjournment,  the  appellant  had
    been  in  the  UK  for  over  11  years  before  making  his  claim  to
    asylum/international  protection.   The   appellant   had   had   every
    opportunity to seek legal advice and obtain medical evidence to confirm
    that his scars were cigarette burns prior to  claiming  asylum  but  no
    medical evidence had been adduced save a report from  the  GP  produced
    shortly before the hearing. The appellant had made a conscious decision
    to claim asylum but allegedly was still reluctant to give  a  full  and
    frank account. The appellant had only raised the scarring at  the  last
    minute.

20. An adjournment was being sought for an assessment to be made  of  scars
    that were according to the appellant over 12 years old. Given that  the
    representatives had been aware of the issue of the scars  and  injuries
    at least at the time of the PHR and given that there was  no  timetable
    for such a report the judge was entitled to consider that the appellant
    had had ample time to put his claim in order.   The judge was  entitled
    to proceed with the appeal and determine the  appeal  on  the  evidence
    before him.

21. The judge had noted significant credibility issues with the appellant's
    account. The judge noted that appellant  had  taken  legal  action  not
    against Mr Baber but against the plot. The appellant was a business man
    and if an individual had defrauded him he would know  that  the  action
    was against the fraudster not against anyone else. [see question 102 in
    the interview].   The judge also noted that the  appellant  would  have
    noted buildings on the plot of land and as a business  man  would  have
    made enquiry about the property.  The  refusal  letter  had  noted  the
    inconsistencies in the dates in the appellant's account.

22. The judge took  specific  note  of  the  medical  admission  note  from
    Pakistan which stated that the appellant had been in  a  car  accident.
    The appellant had claimed that it was only by making that claim that he
    could get treatment. Again, the judge doubted the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account.

23.   It is also to be noted that the appellant had made an application  to
    come to the UK in 2008  on  a  visit  visa  and  that  application  was
    refused.

24. The judge has carefully considered the appellant's  account  and  given
    valid reasons for finding that the appellant would in  any  event  have
    been able to internally relocate. The judge has gone on to consider the
    appellant's claim in detail and given valid reasons  for  finding  that
    the appellant had not told the truth. The judge has  taken  account  of
    the GP's assessment of the scars but otherwise has given valid  reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's account.

25. For the reasons set out there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision. The judge has fully justified the conclusions reached and was
    entitled given the length of time that the appellant had been in the UK
    to proceed with the hearing and make the findings that he has.

    Notice of Decision

26. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.





Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 28th May 2019



