
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/12641/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision promulgated and    |
|                                      |sent                                 |
|On 17 May 2017                        |         On 25 May 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                     mF
              (Anonymity to continue till after fresh hearing)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, solicitor, Elder Rahimi
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision by Judge  Paul  Housego,  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 19 December 2016.  The appellant was born  in  Iran  in
    1995, and says he entered this country  on  5  May  2016.   He  claimed
    asylum some time after that, on the basis that while in this country he
    had converted to Christianity, having previously taken some interest in
    this religion when he was in  Iran,  and  got  into  trouble  with  the
    authorities over it.

2.   The appellant was interviewed on 18 October 2016,  and  his  claim  was
    refused on 1 November.   The  judge  disbelieved  his  account  of  his
    conversion, and the decision is challenged on  various  grounds;  first
    and foremost being difficulties which are said to have arisen over  the
    interpretation.  The judge referred to Dorodian [01/TH/1537] (mentioned
    with approval in NM (Christian Converts) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00045 at paragraph 68), and it was clearly relevant  to  consider  what
    knowledge the applicant had of the Christian religion.

3.   The judge accepted at paragraph 63 that he had shown some knowledge  of
    Christianity, but, reasonably enough, took the view that that  was  not
    necessarily the whole story.  What he had needed to do was  to  explore
    the knowledge that the appellant had shown, and it is very  clear  that
    difficulty had arisen with the interpretation, over the translation  of
    religious expressions.  The judge has helpfully provided a  typewritten
    note of his record of proceedings, though, not quite so  helpfully,  an
    unproof-read one. With the help of Mr Gayle's own note, I have  had  to
    make sense of it at some points; but it is quite clear that  the  judge
    did take considerable trouble to get clear  answers  to  the  questions
    that the appellant was asked, so far as he possibly could, and he is to
    be commended for that.

4.   The judge notes at paragraph 45 of his decision that it was  "difficult
    to get a clear answer to relatively  simple  questions".   The  example
    that he goes on to give at paragraph 45, if it was an  example,  refers
    to the means by which the appellant had got the money to pay  an  agent
    to bring him to this country.  That is dealt  with  in  the  record  of
    proceedings at page 8.  There is an  indication  there  that  Mr  Gayle
    raised concern about the interpretation,  because  answers  were  being
    given about money which did not necessarily fit the question.

5.   At this point the question was  why  the  appellant  should  have  been
    giving answers about his father's pension.  The appellant's  answer  to
    that is, "Because you asked me how much he gets  as  a  pension".   The
    judge says correctly in terms of his previous question, as recorded  on
    the transcript, "I asked how much the agent was paid". It  seemed  from
    the exchange which had taken place that the appellant  was  under  some
    misapprehension, if it was a misapprehension, about  the  relevance  of
    his father's pension; but it seemed that an answer was provided to  the
    question in the end. In my view, though I acknowledge  that  the  judge
    heard and saw the appellant, this  exchange  was  just  as  capable  of
    showing interpretation difficulties as evasiveness on his part.

6.   However a key finding in  the  judge's  credibility  decision  came  at
    paragraph 68, "The oral evidence of the appellant was evasive and often
    avoided questions" and the judge then relates the efforts  he  made  to
    ensure the interpretation was correct and concludes,  "I  am  satisfied
    that the reason was not any difficulty in translation".   It is  a  bad
    practice for a judge to find an  appellant,  or  anyone  else,  evasive
    without giving details of how he had been evasive.  If  it  is  obvious
    from what had gone before, then it is not necessarily a material  error
    of law, so Mr Kotas by invitation referred me to the passages which  he
    said did make that clear.

7.   The first comes at paragraph 41 of the judge's decision, as follows:

     Asked why he had come to the UK and not another country, the  appellant
         said that he had difficulty in his own country and that was why  he
         had come to the UK.  I asked if he had understood the question.  He
         said that he gave money to the trafficker  to  take  him  somewhere
         safe.  He had not known that he was coming to the UK, and  did  not
         know that was where he was until he was arrested on arrival.

8.   That passage appears  in  the  record  of  proceedings  at  page  5  as
    follows:-

         Q    Why chose UK to come to not another country?
         A    Because I had the difficulty in my country I  would  not  came
                      (sic) here.


         Q by Judge    Did you understand the question?
         A    I gave money to trafficker to take me somewhere safe and  they
                      brought me here.


         Q    And do you have friends, family here?
         A    Nobody.


         Q    So you did not know coming to the UK, is that right?
         A    No I did not know I was coming to the UK - I just  said  'Take
                      me somewhere safe'.


         Q    At what point did you realise you coming to  the  UK  in  your
                      travels?
         A    At no point I realise that I knew I was coming to the UK  when
                      the human trafficker arrested me I was informed I was
                      in the UK.

9.   It was then suggested to the appellant by the presenting  officer  that
    he was not being truthful, and there was an exchange which  got  no-one
    very much further about that.   It  is  difficult  to  see  that  those
    questions either, as recorded, are an example  of  evasiveness,  rather
    than difficulties of interpretation.  It may have  been  clear  to  the
    judge seeing the appellant give those answers for himself,  and  it  is
    certainly true that this appellant  was  somebody  with  a  history  of
    raising difficulties about interpretation at  his  interview;  but  the
    judge needed to explain how and why he had reached that conclusion.

10.  The other example mentioned by Mr Kotas comes at the judge's  paragraph
    42, where it appears in this form:-

     Asked if his family had converted to Christianity  the  appellant  said
         that he was in touch with them.  The Home Office Presenting Officer
         said that she had asked if they had converted: the  appellant  said
         no.  Asked when he was last in touch with them the  appellant  said
         it was Saturday, 17 December 2016.  Asked how they felt  about  his
         conversion he said they were unhappy about it, and unhappy that  he
         was far away, but happy that he was safe.

11.  That passage in the judge's record of proceedings appears as follows:-

         Q    Your family in Iran?
         A    Yes.


         Q    Have they converted to Christianity?
         A    I am in contact with them.


         Q    What I asked is have they converted?
         A    No.

12.  It is quite clear that the appellant's  answer  about  being  in  touch
    with his family was not a direct answer to the question  about  whether
    his family had converted to Christianity; but it seems that, when  that
    question was repeated, he did give a direct answer, which was "No".  It
    is not easy to see what the appellant could possibly have  to  gain  by
    avoiding that particular question; and once  again,  in  my  view,  the
    judge did not make it clear, if that was intended as an example, why he
    regarded him as evasive on it.

13.  So for those reasons, and  without  going  on  to  consider  the  other
    grounds, it seems to me that there will have  to  be  a  fresh  hearing
    before a different judge. Considerable care will no doubt be taken that
    the interpreter chosen is not one with whom  the  appellant  can  claim
    there are any difficulties, and it may be as well for that person to be
    booked for a
    case management hearing in advance of the actual hearing date, so  that
    this can be established to the judge's satisfaction; but that  will  be
    something for the resident judge to consider.

Appeal : decision set aside
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Housego
                               [pic]                       (Judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

                                Date 24 May 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

