
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/12436/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|Via Microsoft Teams                  |On 27 August 2021                    |
|On 12 August 2021                    |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Ms A V                                            |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.
I make this order because this is a protection claim.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms P Solanki, of Counsel, instructed by Tamil
Welfare Association.
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka of Tamil  ethnicity  from  the
    north of Sri Lanka, born on 21 October  1984.  She  appeals  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C Griffith (hereafter  the
    "judge") promulgated on 30 March 2021 following a hearing on  16  March
    2021 by which the judge dismissed her appeal on asylum grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds  against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  of  29
    November 2019 to refuse her further submissions of 9 August 2018.

 2. The grounds contend, in summary, that the judge materially erred in law
    in her assessment of the appellant's credibility, the risk  on  return,
    her Article 3 claim based on her medical condition and, in relation  to
    the appellant's private life claim, in reaching  her  finding  for  the
    purposes of para 296ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules,  that  there
    would  not  be  very   significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    reintegration in Sri Lanka .

 3. Each ground has more than one limb. I  have  therefore  described  them
    below as ground 1(a), ground 1(b), ground 2(a) etc.



Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 June 2010 on a direct
    flight from Sri Lanka with entry clearance as a student valid until  10
    June 2012, having obtained a passport through an agent which  gave  her
    correct name, date of birth and photograph.

 5. On 14 September 2012, the appellant claimed asylum. This was refused on
    1 March 2015. Her appeal against the decision of 1 March 2015 was heard
    by the First-tier on 23 May 2016 and remitted  to  the  respondent  for
    reconsideration.

 6. The decision was reconsidered  and  her  asylum  claim  refused  on  13
    December 2017. Her appeal against that decision was dismissed following
    a hearing on 2 February 2018 before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andonian in a decision promulgated on 22 February 2018. She was granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Her  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was dismissed by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Monson  on  17
    October 2018. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the Court of Appeal. She exhausted her appeal rights  on  16  April
    2019.

 7. The appellant's further submissions of 9 August  2018  relied  upon  PP
    (female headed household; expert duties) Sri Lanka  [2017]  UKUT  00117
    (IAC) and contended, inter alia, that the Sri Lankan  authorities  were
    continuing to visit her family home in Sri Lanka looking  for  her  and
    she would therefore be unable to reside with her parents or siblings in
    Sri Lanka. She would  therefore  be  forced  to  reside  in  Jaffna  in
    isolation without the support of her male relatives.  She  was  of  low
    socio-economic  status  which  would  expose  her  to   dependence   on
    government aid and/or other services by the security forces in  Jaffna.
    She also maintained that she was at risk on return in Sri Lanka due  to
    her involvement with the LTTE. She relied upon Article 3 in relation to
    her medical condition. She suffers from post-traumatic stress  disorder
    (PTSD) and moderate depressive episodes.  Finally, she  relied  on  her
    right to her private life.

 8. The applicable  country  guidance  at  the  time  of  Judge  Andonian's
    decision as well as the judge's decision was GJ and others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).



Basis of asylum claim before Judge Andonian

 9. The appellant was involved in the LTTE. She took part in LTTE plays  in
    school in 2002. She organised social events and was involved in  Heroes
    Day. She was also involved in recruitment for the LTTE,  canvassing  in
    this regard from door-to-door. She joined the LTTE in 2006  and  became
    involved in food distribution and caring for the  wounded.  She  was  a
    programme organiser in schools in Vanni.

10. The appellant was arrested and detained in October 2002  and  in  April
    2006. On each occasion, she was sexually abused.  She  was  accused  of
    being an LTTE member and interrogated. Following her release  from  her
    second detention in July 2006, the authorities  attended  her  home  in
    search for her. She was involved with the LTTE until  the  end  of  the
    conflict. The army sent her to live in an IDP camp where she contracted
    chickenpox. A priest took her to live in a church  hostel.  In  October
    2009, the authorities came in search of  her  at  the  hostel.  Between
    October and November 2009, she stayed in hiding with an aunt  and  made
    arrangements to leave the country. In April 2010, the authorities  came
    in search of her again. They attended  again  in  2011  and  2012.  Her
    father informed her that individuals continue to  call  at  the  family
    home in search of her.



Judge Andonian's decision

11. Judge Andonian accepted that the appellant is a  Sri  Lankan  of  Tamil
    ethnicity and that she originates from northern Sri Lanka. He  rejected
    her evidence that she  had  been  detained.  He  did  not  believe  her
    evidence that she was unable to tell the Home Office about  the  sexual
    abuse.

12. Judge Andonian found  that  the  appellant  "may  well  have  had  some
    connection with the LTTE and had been questioned about it" but  he  did
    not find that the Sri Lankan authorities would have any interest in her
    on return as she was a low level member and not  prominent  (paras  79,
    80, 88 and  91 of Judge Andonian's decision). He found that she was not
    and never had been a prominent member and, even if she was a member, it
    was at a very low level,  so  insignificant  that  there  would  be  no
    interest in her on return. He stated: "I cannot see how providing  food
    and knocking on doors to galvanise support for the  LTTE,  over  eleven
    years ago, singing songs and being in  plays  at  school  some  sixteen
    years ago, would open her to a risk of persecution upon  return.  I  do
    not believe she comes within the ambit of GJ[pic]

13. Judge Andonian found that the appellant's parents were not at  risk  as
    they had remained in Sri Lanka. He did not accept that the  authorities
    were returning to her family home (paras 92-94).  She  would  not  have
    been able to obtain a passport. He did not believe  her  evidence  that
    her agent had obtained her passport and visa. He found it  unbelievable
    that the agent would have been able to obtain a student  visa  for  the
    appellant without her being interviewed and without  applying  for  the
    visa herself. Her delay in  claiming  asylum  damaged  her  credibility
    (96). She could return to her family.





The judge's decision

The appellant's asylum claim

14. The judge summarised the country expert evidence of Dr Gilberto  Algar-
    Faria dated 5 March 2021 at  paras  40-44  of  her  decision  and  also
    referred to his evidence at paras 82, 83 and 88.

15. The judge reminded herself of the guidance in Devaseelan v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department * [2002] UKIAT  702  (para  68)  and  the
    findings of Judge Andonian.  She assessed the new material before  her.
    Her findings, which I have assembled from paras 76-91 and  set  out  in
    historical timeline in relation to the appellant's asylum claim, may be
    summarised as follows:

    (i)    The appellant's past activities when she was a  teenager  during
         the course of the civil war were credible. It was credible that  at
         that time activities, in particular recruiting for the LTTE,  would
         have been capable of making the authorities interested in her (para
         77). There was no evidence that she was a prominent activist  (para
         78).

    (ii)   The judge gave the appellant the benefit of the doubt  that  she
         was arrested on two occasions albeit for short periods  (para  78).
         However, the appellant was  not  released  from  detention  on  the
         payment of a bribe (para 87).

    (iii)  The judge also said that, given that the appellant was  a  young
         vulnerable female, she was prepared to accept that she was sexually
         assaulted in detention (para 78).

    (iv)   The judge said that  she  saw  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
         findings  of  Judge  Andonian  regarding  the  low-level  level  of
         involvement the appellant had had with the  LTTE  when  she  was  a
         teenager (para 76).

    (v)    She noted that no interest was shown in  the  appellant  between
         the 2002 arrest and the 2006 arrest. In the interim, she  was  able
         to  complete  her  'A'  levels  and  continue  with  [pic]her  LTTE
         activities (para 78).

    (vi)   In relation to the appellant's  evidence  that  the  authorities
         looked for her at the hostel where she was  then  living  (i.e.  in
         October 2009), the judge noted that para  13  of  Judge  Andonian's
         decision stated that the authorities went looking for  her  at  the
         hostel because she was from Vanni. The judge  considered  that  the
         timing was relevant as this happened shortly after the end  of  the
         civil war. She considered that it was possible that at  that  stage
         the authorities were [pic]interested in any Tamil in the north  and
         those who had connections with the LTTE (para 87).

    (vii)  The judge rejected the appellant's evidence  that  she  obtained
         her passport and student visa through an agent (para 88).

    (viii) The judge noted that the appellant had not taken part in any sur
         place activities in the United  Kingdom  and  then  said  that  the
         appellant "has had no role let alone any significant role in  post-
         conflict Tamil [pic]separatism within the diaspora  or  within  Sri
         Lanka" (para 78).

    (ix)   The judge considered a letter dated 2 August  2019  said  to  be
         from the appellant's father which  stated,  inter  alia,  that  the
         appellant could not return to live with her family  in  Sri  Lanka.
         She found that the letter was a  fabrication  (paras  84-86).   She
         found that there was no reason why the appellant could  not  return
         to live with her parents and siblings in the family home (para 86).



    (x)    The judge rejected the appellant's claim  that  the  authorities
         have continued to attend the family home looking for her (para 86).



    (xi)   The judge considered  that  the  appellant's  failure  to  claim
         asylum on arrival and that she waited until her  student  visa  had
         expired went against her credibility (para 90).

16. In relation to the risk on return at the airport, the judge found  that
    the appellant may well be asked  questions  on  arrival  in  Sri  Lanka
    because she will be returned as a failed asylum seeker and because  she
    has been out of the country for a number of years. However,  the  judge
    noted that the appellant had left Sri Lanka on a student visa to pursue
    a course of studies. She stated that, as she was  not  satisfied  there
    was anything in the appellant's background to excite  the  interest  of
    the authorities arising from her former LTTE contacts, she did not find
    the appellant would be at  risk  of  being  detained  by  the  security
    services (para 89). The judge found that  there  were  no  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant was or could be perceived to be  a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka (para 78). The appellant  was  not  on  a
    "stop list", which comprises of a  list  of  individuals  against  whom
    there is an extant court order or arrest warrant, given that there  was
    no evidence to suggest that any court order or arrest warrant had  been
    issued in respect of her (para 80).

17. Similarly, with regard to a "watch list", the judge  found  that  there
    was nothing to suggest that the appellant was a Tamil activist  working
    to  destabilise  the  state  or  revive  internal  armed  conflict  and
    therefore she did not find that there  was  any  reasonable  likelihood
    that the appellant would be  monitored  by  the  security  services  or
    detained after leaving the airport (para 81).

The appellant's Article 3 health claim

18. The judge summarised the (first) report of Dr Stevens dated 31  January
    2018 (which was also considered by Judge Andonian) at paras 27-30,  the
    second report of Dr Stevens dated 14 November 2019 at paras  31-32  and
    the most recent report of Ms Joanne Lackenby at paras 33-39.  She  also
    summarised the expert evidence  of  Dr  Algar-Faria  on  the  issue  of
    accessing healthcare at para 44.

19. The judge assessed the appellant's Article 3 claim based on her medical
    condition at paras 92-102.  There was no dispute that the appellant was
    suffering from severe to moderate PTSD and  depression.  She  was  born
    Christian.  She  had  recently  become  a  Jehovah's  Witness  and  for
    religious reasons would not take her own life. The judge noted that the
    most recent report stated that "She does not have a significant history
    of  attempted  suicide.  Her  religious  beliefs  act   as   a   strong
    [pic]protective factor and are likely to continue to do so" (para 92).

20. The only medication the appellant is receiving at present, according to
    her evidence, is sleeping pills which the appellant  took  infrequently
    (para 93).

21. The judge considered Ms  Lackenby's  opinion  that  the  appellant  was
    unlikely to engage with the mental health services in Sri Lanka at para
    94, specifically quoting (at para 94) from a paragraph in Ms Lackenby's
    report where Ms Lackenby had referred, inter  alia,  to  "cultural  and
    shame-based barriers" which she said were likely  to  increase  in  Sri
    Lanka; that the appellant was likely  to  fear  greater  judgment  from
    members of her own culture due to the taboos surrounding sexual  abuse;
    that females were more at risk of stigma  and  sexual  acts;  and  that
    returning to the environment where the trauma occurred was likely to be
    a further barrier to engagement with the therapies and her symptoms are
    likely to worsen.

22. Having considered the respondent's Country Policy and Information  Note
    ("CPIN") dated July 2020 on medical treatment  and  healthcare  in  Sri
    Lanka at paras 96-98 of her decision, the judge said, at para 99:

         "99.     Although described as inadequate, the  objective  material
             shows that there are treatments available  both  in  terms  of
             therapy and a number of drugs. It is stated that mental health
             carries a stigma in Sri Lanka and is therefore something  that
             might deter the appellant  from  engaging.  It  seems  to  me,
             however, that she has not engaged to any significant degree in
             the UK, in that what medication is offered to her,  she  takes
             intermittently. A medical expert  states  that  the  appellant
             would benefit from  long-term  psychological  therapy  and  is
             likely to engage more meaningfully with a female  and  someone
             who  is  not  from  her  own  culture.  There  are  treatments
             available in Sri  Lanka  which  include  counselling,  CBT  as
             [pic]well as medication, albeit they are not  on  a  par  with
             what is on offer in the UK. It is significant,  however,  that
             the appellant's state of health has not  deteriorated  despite
             the absence of talking therapy over the last year and the  low
             level of engagement the appellant has  shown  as  regards  her
             medication."

23. Having reminded herself at para 96 of the Supreme Court's  judgment  in
    AM (Zimbabwe ) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17, the judge  said  (paras  101-102)
    that she did not find that the appellant if returned would  be  exposed
    to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  her  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a reduction in her life expectancy
    and  therefore  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  test  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe). Her current treatment in the [pic]United  Kingdom  appeared
    to be minimal, there are treatments available  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    appellant would have the support of her family.

The appellant's private life claim - para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules

24. The judge reminded herself  of  the  appellant's  diagnosis,  that  her
    condition was described in the most recent report as moderate to severe
    and that her symptoms are in the moderate range. She took into  account
    her earlier findings regarding the availability  of  treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka, the fact that the appellant was not currently taking  any  anti-
    depressant medication and that, it appeared, she had not  engaged  with
    any therapy for a year. The judge noted that, despite this, her  mental
    health had not deteriorated for at least the last two years (para 104).



25. The judge said that she attached considerable significance to the  fact
    that the appellant has family in Sri Lanka and remained in contact with
    them and her earlier finding that the appellant would be able  to  live
    with them on return (para 105).

26. The judge noted the evidence that mental illness carries  a  stigma  in
    Sri Lanka at paras 105 and 108. However, she found that  there  was  no
    evidence before her that the appellant's family would  reject  her  for
    those reasons or fail to provide help to her  to  access  such  medical
    services as are available. She noted that  the  family's  circumstances
    were described by Dr Stevens  as  "materially  comfortable"  which  the
    judge considered suggested that there would be money available  to  pay
    for treatment and travel if that were necessary (para 105).

27. The judge rejected the submission that the appellant has a low standard
    of education, given that the appellant had studied as far as 'A'  level
    in Sri Lanka and had begun an HND in Computing,  which  she  failed  to
    complete only because the funding for it ceased to be  available  (para
    106).

28. The judge reminded herself of the guidance as to integration in  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813, quoting from the  judgment  at  para  108  of  her
    decision. She was satisfied that the appellant will  have  retained  an
    understanding of how life in Sri Lanka is carried on and that,  despite
    her mental health issues, she could participate in it with the help  of
    her family. She stated that whilst mental illness was said to  carry  a
    stigma, the evidence did not suggest  that  those  with  mental  health
    issues are discriminated against to such  a  degree  that  they  cannot
    participate in society.[pic] She was therefore not satisfied  that  the
    appellant had established that her circumstances on return would amount
    to very significant obstacles to her integration.[pic]



ASSESSMENT

Ground 1(a)

29. Ground  1(a)  is  that  the  judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence that her family have  not  been
    visited by the Sri Lankan authorities since her arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010, in that she failed to take  into  account  the  expert
    evidence  of  Dr  Algar-Faria  and  the  respondent's  CPIN  on   Tamil
    Separatism, version 6.0 dated May 2020.

30. Ms Solanki took me to the expert evidence and background  evidence  she
    relied upon, i.e. paras 6.4.1, 6.4.4. and  6.8.5  of  the  respondent's
    CPIN on Tamil Separatism and paras 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 of the report of Dr.
    Algar-Faria.

31. I have carefully considered the background  material  to  which  I  was
    referred.

32. There is nothing in the evidence to which I was referred in the CPIN on
    Tamil Separatism that suggests that family members of all  former  LTTE
    members are monitored irrespective of the nature, extent  and  duration
    of their activities and  irrespective  of  whether  or  not  they  have
    engaged in any activities that threaten the integrity of the  state  of
    Sri Lanka. To the contrary, para 6.4.4 specifically  refers  to  "close
    relatives of high-profile former LTTE members who  are  wanted  by  Sri
    Lankan authorities may be subject to monitoring" (my emphasis) and para
    6.8.5 states that:

         "An NGO told the UK FFT that family members of former  LTTE  cadres
         may be under  some  surveillance  and  that  rehabilitees  have  to
         routinely report to the military.... Similarly,  the  Human  Rights
         Commission  thought  that  monitoring  of   former   LTTE   members
         continued."

         (my emphasis)

33. I do not accept that the judge failed to take into account the expert's
    opinion that the appellant's evidence, that the Sri Lankan  authorities
    continue to visit her family looking for her, was consistent  with  the
    country information. She summarised the expert's evidence at paras  40-
    43 of her decision, referring specifically, to  the  evidence  he  gave
    concerning the plausibility of the appellant's family  home  in  Jaffna
    being visited at para 41 of her decision which reads:

         "41.     Addressing the plausibility, if any,  of  the  appellant's
             claim that the authorities have continued to visit the  family
             home in Jaffna enquiring about her, in  the  expert's  opinion
             the appellant's claim that her father received visits  between
             2010 and 2015 was consistent with country information and,  if
             credible, it is plausible that the authorities  may  still  be
             looking for her."

34. The judge again referred to the expert's opinion in the second sentence
    of para 83 of her decision  where  she  began  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence that her family continued to be visited by the Sri
    Lankan authorities. Para 83 reads:

         "83.     I have considered the appellant's claims that  her  family
             continue to be visited by  unnamed  individuals  asking  about
             her.  A  negative  credibility  finding  was  made  by   Judge
             Andonian. I have considered the expert's report on  the  issue
             who found it was consistent with country information. I accept
             that the families of those who have  or  had  a  high  profile
             within the  LTTE  might  have  received  visits  and,  at  its
             highest, that shortly after the  end  of  the  civil  war  the
             families of all  those  detained  at  some  point  during  the
             conflict might have been  visited.  However,  given  that  the
             authorities have sophisticated intelligence gathering at their
             disposal and in light of the lack of any political activity in
             the UK since  her  arrival  in  2010,  I  do  not  accept  the
             credibility of her account that the  family  continued  to  be
             visited until 2015 or beyond."

35. In reaching her finding on the credibility of the appellant's  evidence
    that her family continued to be visited by the Sri Lankan  authorities,
    the judge considered not only her assessment of credibility as a  whole
    but also the fact that Judge Andonian had made a  negative  credibility
    finding on this evidence.

36. In reality, ground 1(a) amounts to no more than an attempt to  re-argue
    the case, despite the fact that it has been advanced on the basis  that
    the judge failed to consider the expert  evidence  and  the  background
    evidence in the respondent's CPIN on Tamil Separatism.

37. I therefore reject ground 1(a).

Ground 1(b)

38. Ground 1(b) is that the judge  failed  to  put  to  the  appellant  any
    questions concerning how her student visa was secured. It was therefore
    unfair to hold this issue against the appellant.

39. Ms Solanki did not address ground 1(b) at the hearing until I asked her
    whether she was going to do so. I pointed out to  her  that,  as  Judge
    Andonian had  specifically  raised  the  issue,  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to have addressed it at the hearing before the judge  if  she
    had wished to do so. Ms Solanki accepted this to be so but nevertheless
    also submitted that it was the case that the judge had not raised it.

40. I have no hesitation in rejecting any suggestion  that  there  was  any
    unfairness by reason of the judge  failing  to  put  to  the  appellant
    questions about how she was able to obtain her student  visa.  Plainly,
    she was aware that Judge Andonian had raised it  in  his  decision  and
    taken it into account in assessing her credibility. It was open to  her
    to have addressed the point, if she had wished to do so.

41. I therefore reject ground 1(b).

Ground 2(a)

42. Ground 2(a) is that, in assessing the risk on return, the judge  failed
    to consider the extent of  the  appellant's  LTTE  activities  and  the
    interest in her as a result. She failed to take into  account  relevant
    facts.

43. Paras 9 and 10 of the grounds contend that the relevant  facts  are  as
    follows:

    (i)    (para 9 of the grounds) the accumulation of the appellant's LTTE
         activities over a long period of  time  combined  with  her  double
         detention  record,  her  long   absence   from   Sri   Lanka,   her
         vulnerability as a female, her return from a diaspora hotspot to  a
         highly militarised area and the current regime in Sri Lanka;

    (ii)   (para 10 of the grounds) the following facts: (a) taking part in
         LTTE plays  in  school  in  2002,  (b)  being  arrested,  tortured,
         interrogated and detained for a week as a suspected LTTE member  of
         supporter in 2002, (c) being involved in Heroes Day activities  and
         LTTE recruitment persuading people to join the LTTE  in  2005,  (d)
         she was a LTTE programme organiser in schools in Vanni in 2006  and
         2007 and also recruited for the LTTE  in  Kalliyadi,  (e)  she  was
         arrested, interrogated, tortured, sexually assaulted  and  detained
         for a week in 2006 owing to her suspected LTTE  support/membership,
         (f) she provided  food  for  the  LTTE  cadres  in  2007,  (g)  the
         [pic]authorities came to look for her in late 2009 whilst  she  was
         in hiding.

44. Para 11 of the grounds contends that the facts that the judge failed to
    take into account were that the appellant was a programme organiser  in
    Vanni in 2006 and 2007, her recruitment of LTTE members post  2005  and
    her provision of food for LTTE cadres in 2007.

45. In view of the fact that para 11 of the grounds specifically identifies
    the facts that it is contended the judge fail to take into  account,  I
    draw the inference that it is not suggested that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account the other facts mentioned in paras 9 and  10  of  the
    grounds that are not mentioned in para 11 of the grounds. In any event,
    I reject any suggestion that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    those other facts. Leaving aside the obvious repetition in para  10  of
    the grounds of  some of the facts, the  judge  plainly  did  take  into
    account the appellant's activities from the age of 17  years  (the  age
    being specifically stated at para 5) until she was sent to the IDP camp
    in May 2009 at the end of the civil war (para 12).  She  made  specific
    reference to the length of the appellant's absence from Sri  Lanka,  in
    that she specifically mentioned that the appellant arrived in June 2010
    (para 6) and she said at para 89 that the appellant has been out of Sri
    Lanka for a number of years. She specifically mentioned the appellant's
    vulnerability as a female (para 78). She took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had not been involved in any diaspora  activities  (para  81)
    and that the appellant originates from Jaffna where her family home  is
    situated. The judge's finding that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    return to her family home shows that she took  into  account  that  the
    appellant would be returning to the north.

46. Turning then to facts identified in para 11 of the  grounds  as  having
    been overlooked by the judge, I reject the submission  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the appellant's recruitment activities post
    2005. She specifically referred to the appellant's recruitment for  the
    LTTE, mentioning it both in terms of Judge  Andonian's  decision  (para
    69) as well as her own assessment (third sentence from the end of  para
    77).  She  specifically  mentioned  the  appellant's  activity  in  the
    provision of food, mentioning this in the context of  Judge  Andonian's
    decision (para 69).

47. I acknowledge that there appears  to  be  no  mention  in  the  judge's
    decision of the appellant's evidence that she was a programme organiser
    in Vanni in 2006 and 2007. However, the fact is that there was a lot of
    evidence before the judge. She had  four  bundles  of  documents  which
    contained several medical reports and a lengthy country expert  report,
    together with other background evidence including the respondent's CPIN
    on Tamil Separatism. It is simply unrealistic and, indeed, undesirable,
    to expect judges  to  engage  specifically  with  every  piece  of  the
    evidence placed before them. The judge's decision  was  a  lengthy  and
    thorough one. I am satisfied that she engaged with  the  evidence  that
    was before her more than adequately.

48. I therefore reject ground 2(a).

49. At the hearing, Ms Solanki attempted to rely upon the  decision  in  KK
    and RS (Sur place activities: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2021] UKUT 0130 (IAC)
    in support of her submission that the judge's failure to  consider  the
    matters raised in para 11 of the grounds was material because  (in  her
    submission) KK & RS shows that even low level members of the  LTTE  are
    harassed. However, I have concluded that the judge did not err  in  law
    as contended in ground 2(a).

50. Furthermore, and as I said  at  the  hearing,  the  fact  is  that  the
    guidance in KK and RS and  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in KK and RS was not before the judge and therefore cannot  be
    relied upon in order to establish a  material  error  of  law.  In  any
    event, I cannot see anything in the guidance issued in KK and  RS  that
    is of any material assistance to the appellant, given the total lack of
    any sur place activities on the appellant's part, the nature and extent
    of her activities with the LTTE in Sri Lanka, that her detentions  were
    short and that her activities are now long distant.

Ground 2(b)

51. Ground 2(b) is that the judge failed to consider  the  risk  on  return
    against the UNHCR Guidelines set out in GJ at paras 288-294 and MP (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

52. The relevant UNHCR Guidelines were set out at para  290  of  GJ,  which
    reads:

         "290.    We have considered the passage on page  27  of  the  UNHCR
             Guidelines relied upon by Miss Jegarajah:   with  respect,  we
             disagree with her assessment that it asserts that  any  former
             links with the LTTE  are  determinative  of  an  asylum  claim
             today.  The relevant passage begins on page 26  and  reads  as
             follows:

             "A. Risk Profiles

             A.1 Persons Suspected of Certain  Links  with  the  Liberation
             Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)

             At the height of its influence in Sri Lanka in 2000-2001,  the
             LTTE controlled and administered  76%  of  what  are  now  the
             Northern and Eastern Provinces. Therefore, all persons  living
             in those areas, and at the outer fringes of  the  areas  under
             LTTE control, necessarily had contact with the  LTTE  and  its
             civilian administration in their daily lives. Originating from
             an area that was previously controlled by the LTTE does not in
             itself result in a need for international  refugee  protection
             in the sense of the 1951 Convention and its 1967 Protocol.

             However, previous (real or perceived)  links  that  go  beyond
             prior residency within an area controlled by the LTTE continue
             to expose individuals to treatment which may give  rise  to  a
             need for international refugee protection,  depending  on  the
             specifics of the individual case. The  nature  of  these  more
             elaborate links to the LTTE can vary, but may  include  people
             with the following profiles:

                  1) Persons who held  senior  positions  with  considerable
                  authority in the LTTE civilian  administration,  when  the
                  LTTE was in control of large parts of  what  are  now  the
                  Northern and Eastern Provinces;

                  2) Former LTTE combatants or "cadres";

                  3) Former LTTE combatants or "cadres" who, due  to  injury
                  or other reason, were employed by the  LTTE  in  functions
                  within the administration, intelligence, "computer branch"
                  or media (newspaper and radio);

                  4) Former LTTE supporters who  may  never  have  undergone
                  military training, but  were  involved  in  sheltering  or
                  transporting LTTE personnel, or the supply  and  transport
                  of goods for the LTTE;

                  5) LTTE fundraisers and  propaganda  activists  and  those
                  with, or perceived as having had, links to the Sri  Lankan
                  diaspora that provided funding and other  support  to  the
                  LTTE;

                  6) Persons with family links or who are  dependent  on  or
                  otherwise  closely  related  to  persons  with  the  above
                  profiles.

             When assessing claims of persons with the profiles  above,  it
             may, depending on the individual circumstances of  the  claim,
             be important to examine the  applicability  of  the  exclusion
             clauses. ..."  [Emphasis added]

             The effect of that passage is  that  these  categories  remain
             fact-specific.  We shall set out later, in the  light  of  the
             wide-ranging  expertise  we  have  heard  and  read,  what  we
             consider to be the fact-specific risk groups,  some  of  which
             overlap with the general  categories  set  out  in  the  UNHCR
             guidelines generally and at paragraph A.1 in particular."

53. Whereas para 13 of the grounds contends that the appellant falls within
    categories 2), 3) and 4) of the UNHCR Guidelines, Ms Solanki  submitted
    at the hearing that the appellant falls within categories  3),  4)  and
    5).

54. At the hearing, Ms Solanki submitted that, in view of the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) with reference to paras 11 and 50
    of the judgment, the UNHCR Guidelines apply.

55. I have carefully considered the judgment in MP (Sri Lanka).  It  is  my
    understanding that  the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines were  less  demanding  than  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance in GJ (paras 15 and  16)  and,  importantly,  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ gave due consideration to the UNHCR Guidelines  but  was
    entitled to adopt the less generous approach to  risk  demonstrated  by
    its guidance (paras 17-20, in particular para 20; and para 50).

56. It is clear from MP (Sri Lanka) that the central question is whether or
    not there is a real risk of the  Sri  Lankan  government  regarding  an
    individual as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as
    a single state. Such a real risk may  arise  even  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that the individual has been  involved  in  diaspora  activism
    (para 50).

57. That  central  question  is  precisely  the  question  that  the  judge
    considered. I therefore do not accept that the judge erred  in  law  in
    failing to mention the UNHCR Guidelines.

58. I therefore reject ground 2(b).

Ground 2(c)

59. Ground 2(c) is that the judge failed to consider  the  risk  on  return
    against the evidence that was before her concerning the current  regime
    in Sri Lanka, i.e. the country expert evidence of  Dr  Algar-Faria  and
    the respondent's CPIN on Tamil Separatism.

60. At the hearing, Ms Solanki referred me to paras 5.2.1,  5.2.5,  5.2.10,
    5.2.12, 5.2.19-5.2.21 and the conclusion at para 5.2.26 of the expert's
    report as well as to the whole of section 3.3 of the respondent's  CPIN
    on Tamil Separatism, all of which she submitted  was  evidence  of  the
    deterioration in the human rights situation  in  Sri  Lanka  under  the
    Rajapaksa regime. She submitted that the judge failed  to  address  the
    address this evidence.

61. I have carefully considered the passages  in  the  expert's  report  to
    which I was referred. I noted, inter alia, that:

    (i)    At para 5.2.5 of his report, the expert referred to a  spate  of
         attacks by unidentified individuals against human rights  activists
         and journalists and  that  individuals  working  for  human  rights
         organisations have been summoned for  questioning  and  accused  of
         being involved in terrorist activities and receiving  money  abroad
         for terrorist activists.

    (ii)   At para 5.2.10 of his report, the expert refers to  "Sri  Lankan
         security forces  and  intelligence  agencies  [having]  intensified
         surveillance and threats against families of  victims  of  enforced
         disappearance and activists supporting them".

    (iii)  At para 5.2.12 of his report, the expert refers to a continuance
         of "arbitrary detention and mistreatment of activists" and that  in
         April 2020, a social media commentator and a prominent  Sri  Lankan
         lawyer were both arrested and  have  since  been  detained  without
         charge or access to a lawyer.

    (iv)   The  expert  concludes,  at  para  5.2.26,  that  the  Rajapaksa
         presidency presents "an imminent  risk  to  any  suspected  ex-LTTE
         members".

62. The opinion expressed by the expert at para 5.2.26 is sufficiently wide
    to include anyone who had been a LTTE member in the past, even if  such
    membership was long distant, irrespective of the nature and/or duration
    of the individual's activities and even if it is  found  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that applies in protection claims that  there  is  no
    reasonable likelihood that the individual concerned  was  or  might  be
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of the state  of  Sri  Lanka.
    For example, on the expert's opinion, even someone who was  a  fleeting
    member of the LTTE some 20 years ago, who had assisted  the  LTTE  with
    low-level  activities  such  as  digging  bunkers  and  who   had   not
    subsequently involved himself in any way whatsoever with any activities
    that might be of adverse  interest,  would  nevertheless  be  at  risk,
    according to para 5.2.26.  That conclusion was simply not supported  by
    the evidence in the preceding paragraphs, the main points  of  which  I
    have summarised at para 61 (i)-(iii) above.

63. I have also carefully considered section 3.3 of the  respondent's  CPIN
    on Tamil Separatism. I noted, inter alia, that:

    (i)    Para  3.3.5  states  that  officials  and  journalists  who  had
         investigated the Rajapaksa  regime  for  human  rights  abuses  and
         corruption had begun to flee the  country.  It  also  mentions  the
         abduction and questioning of a female  of  Sri  Lankan  nationality
         employed by the Swiss Embassy in Colombo.  It  was  said  that  the
         abductors appeared to be focused on finding information about a Sri
         Lankan detective who had been investigating Rajapaksa.

    (ii)   Section 3 goes on to refer to the  Rajapaksas  taking  steps  to
         consolidate their family's control of  the  government  and  stifle
         investigations into human rights abuses and corruption as  well  as
         taking steps that appeared to be aimed at weakening  religious  and
         ethnic-based parties.

64. Whilst it is true that section 3 of the CPIN on Tamil  Separatism  does
    show a deterioration of the human rights situation in  Sri  Lanka,  the
    evidence is that the risk arises in respect  of  activists  engaged  in
    investigating human rights abuses and corruption. However, there was no
    evidence before the judge of  the  appellant  being  involved  in  such
    activities in the United Kingdom or intending  to  become  involved  in
    such activities in Sri Lanka.

65. Given the substantial body of evidence and reports that the  judge  had
    before her, the judge did not err in law by failing to engage in  terms
    with the specific aspects of the expert's report  and/or  the  CPIN  on
    Tamil Separatism relied upon in ground 2(b). The fact that she did  not
    engage with this evidence does not mean that she did not  consider  it.
    There is no obligation on judges to engage with  every  aspect  of  the
    evidence that is placed before them. The judge's decision  was  a  very
    detailed decision which dealt with the evidence  that  was  before  her
    more than adequately.

66. In any event, any such error was not material, for the reasons  I  have
    given above.

67. I therefore reject ground 2(c).

Ground 2(d)

68. Ground 2(d) is that the judge failed to consider and properly weigh the
    country expert evidence.

69. At para 16 of the grounds, it is accepted that the judge had considered
    some aspects of the expert's report. However, it is contended that  the
    failure to consider the particular aspects that are set out at para  15
    of the grounds amounts to a material error of  law  as  it  leaves  the
    judge's assessment incomplete.

70. At the hearing, Ms Solanki referred me to paras 5.5.12, 5.5.16 as  well
    as the whole of para 5.6 of the expert's report.

71. All of the passages of the expert's report referred to in  the  grounds
    and at the hearing by Ms Solanki relate to the  expert's  opinion  that
    the appellant would be at real risk on return given her past activities
    and the deterioration in the human rights situation  in  Sri  Lanka.  I
    have already dealt with the evidence concerning  the  deterioration  in
    the human rights situation in Sri Lanka.  It  did  not  constitute  any
    basis for departing from the country guidance.

72. Accordingly, all that remains of ground 2(d) is that the  judge  failed
    to  take  into  account  the  expert's  opinion  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances are such that she is at real risk on return. However, the
    fact is that the judge plainly  did  take  into  account  the  expert's
    opinion as to the risk on return. She specifically mentioned it at para
    82 and  stated  that  his  opinion  was  not  consistent  with  country
    guidance. For the reasons,  I  have  already  given  she  was  entirely
    correct to say (para 82):

         "82.     ... There is no evidence even to suggest that,  given  the
             nature of her low-level involvement with the LTTE and her lack
             of diaspora activities, she would be of any interest on return
             because of her former involvement."

73. Again, given the substantial body of  evidence  and  reports  that  the
    judge had before her, the fact  that  she  did  not  engage  with  this
    evidence does not mean that she did not consider it. Her decision was a
    very detailed decision which, again, dealt with the evidence  that  was
    before her more than adequately.

74. In any event, any such error was not material, for the reasons  I  have
    given above.

75. I therefore reject ground 2(d).

Ground 2(e)

76. Ground 2(e) is that the judge failed  to  assess  the  risk  on  return
    against the country guidance in reaching her finding that the appellant
    would not be on a watch list.

77. In this regard, it is said that the judge failed to apply GJ,  in  that
    she overlooked the fact that the question  was  whether  the  appellant
    would be perceived as threat to the  integrity  of  the  state  of  Sri
    Lanka.

78. There is simply no substance in this  ground.  The  judge  specifically
    considered this issue, for example in the  last  sentence  of  para  78
    where the judge said: "This appellant is not, and there are no  grounds
    for believing that she could be  perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka".

79. There is simply no basis for the assertion in the  second  sentence  of
    para 20.b. of the grounds that  "the  appellant  had  clearly  been  of
    adverse interest to the authorities for  many  years  on  the  accepted
    facts,  including  post-conflict  in  late  2009"  (my  emphasis).  The
    assertion that she was of adverse interest to the authorities "for many
    years" ignores the fact that,  as  the  judge  found,  the  appellant's
    detentions were short, that she was not released on the  payment  of  a
    bribe (para 87), and that no interest was shown in her between the 2002
    and 2006 incidents (para 78).

80. At the hearing, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge failed to take into
    account  that  the  appellant  was  of  adverse  interest  because  the
    authorities looked for her after the end of the civil war. This  refers
    to the fact that the Sri Lankan authorities looked  for  the  appellant
    when she was in the church hostel in October 2009. However,  the  judge
    specifically mentioned this at para 12 and took it into account at para
    87 in reaching her finding that the appellant would not be on the watch-
    list. She said  that  the  timing  of  the  visit  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in October 2009  was  relevant;  that  this  happened  "...
    shortly after the end of the civil  war  and,  [pic]as  I  have  stated
    above,  it  is  possible  that  at  that  stage  the  authorities  were
    [pic]interested in any Tamil in the north and those who had connections
    with the LTTE..."

81. The remainder of para 20 of the grounds amounts, in reality, to no more
    than a disagreement with the judge's reasoning  and  finding  that  the
    appellant would not be on a watch-list.

82. I therefore reject ground 2(e).

In relation to the appellant's Article 3 health claim:

Ground 3(a)

83. Ground 3(a) is that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence. It is contended that the judge overlooked the following:

    (i)    (Para 23 of the grounds) that there has been no  improvement  in
         the  appellant's  mental  health  since  her  diagnosis  of   PTSD,
         depressive episode and anxiety from at  least  2018;  and  that  Dr
         Lackenby  had  stated  that  the  appellant's  mental  illness  and
         symptoms were likely to worsen upon return this being the  location
         of trauma and her fear of persecution.

    (ii)    (Para  24  of  the  grounds)  that  part  of  the  problem  was
         accessibility owing to cultural issues, shame and stigma.

84. There is simply no substance in any of the submissions in paras 23  and
    24 of the grounds for the following reasons:

    (i)    The submission that the judge failed to take into  account  that
         there has been no improvement  in  the  appellant's  mental  health
         ignores the fact that an assessment of an  individual's  Article  3
         health claim begins with consideration of their current health  and
         the extent of any deterioration upon return. No authority was given
         for the proposition that lack of  improvement  in  an  individual's
         health  in  the  United  Kingdom   was   in   itself   a   relevant
         consideration.

    (ii)   Not only is it the case that the judge summarised  the  evidence
         of Ms Lackenby at paras  33-39  of  her  decision,  she  took  into
         account (at para 95) Ms Lackenby's opinion that the appellant would
         be unlikely to engage with the mental health services in Sri  Lanka
         and quoted from Ms Lackenby's report, as follows:

         "95.     The reasons for this are multi-faceted. Cultural and shame-
             based barriers are likely to increase in  Sri  Lanka,  she  is
             likely to fear  greater  judgment  from  members  of  her  own
             culture more so than members of a Western culture, due to  the
             taboos surrounding  sexual  abuse,  relationships  outside  of
             marriage and mental illness. Whilst not an  expert  in  mental
             health services in Sri Lanka, experience  of  working  in  Sri
             Lanka and supervising education provision in one university in
             Colombo,  suggested  that  psychological  therapies  are   not
             respected in Sri Lanka, nor are they operational to  the  same
             degree they are in the UK. There does remain stigma  regarding
             mental illness. Females are more at risk of stigma and  sexual
             acts, in whatever form, are not  openly  discussed.  Moreover,
             returning to the environment  where  the  trauma  occurred  is
             likely  to  be  a  further  barrier  to  engagement  with  the
             therapies and her symptoms are likely to worsen."

         (My emphasis)

85. In addition to Ms  Lackenby's  evidence  as  to  the  accessibility  of
    treatment, the judge took into account the expert evidence of Dr Algar-
    Faria on the subject, at para 44 of her decision, which reads:

         "44.     On the issue of accessing healthcare,  the  expert  stated
             that Tamils living anywhere in Sri Lanka may face difficulties
             accessing   healthcare.   Addressing   in    particular    the
             availability of mental health facilities, referring to a  2013
             podcast on mental health, he stated that medical professionals
             in Sri Lanka noted that those with mental  health  issues  are
             likely to be stigmatised, that  mental  health  services  have
             been  struggling  although  there  has  been   a   significant
             improvement. Referring to comments from  a  representative  of
             the Human Rights Commission, "PTSD seen across the country but
             the psycho-social  support  is  lacking.  More  mental  health
             services are required." He reported  that  the  mental  health
             service  is  largely  centralised  and  that  options  outside
             Colombo were much more limited than  those  available  in  the
             capital, but remain extremely  limited  in  remote  areas  and
             there  are  conflicting  accounts  about   the   quality   and
             availability of care facilities in  built-up  areas.  He  drew
             attention to the stigma associated with attending hospital for
             a mental health reason."

         (my emphasis)

86. Accordingly, contrary to paras 23 and 24  of  the  grounds,  the  judge
    specifically considered Ms Lackenby's evidence (as well as the evidence
    of the country expert) concerning accessibility of  treatment,  reasons
    for inaccessibility and that the appellant's condition  was  likely  to
    worsen.

87. At the hearing, Ms Solanki referred me para  17.5  of  the  psychiatric
    report dated 22 May 2016 of Dr Saleh Dhumad to the  effect  that  there
    would be an increase in the risk of suicide in  the  event  of  removal
    (AB3/20) and paras 56-58 of the psychiatric  report  dated  31  January
    2018 of Dr Stevens to the effect that the potential  for  the  risk  of
    suicide was "essentially unknown" (AB3/44).

88. However, the report of Dr Dhumad was nearly 5 years old by the date  of
    the hearing before the judge. In addition, the judge had summarised the
    report of Dr Stevens dated 31  January  2018  at  paras  27-30  of  her
    decision. Furthermore, the most recent medical report  before  her  was
    that of Ms Lackenby dated March 2021 which stated, as the  judge  noted
    (para 92) that "[the appellant] does not have a significant history  of
    attempted suicide. Her religious beliefs (she  had  recently  become  a
    Jehovah's witness) act as a strong protective factor and are likely  to
    continue to do so."

89. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that there is no substance in Ms
    Solanki's submission that the judge had erred by failing to  take  into
    account the medical evidence of Dr Dhumad and Dr Stevens as to the risk
    of suicide. It was unhelpful for me to be referred to the long  distant
    reports of Dr Dhumad and Dr Stevens in relation to the risk of suicide.



90. At the hearing, Ms Solanki submitted that what was relevant in relation
    to ground 3 was the appellant's presentation on arrival at the  airport
    in Sri Lanka and when visited by the authorities at home and  monitored
    which (in her submission) the judge failed to consider.

91. I pause here to draw attention to the fact  that  this  submission  was
    advanced before me in the context of the appellant's Article  3  health
    claim, and not her asylum claim. There was no  ground  brought  against
    the judge's decision on the appellant's Article 3 claim that  is  based
    on the facts of her asylum claim.

92. Given that the submission was made in the context  of  the  appellant's
    Article 3  health  claim,  the  argument  must  be  that  such  is  the
    appellant's current mental condition that there are substantial grounds
    for believing that, if she is questioned/monitored by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities upon or after return,  she  would  face  a  real  risk,  on
    account of the absence of appropriate treatment in Sri Lanka, of  being
    exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  the  state  of
    her health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
    in life expectancy.

93. I reject the submission that the judge erred in her assessment  of  the
    appellant's  Article  3  health  claim  by  failing  to  consider   the
    appellant's condition on being questioned by the Sri Lankan authorities
    on arrival in Sri Lanka, for the following reasons:

    (i)    In the first place, there was nothing in  the  passages  in  the
         reports of Dr Dhumad and Dr Stevens to which Ms Solanki referred me
         that dealt with the appellant's condition on  being  questioned  by
         the Sri Lankan authorities. In any event, their  reports  are  long
         distant.

    (ii)   I noted that para  23  of  the  grounds  does  make  a  fleeting
         reference to the issue in that it states that "her  mental  illness
         and symptoms are likely to worsen upon return  to  Sri  Lanka  this
         being the location of trauma and her fear of persecution, which  in
         turn will have  a  debilitating  impact  on  her  presentation  and
         wellbeing (AB4 p26-48)". This is a reference to the  entire  report
         of Ms Lackenby. No attempt was made to refer  me  to  any  specific
         part of Ms Lackenby's  report  that  dealt  specifically  with  the
         appellant's condition on being questioned or monitored by  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities.

    (iii)  Nevertheless, I have read the  entire  report  of  Ms  Lackenby.
         There is nothing in it which deals with the  appellant's  condition
         on being questioned by the Sri Lankan authorities. Ms Lackenby  was
         asked to comment on the appellant's fitness to give evidence at the
         hearing. In that regard, she said that the  appellant  was  fit  to
         give evidence  although  she  was  likely  to  become  anxious  and
         distressed; that if the questioning  was  adversarial  and  overtly
         critical, she was unlikely to provide coherent or  full  responses;
         and that an inquisitorial style  exploring  her  evidence  is  more
         likely to result in more detailed evidence (paras 10.1  c)  II  and
         III AB4/41). However, the fact is that she was not asked to comment
         on the appellant's condition on being questioned by the Sri  Lankan
         authorities.

    (iv)   There was therefore  no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
         appellant's  condition  on  being  questioned  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities would be such that there were substantial  grounds  for
         believing that she  would  face,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
         appropriate treatment in Sri Lanka, a real risk of being exposed to
         a serious, rapid and irreversible  decline  in  the  state  of  her
         health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
         in life expectancy.

    (v)    Importantly, I noted that the skeleton argument that was  before
         the judge made no mention of any submission  that  the  appellant's
         condition on being questioned by the Sri Lankan  authorities  would
         be such that there were substantial grounds for believing that  she
         would face, on account of the absence of appropriate  treatment  in
         Sri Lanka, a real risk of being exposed to  a  serious,  rapid  and
         irreversible decline in  the  state  of  her  health  resulting  in
         intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy.
         The closest it comes to is at para 26 where it is stated that  "her
         mental health makes it likely that she would be unable to withstand
         interrogation too".

    (vi)   It is therefore clear that  the  issue  raised  at  the  hearing
         before me (summarised at para 90 above)  was  in  fact  not  argued
         before the judge and there was no evidence in support of it  before
         the judge.

94. I therefore reject ground 3(a).

Ground 3(b)

95. Ground 3(b) is that the  judge  failed  to  address  the  health  claim
    against  GJ  (paras  269-271  and  449-457)  or  the  large  amount  of
    background evidence that she was referred to  at  paras  39-41  of  the
    skeleton argument and Annex 1 to the skeleton argument that was  before
    the judge.

96. However, para 269 of GJ referred to Dr Smith as being the only  witness
    to suggest that having  a  mental  health  issue  was  a  risk  factor.
    Furthermore, the Upper Tribunal rejected the  submission  that  "mental
    health" should be added as an additional risk factor (para 271).

97. There is therefore no substance in the submission that the judge  erred
    by failing to address the appellant's health claim against  paras  269-
    271 of GJ. It was unhelpful for me to be referred to paras  269-271  of
    GJ.

98. At paras 449-457 of GJ, the Upper Tribunal considered the appeal of the
    third appellant in GJ. It has been said, time and  again,  that  it  is
    unhelpful to make factual comparisons between  one  case  and  another.
    Paras 449-457 were  not  part  of  the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. There is  therefore  no  merit  whatsoever  in  Ms  Solanki's
    submission that the judge erred by failing to address  the  appellant's
    health claim against paras 449-457 of GJ.

99. In any event, the Upper Tribunal in GJ noted that the  evidence  before
    it showed that the third appellant was  considered  by  his  Consultant
    Psychiatrist to have clear plans to commit suicide if returned and that
    he was mentally very  ill,  too  ill  to  give  reliable  evidence.  In
    contrast:

    (i)    The judge found, relying upon the report of  Ms  Lackenby,  that
         the appellant's religious beliefs were a strong  protective  factor
         (para 92).

    (ii)   The appellant was able to give evidence before the  judge  (para
         104). The judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  interview  with  Ms
         Lackenby had lasted four hours and that Ms  Lackenby  had  reported
         that the  appellant  did  not  appear  to  have  obvious  signs  of
         difficulty with concentration. The judge  further  noted  that  the
         appellant spoke fluently and responded to the questions put to  her
         by the respondent's representative.

100. It was  therefore  unhelpful  for  me  to  be  referred  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's treatment of the evidence concerning the  mental  health  of
    the third appellant in GJ in support of a  submission  that  the  judge
    erred in law in  assessing  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    mental health.

101. I have considered paras 39-41 of the skeleton argument that was  before
    the judge. These concern mental  health  treatment  facilities  in  Sri
    Lanka and the stigma attached to mental ill-health in Sri Lanka.  There
    is nothing in these  extracts  which  adds  anything  material  to  the
    evidence that the judge considered.

102. I am satisfied that this is also the case in respect of Annex 1 to  the
    skeleton argument that was before the judge.  That  too  concerned  the
    stigma in Sri Lanka relating to mental ill-health.

103. I therefore reject ground 3(b).

Assessment of para 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules

Ground 4(a)

104. Ground 4(a) is  that,  in  reaching  her  finding  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant's family  will  reject  her  owing  to  her
    mental health, the judge failed to address the  appellant's  submission
    or consider the objective evidence to  which  she  was  referred  which
    demonstrated that Sri Lankan families routinely did so.

105. The nub of this ground is that, given the background  material  to  the
    effect that Sri Lankan families routinely  reject  family  members  who
    suffer from mental ill-health, the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant would be able to return to live with her family.

106. However, the  fact  is  that  this  was  a  fact-sensitive  point.   In
    reaching her finding that the appellant would be able to return to live
    with her family and that she would have their support,  she  took  into
    account the appellant's evidence that she had been in  regular  contact
    with her family. The only evidence that had been submitted to establish
    the appellant's claim that she would have to live in isolation from her
    family was a letter dated 2 August 2019 said to be from her father.

107. Not only is it the case that the judge found  that  the  letter  was  a
    fabrication (para 86), there was nothing  in  the  letter  itself  that
    stated that the reason why the appellant could not return to live  with
    her family  was  because  of  her  mental  ill-health.  The  judge  was
    therefore entirely correct to find that there was no evidence that  the
    appellant's family will reject her.

108. In essence, Ms Solanki was attempting to rely upon  general  background
    evidence to the effect that Sri Lankan families routinely reject family
    members who are mentally ill to establish that the  appellant's  family
    would reject her without advancing  any  evidence  whatsoever  that  is
    specific to the appellant. That is simply untenable,  especially  given
    the appellant's regular contact with her family  and  that  the  letter
    said to be from her father does not give mental illness as a reason for
    her not being able to live with her family.

109. I therefore reject ground 4(a).

Ground 4(b)

110. Ground 4(b) is that, in reaching her finding that there  would  not  be
    very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  reintegration  in  Sri
    Lanka, the judge failed to take into  account  "a  number  of  relevant
    issues" including: her  heightened  fears  on  return  as  an  accepted
    torture and sexual abuse victim at the hands of the government  of  Sri
    Lanka; the situation in Sri Lanka, particularly for Tamils in the north
    "where there was  one  officer  for  every  five  civilians";  and  the
    problems that the deterioration in her  mental  health  would  pose  in
    obtaining  employment,  establishing  relationships  with  others   and
    participating in society.

111. However, the judge reminded herself of the guidance as  to  integration
    in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at para 108 of her decision, that:

         "The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

112. The judge then said:

          "I am satisfied the appellant will have retained an  understanding
         of how life in Sri Lanka is carried  on  and,  despite  her  mental
         health issues, could, with the help of her family,  participate  in
         it. Whilst mental illness is said to carry a stigma,  the  evidence
         does  not  suggest  that  those  with  mental  health  issues   are
         discriminated against to such a degree that they cannot participate
         in society.[pic]"

113. The judge can be  taken  to  have  understood,  from  the  guidance  in
    Kamara, that participation in society included the  prospect  of  being
    employed,  establish  relationships  with  others  and  participate  in
    society. She was plainly aware that the appellant had  suffered  sexual
    abuse in detention in Sri Lanka.

114. There is therefore no substance in ground 4(b) which I reject.

115. For all of the reasons given above, the judge did not err in law.

116. Having dealt with all of the grounds,  it  is  appropriate  for  me  to
    stress, in view of the lengthy grounds, that the judge's decision was a
    very careful, considered and adequately  detailed  decision.  I  stress
    that, in the instant case, the judge had before  her  four  bundles  of
    documents as well as the respondent's CPIN on Tamil Separatism  and  on
    healthcare. She had a  very  lengthy  skeleton  argument  with  further
    background evidence attached to the skeleton argument. As I have  said,
    it is neither reasonable nor desirable to  expect  the  judge  to  have
    dealt with the evidence before her in the detail that appears  to  have
    been expected on the appellant's behalf.

117. I make one final point. It is difficult to avoid  the  conclusion  that
    permission was granted in this case  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not
    because there were any arguable errors of law but because the  drafting
    of the grounds did not lend itself  to  a  different  disposal  of  the
    application for permission within a reasonable timescale. That is not a
    criticism of the permission judge.

    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any error of law sufficient  to  require  it  to  be  set
    aside.



Signed                            Date: 17 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email
