
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/12923/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 April 2017                          | On 03 May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     ST
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms E. Sanders, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th January 1989 whose
   application for asylum was rejected by the respondent. The appellant's
   subsequent appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn. In a
   decision promulgated on 18 January 2017, the judge dismissed the appeal.
   The appellant now appeals, with permission, against that decision.


2. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal, in summary, was
   that he would be at risk on return to Pakistan because of his involvement
   in an ongoing land dispute and his activity for the Muttahida Qaumi
   Movement (MQM). He claims to have been arrested, detained and tortured on
   three occasions, and that his uncle has been killed, as a result of the
   land dispute. He also claims that the other family involved in the land
   dispute has powerful connections with the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz)
   (PML-N).


3. Judge Quinn did not accept the appellant's account. At paragraph 27 she
   stated that she did not find the appellant credible. She also stated that
   the appellant had not established there was a genuine land dispute that
   put him at risk and that:


         "The appellant had not produced any court documents relating to a
         land dispute...."


4. The grounds of appeal argue, inter alia, that the appellant did submit
   court documents relating to the land dispute and that it was an error of
   law for the judge to fail to consider them.


5. Before me, Mr Singh acknowledged that the judge had erred in stating
   there was an absence of documents concerning the land dispute but
   maintained that because the judge had good reasons, unrelated to the land
   dispute, to find the appellant lacked credibility, the error was not
   material.


Consideration


6. The bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal included, at
   pages 7 - 43, documents which concern a hearing in a court in Gujrat
   about a land dispute. They are in Urdu with an English translation that
   is certified by a translator.


7. As there were court documents relating to a land dispute before the
   First-tier Tribunal the judge was mistaken to state that there were no
   such documents and it was an error of law to reach a decision without
   having regard to, or making a finding in respect of, these documents.


8. The judge found the appellant to not be credible. Although there were
   several reasons for this (including, in particular, the delay in making
   the asylum application) it is apparent from the decision that one of the
   reasons she did not find him credible was that she did not accept there
   was a land dispute. Consequently, the error of law (which renders the
   judge's finding on the land dispute unsafe) affects the credibility
   assessment. Given the importance of the credibility finding to the
   outcome, the error in respect of the land dispute was material, such that
   the decision cannot stand.


9. I have considered, and heard submissions on, whether I should proceed to
   remake the decision. Given that the error of law affects the First-tier
   Tribunal's credibility findings, both parties were in agreement that the
   case would need to be considered afresh. I agree. Accordingly, the appeal
   should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
   law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
   afresh.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 2 May 2017                    |




















