










Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12715/2016



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2018                         |On 6th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Mirwais [S]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lemur Counsel instructed by AA Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Ms Isherwood,  Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  promulgated  on  the  23rd  August  2018
    whereby the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to refuse the appellant's  protection  claim  on  the
    grounds of asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR and the appellant's human rights claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 1st October 2018. Thus the case appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The grounds of appeal raise amongst other things the following  issues:
    -

    a) Judge Geraint Jones erred in refusing an adjournment. There  were  a
       number of factors advanced in support  of  the  application  for  an
       adjournment. The appellant's representative claimed not to have  the
       respondent's bundle. There was a lack of medical evidence because Dr
       Cinova, who was supposed to give evidence had  cancelled  the  night
       before. The  judge  had  in  the  decision  when  dealing  with  the
       dependency claim commented on the medical evidence  and  given  that
       the evidence of Dr  Cinova  was  material,  the  judge  should  have
       granted an adjournment.

    b) The judge commented on the lack of evidence of treatment in  Ukraine
       but pages 12 and 24  contained  evidence  relating  to  the  medical
       treatment in Ukraine. In the circumstances the judge had  failed  to
       consider all the evidence.

    c) In considering the medical evidence submitted the  judge  considered
       the appellant had exaggerated his evidence  in  order  to  obtain  a
       specific outcome. The evidence by Dr Cinova was clear the  appellant
       was suffering from  schizophrenia.  In  the  light  of  the  medical
       evidence the conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  exaggerated  his
       medical condition is not substantiated. The  judge's  assessment  of
       the appellants mental health was therefore flawed.

 5. First with regard to the lack of the respondent's bundle, it has to  be
    noted that this was a case that had been remitted by the Upper Tribunal
    to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  had  carefully  examined  the
    history of the proceedings. Besides the fact that  the  case  had  been
    adjourned on a number of occasions previously  prior  to  the  original
    hearing in the First-tier, the case had been listed for several  months
    and  there  had  been  ample  time  to  put  the  case  in  order.  The
    respondent's bundle being used was the same bundle  as  had  previously
    been used before the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  Judge
    Geraint Jones noted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  solicitors
    seeking  a  copy  of   the   bundle   whether   from   previous   legal
    representatives or otherwise.

 6. Judge Geraint Jones had noted the reasons advanced for an  adjournment.
    The judge was satisfied that sufficient time had  been  given  for  the
    appellant to prepare his  case  including  requesting  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle. I do not find that  there  is  any  error  in  the
    manner in which the judge dealt with the issue raised.

 7. As a second basis for an adjournment was the fact that  a  witness  had
    indicated that she was not going to attend to give evidence in  respect
    of the appellant's mental health Careful examination needs to  be  made
    of how the judge had dealt with the issue of the medical evidence.  The
    mental health of the appellant had been an issue in the previous  First
    -tier hearing. The case had been adjourned to enable the  appellant  to
    obtain evidence relating to his  mental  state.  The  matter  had  been
    remitted to hearing  afresh.  Dr  Cinova  had  provided  a  "statement"
    outlining that the  appellant  was  being  treated  for  mental  health
    conditions.

 8. The judge in dealing with the report from Dr Cinova  noted  that  there
    was no copy of the letter of instruction to Dr Cinova.  The  letter  as
    such did not identify the qualifications of Dr  Cinova.  Indeed  as  is
    evident from paragraph 14 when notifying the appellant's sister that Dr
    Cinova would not be giving evidence  the  doctor  stated  that  it  was
    because she was not authorised to give evidence by the NHS Trust.

 9. Indeed when pressed on the issue of the "report by Dr Cinova" the judge
    noted that the representative wanted to instruct  another  psychiatrist
    and not rely upon Dr cinova at all. There  was  no  evidence  that  any
    steps had been taken to identify an appropriate  psychiatrist  to  give
    evidence, to obtain a timetable for a report or to establish whether or
    not funding for such a report was available. The case had  been  listed
    for over eight months and at the last minute application was being made
    to replace one alleged expert with another.

10. The papers refer to other psychiatrists, who had treated the appellant.
     It was for the appellant's representative to ensure  that  the  report
    that  they  obtained  was  from  an  appropriately  qualified   medical
    practitioner and ensure that the practitioner instructed  was  properly
    qualified to give the evidence. In order to do that the  qualifications
    of the doctor should have been established at the time  of  giving  the
    instructions to prepare the report. The  report  should  have  been  in
    proper form setting out the qualifications and establishing the  doctor
    was authorised to give the evidence.  Nowhere are the qualifications of
    Dr Cinova set out. The appellant and his representatives had  had  more
    than sufficient time to get appropriate reports.

11. In the circumstances the judge was entitled  to  approach  the  medical
    evidence in the manner that he has.

12. It has been alleged that the judge has failed to take  account  of  the
    background evidence in respect of the  availability  of  mental  health
    medical treatment should the appellant be returned to the Ukraine.  The
    representative for the respondent argued before me the point  that  the
    background  evidence  produced  related  to  the  treatment  that   was
    available to prisoners. It was submitted that the evidence did not deal
    with the availability and level  of  treatment  available  to  ordinary
    citizens.

13. Whilst I would agree that the first set of reports deal primarily  with
    individuals that are treated in prisons, there is  a  report  by  Olena
    Zhabenko commencing at page 19. Whilst the  initial  reports  do  raise
    concerns as to the treatment of  those  suffering  from  mental  health
    conditions in prison, the same cannot be  said  of  the  report  by  Ms
    Zhabenko. Again it is unclear what the ladies qualifications  are.  Her
    report indicates that  psychiatric  treatment  is  available,  both  in
    hospital, in clinics and medicine thereafter. Whilst there are  limited
    facilities and otherwise once discharged from a mental health facility,
    medicines have to be purchased, the indications are that treatment  and
    medicines are available.

14. There is nothing within  the  report  which  would  indicate  that  the
    appellant would not be able to access  appropriate  treatment  or  that
    would indicate a breach of any right  under  Article  3  or  8  by  the
    treatment provided.

15. In the circumstances if the judge has failed to consider the  evidence,
    the evidence itself is not such as to  show  that  any  rights  of  the
    appellant would be breached by reason of his mental health condition on
    return to the Ukraine. Whilst reports of individuals in prison do raise
    issues, the final report indicates that treatment is available  as  are
    medicines at a price. In the circumstances if the judge has  failed  to
    consider the evidence, the nature of the evidence is such that it would
    make no material difference.

16. Having considered the evidence  available  and  having  considered  the
    decision as a whole the judge was entitled to deal  with  the  evidence
    and issues raised in the  manner  that  he  did.  The  judge  carefully
    considered the  evidence  available  and  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions that he did.

17. There is no material error of law.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

    Notice of Decision

18. The appeal is dismissed

19. I do not make an anonymity direction







Signed                                                   Date 30th November
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

