
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12809/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st February 2018                         |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                mr naveed [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5th  August  1977.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history having first applied for
    a Tier 4 (General) Student visa on 3rd March 2010.  This was eventually
    granted on 9th December  2011  valid  until  30th  January  2014.   The
    Appellant prior to that date had applied for an EEA residence card with
    his partner and this had been refused.  On expiry  of  the  Appellant's
    leave he did not seek to regularise his stay before the expiry date and
    was served with overstayer papers on 10th May 2016.  At  that  time  he
    claimed asylum.  His claim for asylum was based on a claim that he  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan  on  the  basis  of  his
    membership of a particular social group namely that he was  a  gay  man
    from Pakistan.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated
    3rd November 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Knowles sitting at Manchester on 2nd  June  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  13th  June  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. On 23rd June 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On 25th September 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Scott-Baker noted that the  Appellant  was
    claiming to be gay and at the hearing there  was  evidence  before  the
    judge from his partner and two further  witnesses.   Judge  Scott-Baker
    considered that the judgment was arguably deficient in that there  were
    no findings concerning the evidence of the Appellant's partner and  two
    other witnesses and that that could well be material as it was evidence
    of the Appellant's partner that he was currently in a relationship with
    the Appellant.

 4. On 18th October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response opposes the Appellant's appeal and
    contends that at paragraph 30 of the judge's  findings  he  had  stated
    that he had  considered  the  witness  evidence  and  had  gone  on  to
    comprehensively give cogent reasons why the Appellant was not credible.



 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Brown.  Mr Brown is extremely familiar with this matter.  He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is also  the  author  of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Brown relies  on  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant relied on oral testimony from his partner and two  witnesses.
    He refers to those two witnesses [ZA] and [AY].  Mr Brown submits  that
    these witnesses gave oral testimony at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and that there has been no real assessment of their
    evidence within the decision particularly  at  paragraph  30  when  the
    judge makes his findings.  He submits it is inadequate  for  the  judge
    merely to state that he has considered witness evidence and that in the
    absence of reasons there must be a material error of law as the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's conclusions are undermined.

 7. Mr Bates in brief response submits that the issue is a narrow  one  and
    accepts that there is only a general reference to witness evidence  but
    that the particularisation of evidence is set out at paragraphs  12  to
    14 and that the judge did consider the evidence in the  round  pointing
    out that he had  concerns  over  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    testimony.  He submits that the judge has done sufficient in  paragraph
    30 to show that he has considered all the evidence and that  whilst  he
    may have been capable of going into greater  detail  it  has  not  been
    shown that the error is material.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. It is incumbent upon a judge to give full consideration to all evidence
    that is produced before him particularly oral  testimony  and  to  make
    findings on that evidence.  Having said  that  there  are  two  general
    principles of law which also need to be considered.  Firstly, it is not
    incumbent upon a judge to recite every single piece  of  evidence  that
    comes before him only those that are material and secondly, a judge  is
    entitled to make conclusions having  considered  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

11. The relevant paragraph here is paragraph 30 of  the  judge's  decision.
    Therein the judge states:

         "I have considered the evidence given  by  the  Appellant  and  the
         Respondent, in his witness  statement,  in  his  evidence  and  the
         documentation  provided  in  his  bundle  of  documents   and   the
         submissions of both parties.  I  have  also  considered  supporting
         witness evidence."

    Thereinafter the judge has considered in some detail the factual matrix
    of this appeal, stated that he has considered the Appellant's  evidence
    in the round and explanations for inconsistencies where they have  been
    given and made a  finding  taking  everything  into  account  that  the
    Appellant has not provided a credible account and it is not  reasonably
    likely that his situation account is true.

12. The difficulty that such an approach shows is that the judge has failed
    to do any more than merely say that he has  considered  the  supporting
    evidence.  In this case both the above witnesses have  given  not  just
    written but oral testimony.  It is  incumbent  upon  a  judge  in  such
    circumstances to at least make findings  on  such  testimony.   If  the
    judge had made clear  findings  and  had  still  reached  his  ultimate
    conclusions then it would  be  difficult  to  criticise  the  decision.
    However interests of fairness require that an analysis is given of  the
    testimony and that appropriate findings are made.  To that extent there
    is an error of law and to that extent it is material  because  had  the
    judge considered the evidence that was provided by these two witnesses,
    both of which appear to be of some importance, then it is  possible  he
    might have come to a different conclusion.

13. Consequently in such circumstances I set aside the decision  and  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with  none  of
    the findings of fact to stand.  As a caveat, and as I indicated  to  Mr
    Brown it is of course possible that a subsequent judge  might  come  to
    exactly the same conclusion as Judge Knowles but what is  important  is
    that there is a fully reasoned explanation as to how that  decision  is
    made.  However that is a matter for further consideration before a  new
    judge on a new appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  Directions are set out hereinafter for the  rehearing  of
this matter.

 1) That on finding there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.





 2) The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  at
    Manchester on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an  ELH  of
    three hours.





 3) That the remitted hearing is to be heard before any judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Knowles.





 4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a bundle of up-to-
    date objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek to  rely
    at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.





 5) That an Urdu interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

