
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12120/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st February 2018                   |On 16th March 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   MR JSK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1964.   The
    Appellant and  his  family  arrived  in  the  UK  as  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's immigration history within the Appellant's asylum  decision
    letter.  I note that the Appellant's application is not just on his own
    behalf but on behalf of his wife and his two children born respectively
    on [ ] 2000 and [ ] 2002.  The Appellant claims to have a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Afghanistan on the basis of his religion, namely
    that he is a Sikh and  due  to  a  family  business  debt  issue.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  15th
    October 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malik sitting at  Manchester  on  2nd  May  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  15th  May  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application is made to  vary  that
    order and that order remains in place.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  On 8th  September
    2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  refused  permission  to  appeal.
    Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 13th September 2017.  On  25th
    September 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge McGeachy noted that the Grounds  of  Appeal  asserted
    that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal placed  too  much  weight  on
    what was said in the screening interview and did not properly apply the
    judgment in Karanakaran v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] Imm AR 272.  The grounds assert that  the  judge  did  not  make
    clear findings on all aspects of the Appellant's claim: in  particular,
    they refer to the claim  that  the  Appellants  would  suffer  economic
    hardship because of their religion which would amount  to  persecution,
    attaching a determination of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  in  the
    unreported determinations of GS, SK, KK and KS.  They also assert  that
    the judge erred in her consideration of the Article  8  rights  of  the
    Appellants.  Judge McGeachy considered, notwithstanding the  fact  that
    the judge applied relevant country  guidance  and  moreover  her  clear
    finding that the Appellant was not credible, that in the light  of  the
    determination of GS, SK, KK and KS it would  be  appropriate  to  grant
    permission to appeal.

 4. On 18th October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response contends that the Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately, applied country
    guidance and made clear findings of fact.  Further,  the  Secretary  of
    State contends that it is clear from the decision in GS that it  was  a
    case determined on its own facts, nor  had  the  Appellant  provided  a
    statement to explain what proposition is to be derived from GS.

 5. On 29th October 2017 the Appellant's solicitors responded to  the  Rule
    24 reply pursuant to Rule 25.  They stated therein the reason this  was
    quoted in the grounds was to summarise how some Upper  Tribunal  Judges
    were interpreting the authority of TG (Afghanistan)  [2015]  UKUT  595.
    In the Rule 25 response the Appellant does not seek to  argue  that  GS
    was considered on its own facts.  However, the Appellants seek to argue
    that the Tribunal could have considered granting the  children  refugee
    status and the Appellant and his wife discretionary leave under Article
    8 and that this was not considered by the First-tier Judge.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  appears   by   his   instructed
    solicitor, Mrs Hussain.  The Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mrs Hussain starts by reiterating her Grounds of Appeal and the Rule 25
    statement relying on the proposition that the guidance in  TG  has  not
    properly been followed.   She  notes  that  the  judge  has  found  the
    Appellant not to be credible and thereafter dismissed  the  appeal  and
    submits that credibility should not be determinative as TG sets out the
    criteria of future risks.  She submits there are a number of  omissions
    in Judge Malik's decision and that whilst the judge has  accepted  that
    the Appellant may  have  suffered  discrimination/harassment,  she  has
    concluded that the Appellant has not  been  persecuted.   However,  she
    contends that there have been two children  who  have  been  denied  an
    education that they would have suffered and that there had been  sexual
    harassment towards the Appellant's wife.  She submits it  is  wrong  to
    say that there has been a level  of  persecution  not  reached  on  the
    facts.

 8. Mrs Hussain notes that the decision at paragraph 22 gives a summary  of
    the judge's findings and that she has addressed the issue of  education
    and then the internal relocation to Kabul but she contends  that  there
    has been no assessment of the criteria in TG.  She submits  that  there
    has been a material error of law by failing to apply the criteria in TG
    to the facts of this case and as to  the  Appellant's  future  risk  of
    persecution.

 9. Mr Bates in response says that he is having difficulty in understanding
    the grant of permission but starts by pointing out that the grant  does
    not suggest that there has been an error  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in her analysis of country guidance and that the grant  is  based
    upon an unreported decision.  He consequently fails to see how that  is
    an error because it is accepted GS was decided on a  different  factual
    basis.   He  points  out  that  the  judge  has  rejected  the  claimed
    persecution and that paragraph 19 has recited the criteria  within  TG,
    that paragraph 20 of the decision sets out why the  judge  rejects  the
    contentions of threats/extortion and paragraph 21 explicitly deals with
    the ability of the Appellant to practise his faith.  He points out that
    the family would have a male guardian, namely the principal  Appellant,
    and that a single male adult has been sufficient before  so  why  would
    that not be sufficient now.  He further goes on to consider  the  issue
    relating to the Appellant's children and the prospect of relocating and
    at paragraph 22 he distinguishes the decision from that of  Immigration
    Judge Southern.

10. Turning to the issue of relocation to Kabul, Mr Bates points  out  that
    there is no reference made by the Appellant to the sale of his house in
    Jalalabad and that the Appellant has  assets  and  financial  resources
    which he could refer  to.   Therefore,  he  submits  the  situation  is
    different from that considered by Immigration Judge Southern in GS  and
    that effectively what the judge has said in  her  decision  in  working
    backwards from paragraphs 22 to 19 is  that  the  Appellant  could  re-
    establish himself in Kabul with the assistance of his brother and  that
    the  women  in  his   family   would   have   appropriate   protection.
    Consequently, he contends that all issues in TG  have  been  addressed.
    So far as sexual harassment is concerned, he points out that harassment
    is not persecution and does not reach  the  threshold  of  persecution.
    For all the above reasons he contends that there are no material errors
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and he asked me
    to dismiss the appeal.

11. In brief response Mrs Hussain points  out  that  sexual  harassment  is
    covered by Article 9 of the Qualification Directive and  contends  that
    it does amount to persecution.  She  repeats  her  previous  submission
    contending that although TG has been cited it has not been  applied  to
    the facts of this case and I have to look at the further risk that  the
    Appellant would have by way of having wealth which would expose him  to
    the threat of extortion and violence.  Further, there is  no  evidence,
    she  submits,  that  private  education  for  the  children  would   be
    available.

Case Law

12. The relevant head note of  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) is as follows:
         "(iii)    A consideration of whether an individual  member  of  the
             Sikh and Hindu communities is at risk real of persecution upon
             return to Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.  All  the  relevant
             circumstances must be considered but careful attention  should
             be paid to the following:
             a.   women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
                  appropriate protection from a male member of the family;
             b.   likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access
                  basic accommodation bearing in mind
                  -    Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of
                    the Sikh and Hindu communities
                  -    such individuals  may  face  difficulties  (including
                    threats,  extortion,  seizure  of  land  and   acts   of
                    violence) in retaining property and / or pursuing  their
                    remaining traditional pursuit, that of  a  shopkeeper  /
                    trader
                  -     the  traditional  source   of   support   for   such
                    individuals, the Gurdwara is much less able  to  provide
                    adequate support;
             c.    the  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the  practical
                  accessibility to a suitable place of religious worship  in
                  light of declining numbers and the evidence that some have
                  been  subjected  to  harm  and  threats  to  harm   whilst
                  accessing the Gurdwara;
             d.   access to appropriate education for children in light  of
                  discrimination against Sikh and  Hindu  children  and  the
                  shortage of adequate education facilities for them".

The Law

13.   Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. This is a very thorough decision, well reasoned and well set out.   The
    judge has made adverse findings of credibility.  The proper approach to
    credibility requires an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general
    claim.  In an asylum claim,  relevant  factors  will  be  the  internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of the  claim,  and
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  It is,  I  accept,  theoretically
    correct that a claimant need do no more than state his claim  but  that
    claim  still  needs  to  be  examined  for  consistency  and   inherent
    plausibility.   Such  factors  were  available  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and she  has  given  them  due  consideration  and  made
    appropriate findings.

16. Grant of permission is based on the premise that  the  judge  may  have
    failed to give full and proper consideration to the unreported decision
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Southern.  It is accepted  that  that  case  is
    fact-specific and I am satisfied that it can be distinguished from  the
    present case.  GS and Others postdates TK and indeed TK is referred  to
    in the decision.  The factual matrix is substantially different to  the
    present case.  A failure to address GS does not consequently constitute
    any material error of law.

17. Although it is not cited in  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy's
    grant of permission it is the contention now  of  Mrs  Hussain  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that the judge failed to properly apply  TG.   I  do
    not agree with that  submission.   I  accept  that  merely  reciting  a
    country guidance authority in a decision is  insufficient.   The  basis
    upon which it is relied upon has to be explained.  This is a judge  who
    had done that very thoroughly and  has  made  findings  of  fact  which
    expressly relate to the specific subsections in paragraph (iii) of  the
    head note to TG.  The submissions made by Mrs Hussain  are  effectively
    no more than disagreement with the findings of the  judge.   The  judge
    has analysed the issues, rejected a claim of persecution, analysed  the
    criteria involved, rejected the position with  regard  to  threats  and
    extortion and given reasons for her findings.   She  has  explained  in
    some detail at paragraph 21 the ability of the Appellants  to  practise
    their faith.  Thereinafter she has gone on to give due consideration to
    the role of the  principal  Appellant  as  the  male  guardian  and  to
    consider the financial circumstances of the parties and  the  prospects
    of relocation.

18. Looking at this matter in the round, this  is  a  judge  who  has  made
    findings of fact  on  hearing  the  evidence.   She  has  made  adverse
    credibility findings.  She has applied country  guidance  and  she  has
    looked at the criteria thereunder.  She has made findings of fact  that
    she was entitled  to  and  the  decision  for  all  the  above  reasons
    discloses no material error of law and the appeal is dismissed and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application  is  made  to  vary  that  order  and  the  anonymity  direction
continues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 14 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal
