
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number:  PA/12160/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 19 April 2018                     |On 24 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  K  Smyth,  Solicitor  Advocate,  Kesar  &  Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer



                          Determination and Reasons

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 24 February
      2018 in respect of the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Burns who dismissed the appeal by way  of  a  determination  dated  17
      January 2018.

   2.       The appellant claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan born on [  ]
      1984 but his nationality is disputed by the respondent. He  claims  to
      have arrived in 2007 having travelled from France in a  lorry.  Whilst
      in France, he had been fingerprinted, had given a  different  identity
      and claimed to be a Pakistani national. He claimed asylum in the UK in
      August 2015 after he was arrested.

   3.       On 16 November 2017 the respondent refused his asylum and  human
      rights claim. His appeal against that decision came before Judge Burns
      at Taylor House on 20 December 2017. The  judge  heard  oral  evidence
      from the appellant and from his partner, Ms [D]. The appellant claimed
      that he would be at risk on return because his  father  had  converted
      from Sunni to Shia Islam and that he (the appellant) had  been  raised
      as a Shia Muslim in Pakistan where the family had moved to in 1990.

   4.       Judge Burns was not impressed with the appellant's evidence. She
      was not satisfied that he was an Afghan national and found that he was
      more likely to be a Pakistani. In any event, she  found  there  was  a
      significant Shia Muslim minority in Afghanistan and that  whilst  they
      faced discrimination, this did not amount  to  persecution.  She  also
      took account of his delayed asylum claim  and  the  failure  to  claim
      asylum in France or in any other safe country he passed through on his
      way to the UK.

   5.       Judge Burns also heard evidence on the article 8 claim from  the
      appellant and Ms [D]. She had regard to the documentary  evidence  and
      concluded that whilst there had been a relationship in  the  past,  it
      was no longer subsisting and the appellant was  no  longer  cohabiting
      with Ms [D] in a relationship akin to marriage.

   6.       The appellant challenged the  decision  and,  as  stated  above,
      permission to appeal was granted.   The challenge  was  on  article  8
      grounds only; there has been no challenge to the judge's  findings  on
      the asylum claim.

   7.       Two criticisms were made. First, it was argued  that  the  judge
      had failed to give reasons  for  why  the  other  supporting  evidence
      (statements from Ms [D]'s  two  adult  children  and  a  friend)  were
      discounted. Secondly, it is maintained that when appellant  said  that
      Ms [D]'s son, [A], lived with them  (thereby  contradicting  Ms  [D]'s
      evidence that he did not but came to  visit  occasionally),  he  meant
      that [A] stayed with them. It is argued  that  the  judge  incorrectly
      recorded the appellant's evidence and indeed  had  omitted  to  record
      that the appellant had said [A] "slept on  the  settee"  which  it  is
      maintained was recorded in the representative's notes of the  hearing.



Appeal hearing

   8.       The appellant was in attendance at the hearing. The grounds were
      expanded upon by Mr Smyth in oral submissions at  the  hearing  before
      me. He confirmed that the only challenge was to the article  8  aspect
      of the determination. He submitted that the judge  had  accepted  that
      the appellant had cohabited with Ms [D] in the past although she found
      that the relationship was no longer subsisting. He submitted that  the
      judge had made no findings on the supporting letters.  There  was  now
      also a letter from Ms [D]'s sister. The judge  failed  to  make  clear
      findings on this evidence.

   9.       Mr Smyth also argued that there had been a discrepancy over  the
      colour of a pet cat. The appellant had said it was white  and  Ms  [D]
      said it was black. The appellant was recalled and this matter was  put
      to him. He said he had been muddled. Mr Smyth said this was  possible.
      The sponsor had never owned a white cat and so this  was  an  innocent
      mistake by the appellant. The neighbour's cat was white.

  10.       The next problem was concerned with the living  arrangements  of
      the sponsor's older  son,  [A].  It  was  not  correct  that,  as  the
      appellant said in evidence, [A]  lived  with  them.  However,  in  his
      witness statement the appellant had said that [A] sometimes  came  and
      stayed. The appellant's complaints went beyond  a  mere  quibble.  The
      judge had not recorded the appellant's evidence that [A] slept on  the
      settee. This was indicative of someone  visiting  rather  than  living
      there. This was a material omission.

  11.       At this stage I paused Mr Smyth in his submissions in  order  to
      check the judge's Record of Proceedings. Whilst I found  reference  to
      [A] sleeping in the loft, there was no record of the appellant stating
      that he slept on the sofa. Mr Wilding checked the Presenting Officer's
      notes of proceedings and also found no record of such evidence.

  12.       Mr Smyth then conceded he could not take that point further  but
      maintained that [A] only visited and did not live there. He pointed to
      the evidence of the other children confirming that the appellant lived
      with their mother. He submitted that the discrepancies in the evidence
      were  insufficient  to  undermine  the   other   supporting   evidence
      particularly when no findings on it had been made.

  13.       Mr Wilding replied. He  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response  and
      submitted that the appellant's grounds were a  disagreement  with  the
      outcome. The findings were open to the judge to  make.  The  appellant
      was even recalled to explain the discrepancy that had  arisen  between
      his evidence and that given by Ms [D]. The judge was plainly aware  of
      all the evidence. The case came down to an attempt by the appellant to
      reargue the findings rather than identifying any errors. The appellant
      had failed to explain how he had become confused.  The  judge  carried
      out an assessment and made sustainable  findings.  There  was  nothing
      wrong with the determination, let alone materially wrong.

  14.       In response, Mr Smyth submitted there were  several  letters  on
      which no findings were made. The letter  from  one  of  the  sponsor's
      children  went  beyond  the   "friendly   attitude"   cited   in   the
      determination. The error was a failure to  make  findings  on  crucial
      witness evidence and was therefore material.

  15.       That  completed  the  submissions.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
      hearing, I reserved my determination which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  16.       I am grateful to both sides for their submissions. I have  taken
      these into account along with all the  other  evidence  including  the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

  17.        The  judge's  findings  were  not  based  solely  on  the   two
      discrepancies identified by the appellant in the grounds and  expanded
      in submissions before me. The judge  noted  that  the  appellant  gave
      vague and incorrect details about the studies of  Ms  [D]'s  triplets.
      Had he continued to be involved with the family for the last  9  years
      as claimed, he could be expected to be aware of  these  details.   The
      refusal letter also notes that at interview the appellant  was  unable
      to give the name of the school the three children attended during  the
      time when he was supposed to be living with the family.

  18.       The judge found that the appellant's  evidence  conflicted  with
      that given by Ms [D] as to where her son, [A],  lived.  The  appellant
      claimed he lived with them. Ms [D] said he did not, although  he  came
      to visit and sometimes stayed over.

  19.       Mr Smyth offered two possible explanations for this discrepancy.
      One was that the appellant was confused over the meaning  of  "living"
      and "staying" and the other was that the judge had omitted  to  record
      his evidence that [A] slept on the sofa which  accorded  with  what  a
      visitor might do. There are difficulties with both explanations.  With
      regard to the first, I have not seen any evidence from  the  appellant
      to suggest that this was his evidence. It may well  be  something  his
      representatives  have  thought  of;  it  is  certainly  not  suggested
      anywhere that it was the appellant who put forward  this  explanation.
      There is no  evidence  to  support  the  submission  that  there  were
      language difficulties at the hearing and I note that not only did  the
      appellant give his oral evidence in  English  without  any  issues  of
      comprehension but that he also chose to speak in English at his asylum
      interview and prepared a detailed witness statement without the use of
      an interpreter. Indeed, in his statement  he  maintains  that  he  was
      taught English at school and so knew the language before he even  came
      here. This confirms a fluency in English. In this context, Mr  Smyth's
      submission  about  the  appellant's  confusion   over   "living"   and
      "visiting/staying" is just not plausible.

  20.       The difficulty with the second explanation is that although  the
      representative who appeared for the appellant at  the  hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal maintained that the appellant  had  said  that
      [A] slept on the sofa, neither the judge's  record  nor  that  of  the
      Presenting Officer has a note of that evidence having been  given.  In
      fact, the judge's record clearly notes that the  appellant  said  that
      [A] slept in the loft. It may be that in  his  witness  statement  the
      appellant stated that [A] did not live with them  but  this  does  not
      explain why he should then give an incorrect answer at the hearing. It
      is possible that having prepared a false statement, he  had  forgotten
      what he said therein. It has not been shown that there was  a  failure
      by the judge to correctly record the appellant's evidence.

  21.       Much was made about the discrepancy over the colour of Ms  [D]'s
      pet cat. However, this was just one factor cited by the judge  and  it
      was open to her to conclude that if the appellant had  cohabited  with
      Ms [D] since 2009, he would not have become confused over whether  the
      cat, who had also been living in the house  for  all  that  time,  was
      black or white. Mr Smyth argued that as it had been accepted that they
      had been in a relationship at an earlier  time,  the  appellant  would
      have known the colour of the pet and, therefore, his incorrect  answer
      was just an innocent mistake. I find it is equally plausible  that  he
      had moved out, as the judge found, and had forgotten the colour of the
      animal.  Although Ms [D] sought  to  offer  an  explanation  when  the
      discrepancy became apparent and maintained  the  neighbour's  cat  was
      white, this was not an explanation offered by the appellant and, if he
      was indeed part of the family,  he  could  be  expected  to  correctly
      answer such a simple question, particularly as it was  also  Ms  [D]'s
      evidence that no other animal came in to her home.

  22.       Contrary to what was argued, the judge did have  regard  to  the
      supporting statements. It is incorrect to refer only to paragraph  51.
      The judge addressed the other evidence at paragraphs 40-43 and  indeed
      accepted that the appellant had a good ongoing  relationship  with  Ms
      [D]'s adult children. Clearly, however, there were  difficulties  with
      the evidence that undermined the  strength  of  the  contents  of  the
      statements and it must be  borne  in  mind  that  none  of  those  who
      prepared the statements attended the hearing to give oral evidence and
      to  be   cross-examined.   The   judge   also   plainly   found   that
      notwithstanding the written evidence from two of  the  five  children,
      the discrepancies suggested that the relationship between them was not
      as close as was claimed. Findings have  therefore  been  made  on  the
      supporting evidence. There was no need for the judge  to  itemise  and
      make findings on every item of evidence. She has  made  it  clear  why
      should dismissed the appeal and has provided adequate reasons for  her
      conclusions. Mr Smyth referred to an additional letter from  Ms  [D]'s
      sister however this was not before the judge and  cannot  be  used  to
      undermine the judge's findings at this stage.

  23.       The judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant would  not
      have made basic mistakes if he was still living with Ms [D]. The judge
      rather  generously,  in  my  view,  found  that  there  had   been   a
      relationship in the past but that it was not ongoing. That  conclusion
      was a reasoned one and open to her on the evidence.

  24.       It is, of course, correct that  the  article  8  claim  must  be
      assessed in the context of all the evidence  as  Mr  Smyth  submitted.
      That, the judge has done. Part of that evidence is the fact  that  the
      appellant has not sought to challenge the judge's finding that he made
      a bogus asylum claim and  that  he  was  not  an  Afghan  national  as
      claimed. His lack of credibility in that respect inevitably taints his
      evidence on other matters and even calls  into  question  his  claimed
      identity.  His conduct in entering illegally, working  unlawfully  and
      making no asylum claim until his arrest are also relevant factors.

  25.       Importantly, however, what the grounds fail to engage  with  and
      what Mr Smyth did not address in his submissions, was  the  fact  that
      the judge also considered the appeal on the basis that  there  was  an
      ongoing relationship (at paragraph 53-59). Even if the  errors  relied
      upon by the appellant were, therefore, made out, which they  are  not,
      they would be immaterial because the judge considered  the  appeal  at
      its highest on article 8 grounds. No challenge is made to the  judge's
      findings in this regard. On that basis  alone,  the  article  8  claim
      cannot possibly succeed and this challenge is doomed.

Decision

  26.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make errors  of  law.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




      Signed:




      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal                        23 April 2018
