
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12647/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2017                               |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     k E
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Kotak, Counsel instructed by Lupins,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought with the leave of Judge Page in respect of  a
    determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  promulgated  on  19
    January 2017.  The primary ground of appeal,  as  originally  advanced,
    was that an exchange took place between the judge and Counsel  for  the
    appellant which indicated a hostile animus not merely to Counsel but to
    her chambers generally. There is a short witness statement  in  support
    of that allegation.

2.   When the matter was opened before me it was obvious  I  could  make  no
    findings on this primary ground in the absence of an investigation into
    what took place which would include seeking comment from the judge.   I
    was taken to correspondence indicating the judge's  comments  had  been
    sought, but due to a misreading of  that  enquiry  no  information  was
    supplied.  Accordingly I cannot today investigate that matter.

3.   However, Counsel for the appellant,  Miss  Kotak,  indicated  that  the
    matter could be cut short in that one  could  avoid  that  enquiry  and
    focus instead on what she  considered  to  be  a  powerful  independent
    ground, namely the failure by the judge to consider or give any  weight
    to a medical report by a Dr Juliette Cohen which is found at  pages  J1
    to 22 of the Home Office bundle. This expert report dealt with scarring
    on the body of the appellant and the causes of it.

4.   In reading the determination it is apparent  that  although  the  judge
    makes frequent references to items elsewhere in the Home Office bundle,
    there is no reference at all  to  the  report  of  Dr  Cohen.   In  the
    circumstances of this case that I cannot be satisfied that that  report
    has been considered and left on one side.  It seems to be  more  likely
    it was either overlooked  or  not  accorded  the  weight  it  evidently
    deserved.  Counsel for the Secretary of State  did  not  argue  against
    this preliminary indication.

5.   In all the  circumstances  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  this  appeal
    received anxious scrutiny before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
    determination is therefore set aside and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

6.   This is  sufficient  to  be  dispositive  of  the  appeal,  and  it  is
    therefore unnecessary for the Upper Tribunal to investigate the primary
    ground of apparent bias or judicial misconduct.


Notice of Decision

   1) An error of law having been found,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside.

   2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  to
      be decided afresh by a judge other than Judge Fox.

   3) No findings of fact are preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     10 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

