
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12981/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2019                    |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     H Z
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None (the appellant represented himself as a
litigant in person)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Cohen (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 14 May
         2019, dismissed the appellant's protection and human rights  appeal
         against the respondent's decision of 30 October 2018 to refuse  his
         protection and human rights claim.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of China, born on 28 December  2000.  I
         summarise his protection claim. He lived with his mother and father
         in a village in Anhui Province in Eastern  China.  The  appellant's
         parents followed a religion called Church of  Almighty  God  (CAG).
         The appellant had no interest in the religion and preferred to play
         with his friends. In 2013, when the appellant was 13 years old, the
         police raided the CAG place of worship. The congregation, including
         the appellant, tried to escape but  he  was  caught  and  hit  with
         batons  that  caused  a  serious  fracture  of  his  leg.  He   was
         hospitalised for some months and the fracture treated. A  neighbour
         informed the appellant's parents that a warrant  for  the  family's
         arrest had been issued. After being discharged  from  the  hospital
         the appellant and his parents went to Hefi City where  they  rented
         several properties over a 3-year period, often moving house  so  as
         to avoid the authorities. The appellant's  parents  obtained  money
         from a Snakehead gang and illegally obtained  a  passport  for  the
         appellant. The appellant left China in January 2017  and  travelled
         for 6 months in the company of an agent until he arrived in the  UK
         in July 2017 and claimed asylum.

      3. The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant gave a credible
         account of his protection claim. The respondent identified  several
         inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  relating  to   his
         parents' religion and noted the appellant's lack of basic knowledge
         of   the   religion.   The   respondent   additionally   identified
         inconsistencies relating to where the  appellant  and  his  parents
         lived prior to his leaving China and the  appellant's  age  at  the
         time of the raid. The appellant exercised his right of appeal under
         s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in respect
         of the respondent's decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The appellant had the benefit of legal representation at his appeal
         hearing and his solicitors produced a bundle of  documents  running
         to 297 pages including a witness statement dated 1 April 2019  (the
         appellant had previously produced a statement dated 2 October  2017
         prior to his substantive asylum interview), a confidential  medico-
         legal report authored by Dr Amandeep Singh Ranu, an expert  country
         report authored by  Professor  Mario  I.  Aguilar,  a  letter  from
         Krystle [C] (the appellant's Leaving  Care  Personal  Advisor)  and
         several background evidence reports on religious freedom in  China.
         The appellant gave oral evidence through  a  Mandarin  interpreter,
         adopted his witness  statement  and  answered  questions  from  the
         representatives and from the judge.

      5. In his decision the judge  summarised  the  appellant's  protection
         claim and reasons advanced by the  respondent  for  rejecting  that
         claim. At [16] the judge "... agreed to apply  the  guidelines  for
         vulnerable witnesses in respect of  the  appellant."  At  [17]  the
         judge  confirmed  that  the  appellant  gave  evidence   with   the
         assistance of the Tribunal appointed Mandarin interpreter and  that
         they understood each  other.  The  judge  summarised  the  evidence
         before him and the oral evidence given  by  the  appellant  at  the
         hearing. The judge accurately set out the burden  and  standard  of
         proof in protection and human rights  claims.  At  [31]  the  judge
         stated,

             "The appellant was a minor and was younger when he arrived  in
             the UK and I have made appropriate allowances for this  factor
             and in respect of the evidence that he gave in support of  his
             claim. I note however that he is now 18 years old."

      6. The judge considered the Medico-Legal report (the scarring  report)
         at [33] noting the expert's view that the injury  was  unlikely  to
         have been caused by a baton strike in the case of  someone  of  the
         appellant's age and that it was more likely to have been caused  by
         a fall. Although the injury was  consistent  with  the  appellant's
         account the expert could  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  the
         appellant's injury occurred other than in  the  manner  claimed  by
         him. In these circumstances the judge found that the expert  report
         did little to advance the appellant's appeal.  At  [34]  the  judge
         considered  Professor  Aguilar's  report  noting  that  the  expert
         accepted the appellant's account as being credible and that many of
         the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's   account   were   neither
         considered nor  addressed  by  the  expert.  The  judge  noted  the
         expert's findings and indicated that they would  be  considered  as
         part of his overall assessment.

      7. From [35] to [49] the judge gave detailed reasons for  finding  the
         appellant an incredible witness and for rejecting  his  account  of
         being targeted by the Chinese authorities. These  related,  amongst
         others, to inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  in  respect
         of the number of  occasions  he  attended  church,  inconsistencies
         relating to the name of the religion,  the  implausibility  of  the
         appellant not attending church from the ages of 6 until 13 and  his
         inability to give any basic details of the church.  The  judge  did
         not find it credible that the appellant would be abandoned  by  the
         police after being  assaulted  rather  than  arrested  and  it  was
         implausible that the police would not come to look for him when  he
         was hospitalised. Nor was it credible that the  appellant  and  his
         family remained only 30-40 minutes away from their original home if
         they were wanted by the police. The judge found the absence of  any
         explanation for why the appellant's parents decided to send him out
         of the country 3 years later rather than as soon as possible  after
         the incident to be incredible. The judge noted  inconsistencies  in
         the appellant's evidence relating to his contact with  his  parents
         and the implausibility of his account of  friends  of  his  parents
         collecting him from the airport  and  then  effectively  abandoning
         him.

      8. At [48] the judge stated,

             "I find the appellant's immigration history to be damaging  to
             his credibility. The appellant came to the  UK  in  a  journey
             taking 6 months. He  would  have  spent  significant  time  in
             various countries. The appellant however claimed that  he  did
             not know any of the countries he passed through. The appellant
             said that he could not remember the last plane that he used to
             travel to Heathrow and  yet  had  been  in  contact  with  his
             parents who advised him that two friends would be  waiting  to
             pick him up from the airport.  I  find  the  appellant  is  an
             intelligent young man who has been  progressing  well  in  his
             education in the UK and find that he would have been aware  of
             at least some of his travel details to the UK. I find the fact
             that the appellant has failed  to  disclose  the  same  in  an
             attempt to frustrate removal. In considering  the  appellant's
             immigration history I have regard to Section 8 of  the  Asylum
             and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004. I find
             the appellant's immigration history to be further damaging  to
             his credibility."

      9. And at [49] the judge stated,

             "There are further discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence
             and evidence which I find to be implausible which I  will  not
             set out in further detail herein."

     10. At [50] the judge found that  the  experts'  reports  accepted  the
         appellant's  evidence  at  face  value  whereas  the  judge   found
         significant credibility issues. The judge was  not  satisfied  that
         the appellant or his parents were members of CAG or that he held  a
         well-founded fear of  persecution  in  China.  Nor  was  the  judge
         satisfied that the appellant left  China  illegally.  At  [51]  the
         judge noted that, whilst the appellant was a minor, the Home Office
         would not seek to return him until he reached majority.  The  judge
         found that the appellant was in contact with his parents  in  China
         and that he could return to that country and live with his parents.
         The protection appeal was dismissed, as was the appellant's  appeal
         on humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     11. The original grounds  of  appeal  were  drafted  by  the  appellant
         himself. He claimed he had experienced distress before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal and that, due to the language barrier,  his  age  and
         the trauma he faced when he arrived in the UK, he had  been  unable
         to recall all the information  asked  of  him  at  that  time.  The
         appellant was not satisfied that the evidence relating to  his  leg
         injury was satisfactorily investigated.  The  appellant  criticised
         his former legal representatives because the caseworker  was  twice
         changed, because no interpreter was provided by his  solicitors  at
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and because they failed to explain
         their advice to him following the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
         His solicitors had used interpreters over the phone and he found it
         difficult to understand their dialect.  He  wanted  the  chance  to
         clarify important information or discrepancies.

     12. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
         stated,

             "The grounds of appeal mainly set out disagreements  of  fact.
             In addition, the appellant highlights his age (he  arrived  as
             an unaccompanied minor), the language barriers he  experienced
             during the hearing, and his claimed prior trauma.  It  appears
             that  the  ground  suggest  that  those  factors   meant   the
             appellant's evidence was less coherent,  and  that  the  Judge
             should have made further allowances. It is  arguable  that  he
             should  have  done  so.  The  Judge's  extensive   credibility
             concerns were based, in part, on the  appellant's  failure  to
             claim asylum in one of  his  (unspecified)  transit  countries
             prior to arriving here, pursuant to section 8  of  the  Asylum
             and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.
             Arguably, the Judge erred at [48] when reaching  this  finding
             as he did not know (or if he did know, did not specify)  which
             "safe" countries the appellant had transited through prior  to
             arriving here. Still less did the judge expressly consider the
             impact of the appellant's youth on  his  expectation  that  he
             should have claimed asylum earlier. As  the  Court  of  Appeal
             recently noted in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  914  at  [54],  it  is
             important (i) to apply section 8 correctly, and (ii)  to  make
             allowances for unaccompanied minors. The Judge arguably failed
             to take those steps. Although the Judge said at [16] he  would
             treat the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness,  his  operative
             analysis of the appellant's  evidence  does  not  feature  any
             adjustments on that account.

             The judge also  arguably  erred  by  noting  that  there  were
             "further discrepancies... which I will not set out  in  detail
             further detail therein" at [49]. Arguably, the Judge failed to
             give any, let alone sufficient, reasons for these  additional,
             unspecified credibility concerns.  It  is  not  clear  whether
             those concerns were infected by the Judge's arguably erroneous
             approach to assessing  the  appellant's  credibility,  or  the
             extent to which they were  material  in  the  Judge's  overall
             assessment.

             By arguably erring in his application of  section  8,  and  by
             holding credibility concerns against the appellant which -  on
             the Judge's own reasoning - were expressly withheld  from  the
             reasons he gave, it is arguable that the  overall  credibility
             assessment conducted by the Judge was flawed.

             The appellant's complaints concerning  his  former  solicitors
             and interpretation difficulties have less  merit.  However,  I
             grant permission or  grounds,  as  it  will  be  difficult  to
             isolate which aspects of the Judge's  decision  were  arguably
             affected by that arguable error."

The error of law hearing

     13. The appellant acted as a litigant in person. He was accompanied  by
         Krystle [C], his Leaving Care Personal Adviser. Ms [C] acted  as  a
         McKenzie friend. The appellant made  his  submissions  through  the
         Mandarin interpreter appointed by the Upper Tribunal. I allowed  Ms
         [C] and the appellant a short time to use  the  Tribunal  appointed
         interpreter to prepare his submissions.  The  Mandarin  interpreter
         additionally translated the grant of permission and some paragraphs
         of the scarring report.

     14. The appellant argued that the judge failed to give  him  sufficient
         opportunity to explain what was wrong with his leg and that he  was
         disadvantaged from not having his own interpreter at the First-tier
         Tribunal hearing. The appellant claimed that the judge's  questions
         were not appropriate, but he did not particularise this  complaint.
         The appellant said he could not understand the judge's questions in
         order to give an appropriate  answer.  The  appellant  referred  to
         there being 129 different  Chinese  dialects  and  said  he  didn't
         understand the interpreter's language.

     15. Ms Isherwood submitted  that  the  challenge  amounted  to  a  mere
         disagreement with the judge's findings  of  fact.  The  appellant's
         statement from April 2019 was prepared by his solicitors and signed
         by him and the medical assessment was undertaken in the presence of
         a Mandarin interpreter. There had been no complaint in  respect  of
         what was contained in both the medical report  and  the  statement.
         The judge had borne in mind the appellant's  age  when  considering
         his evidence. The appellant was legally represented at the  hearing
         and no concerns were raised  with  the  interpretation.  The  judge
         properly considered the scarring report. Any error  in  approaching
         the scarring port was, in any event, immaterial given the weight of
         the judge's other adverse credibility findings. The judge  did  not
         ignore the appellant's age and any error was not material.

     16. In response the appellant claimed that he could not be returned  to
         China as he could not find anyone in  the  country,  and  he  spoke
         about his age assessment interview in which he  gave  his  mother's
         phone number to the assessors.

     17. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     18. I will first  consider  the  written  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
         appellant's  submissions  at  the  'error  of  law'  hearing.   The
         appellant criticises his former legal representatives for  changing
         his caseworker twice, which caused delays,  for  not  providing  an
         interpreter for him at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, and for not
         explaining their reasons for advising that there were no merits  in
         seeking to appeal the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The appellant
         did not advance the last point at the 'error of law' hearing and  I
         note that it relates to confidential legal  advice.  The  appellant
         does not appear to have informed his  previous  solicitors  of  his
         concerns and they have not therefore been given an  opportunity  to
         respond to the appellant's criticisms.

     19. Whilst it is unfortunate that there  were  changes  of  caseworkers
         there is insufficient evidence  to  suggest  that  this  materially
         undermined the appellant's ability to present his case, or that his
         former solicitors acted in a  negligent  or  improper  manner.  The
         former  solicitors  prepared  a  substantial  bundle  of  documents
         including a detailed witness statement  from  him  and  two  expert
         reports. There is nothing on the face of the papers to suggest that
         the appellant's case was not professionally prepared.

     20. The appellant maintained  that  his  former  solicitors  failed  to
         provide an interpreter for him at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
         and this left him feeling unsure and lacking confidence  about  the
         Tribunal appointed interpreter which, he claimed,  had  a  negative
         impact on the way he answered questions. He  also  claimed  at  the
         'error of law' hearing that he had been unable  to  understand  the
         Tribunal appointed interpreter at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.
         Information provided by Ms  [C]  at  the  'error  of  law'  hearing
         suggested that an interpreter may have  been  book  either  by  the
         former solicitors or by the social services but failed  to  attend.
         Even if the solicitors failed to book an interpreter themselves the
         appellant was able to give  his  evidence  through  the  First-tier
         Tribunal appointed interpreter. There  was  no  indication  in  the
         judge's  decision,  or  indeed  in  the  judge's  notes,  that  the
         appellant had any difficulty  with  the  Tribunal  interpreter.  As
         noted at [17] of  the  decision  the  appellant  and  the  official
         Mandarin interpreter confirmed that they understood each other. The
         appellant  was,  moreover,  legally  represented.   There   is   no
         indication in the documents before me that the appellant's  counsel
         ever  needed  to  raise  concerns  relating  to  the   quality   of
         interpretation, or that counsel was unable to follow  his  client's
         instructions. Nor  does  the  judge's  decision  suggest  that  any
         questions he asked of the appellant  were  inappropriate.  Although
         the appellant stated in both his written grounds and  in  his  oral
         submissions at the 'error  of  law'  hearing  that  there  are  129
         Chinese dialects he was able to provide detailed answers to all the
         questions asked of him during the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  I
         additionally note that the appellant  had  a  Mandarin  interpreter
         during his substantive asylum interview and he  indicated  that  he
         understood the questions asked of him and that he felt fit and well
         during the interview. I  am  not  persuaded  that  there  were  any
         language difficulties either  during  the  appellant's  substantive
         asylum interview or during  his  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  that
         prevented him from understanding the questions asked and giving his
         answers.

     21. There is some merit in the criticisms identified in  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. The judge drew  an  adverse  inference  under
         section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
         etc.) Act 2004 on the basis that  the  appellant  failed  to  claim
         asylum while travelling through safe third countries, but the judge
         does not identify what countries the appellant  travelled  through.
         Without knowing which countries the appellant travelled through  it
         is not possible to draw an adverse inference under this provision.

     22. The grant of permission additionally notes that the  judge  appears
         to have had other, unspecified, credibility concerns [49],  but  he
         failed to identify these concerns or give any reasons in support of
         his concerns. It is not appropriate for judges  to  make  vague  or
         general references to the existence of other  credibility  concerns
         without then specifically engaging with  those  concerns.  A  judge
         must provide clear reasons if  he  or  she  does  not  believe  the
         material elements of an appellant's account. On reading [49] one is
         left with the impression that  the  judge  may  have  held  matters
         against the appellant that are  unreasoned  and  unidentified.  The
         lack of transparency in this aspect of the decision is concerning.

     23. I am not however persuaded that this error of law, taken on its own
         or in conjunction with the error relating to s.8 of the Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004  and  the  other
         points raised in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  materially
         undermine the sustainability of the judge's decision.

     24. The grant of permission noted that, although the judge indicated he
         would treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  [16],  the
         operative analysis of the appellant's evidence did not feature  any
         adjustments on that account. The  reference  to  the  vulnerability
         guidelines however indicates  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
         appellant's age and the impact his age could have on his  evidence.
         at [31] the judge again made specific reference to the  appellant's
         age and indicated that  he  made  appropriate  allowance  for  this
         factor in respect of the evidence given by the appellant in support
         of his claim. Having made these two general comments,  it  was  not
         necessary for the judge to then again refer to the allowance  based
         on the  appellant's  age  or  vulnerability  when  making  specific
         adverse credibility  findings.  The  decision,  read  as  a  whole,
         suggests the judge did take into account the  appellant's  age  and
         vulnerability at the time of the incident in 2013 and in respect of
         the appellant's evidence in his asylum interview.

     25.  From  [35]  to  [47]  the  judge  gave  substantial  reasons   for
         disbelieving the  appellant's  account  of  his  and  his  parents'
         involvement with the CAG and  of  being  targeted  by  the  Chinese
         authorities. At [36] the judge did not consider  it  credible  that
         the appellant's parents, who  were  regular  churchgoers,  did  not
         insist that he accompanied them to their place of worship from  the
         ages of 6 until 13. The judge  identified  inconsistencies  in  the
         appellant's explanation for his non-attendance at church and  found
         the appellant's account to be  implausible,  especially  given  the
         appellant's age at the time and his claim  in  his  age  assessment
         interview that his parents were strict  [37].  These  were  adverse
         findings  rationally  open  to  the  judge  and  which   were   not
         significantly affected by the appellant's age.

     26. At [38], [39] and [40] the judge noted that, despite his  claim  to
         not be interested in his parent's religion and to  know  little  of
         the religion, the appellant had been born into the  religion,  that
         he claimed in interview to belong to the religion, and that he  had
         attended the place of worship when he was 4-5 years old  and  again
         when he was 13 years old. Yet his interview the appellant  referred
         to his religion as "Almighty God and Catholic" and "is the Almighty
         God in Catholic I believe" and was unable  to  provide  even  basic
         information about the religion and church. The judge did  not  find
         it credible that the appellant would  not  know  the  name  of  the
         church his parents attended on numerous  occasions  throughout  his
         life or the  basics  of  the  religion.  This  was  the  conclusion
         rationally open to the judge on the evidence before him.

     27. At [41] the judge found implausible the appellant's claim that  the
         police simply left him after assaulting him with  batons  and  that
         they did not seek to arrest him while he  convalesced  in  hospital
         for several months despite the issuance of an  arrest  warrant  for
         the whole family. The judge was rationally entitled  to  find  this
         aspect of the appellant's claim implausible for the reasons  given.
         At [42] the judge did not find it plausible  that  the  appellant's
         family would relocate to an area only 30 to 40 minutes away if they
         were wanted by the police and arrest warrants had been issued.  The
         judge was entitled to find that those feature the state authorities
         would not live in such close proximity for  a  period  of  3  years
         given the dangers of detection.  None  of  these  adverse  findings
         could be reasonably affected by the appellant's age.

     28. At [43] the judge was entitled to hold against  the  appellant  the
         absence of any explanation from  him  as  to  why  the  appellant's
         parents only decided to send him out of China some  3  years  after
         the incident that gave rise to his asylum claim and  to  find  that
         this  indicated  that  the  appellant  was  not   sought   by   the
         authorities. At [45] the judge identified clear inconsistencies  in
         the appellant's evidence relating to ownership of a mobile phone in
         his possession and his knowledge  of  either  his  mother's  mobile
         phone number or his father's mobile phone  number.  The  judge  was
         unarguably  entitled  to  hold  these  discrepancies  against   the
         appellant.

     29. At [46] and [47]  the  judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  from  a
         discrepancy in the appellant's evidence relating  to  how  long  he
         remained with friends of his parents when he first entered the  UK,
         and the judge found it implausible that the  family  friends  would
         effectively abandon the appellant without giving  him  any  contact
         number or contact details given that they had been willing to  pick
         him up from the airport and allowed  him  to  live  with  them  for
         several days, and especially given that they  would  have  been  in
         contact with  his  parents.  The  judge  gave  cogent  and  legally
         sustainable reasons for his findings.

     30. Whilst criticism can properly be  made  of  some  elements  of  the
         judge's decision, he ultimately provided overwhelming  reasons  for
         finding the appellant  an  incredible  witness  and  rejecting  the
         appellant's account of fearing the Chinese authorities. In so doing
         the judge referred on two occasions  to  the  appellant's  age  and
         vulnerability. I am not persuaded that the errors of law identified
         in this  decision  are  capable  of  undermining  the  overwhelming
         majority of adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge.  I
         consequently find there is no error on a point of law requiring the
         decision to be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed                                  Date 8 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
