

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/12537/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 September 2017                   |        On 18 September 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                               senay afeworki
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, instructed by Lambeth Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Mathews that was promulgated on 16 January 2017.
     Judge Mathews decided the appellant was not a refugee from Eritrea  or
    otherwise in need  of  international  protection.  Judge  Mathews  also
    decided the appellant did not benefit from article  8  ECHR  on  family
    life grounds even though he is the father of a British citizen child.

 2. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills  advised  Ms  Smith  and  myself
    that, in light of the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) [2017]  UKUT  120,  he  accepted  that  Judge
    Mathews erred when dismissing the original appeal under article 8 ECHR.
     Mr Mills conceded that because the appellant had  a  genuine  parental
    relationship with a British citizen child, his appeal  on  that  ground
    must succeed.  In response, I indicated that  I  would  find  that  the
    decision and reasons statement contains legal error on this issue, that
    I would set aside the decision and remake it to  allow  the  appeal  on
    article 8 grounds.

 3. Although Ms Smith thanked Mr Mills for this concession, she  was  in  a
    little difficulty because  she  was  not  able  to  concede  the  issue
    relating to whether the appellant is a refugee because she did not have
    instructions.  I decided  for  the  sake  of  clarity,  I  should  hear
    argument on those issues to decide whether Judge Mathews had  erred  on
    those grounds.

 4. Ms Smith confirmed there was no challenge  to  Judge  Mathew's  adverse
    credibility  findings.   The  issue  was  whether  he  erred   by   not
    considering  the  current  country  guideline  case,  MST  and   Others
    (national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016]  UKUT  443  when
    assessing the risks the appellant might  face  on  return  as  a  draft
    evader.

 5. Although the original grounds of application argued that Judge  Mathews
    should have re-examined the earlier judicial finding  of  Judge  Saffer
    that the appellant had not left  Eritrea  illegally  in  light  of  the
    additional evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal, Ms Smith realised
    that was a difficult argument to pursue because  it  was  necessary  to
    consider the situation in Eritrea  when  he  left  and  not  now.   Her
    argument moved, therefore, to focus on paragraph 11 of the head note to
    MST and others, which identifies that:

    11. While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person  who
    has exited lawfully may on forcible return face  having  to  resume  or
    commence national service. In such a case  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm by  virtue  of  such  service  constituting
    forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article 3 of the ECHR.

 6. At [21], Judge Mathews finds  no  cogent  reason  to  depart  from  the
    findings made by Judge Saffer in relating to an earlier appeal that was
    dismissed on 15 December 2008.  The key findings  in  relation  to  the
    issues I must consider appear at paragraph 45 and 46 of Judge  Saffer's
    determination.

    45. In summary, therefore I accept that the appellant is  from  Eritrea
    and did military service from 2000, this ended sometime prior to  2007,
    he had no problems while in active service, he subsequently worked as a
    farmer, he remains on reserve duty, and his continued contact with  his
    family and lack of provision for their safety indicates they were at no
    risk as a result of his actions.   I do  not  therefore  accept  it  is
    reasonably likely his father had the problems claimed.

    46.  The question I must ask myself is what  is  reasonably  likely  to
    happen to him on his return to Eritrea.  I accept he is  still  subject
    to reserve duty.  The only evidence he  left  illegally  is  his  word.
    Regrettably his credibility is so poor for the  reasons  I  have  given
    that I am unable to accept his word on this issue.   Exit  permits  are
    required (COIR 34.03).  he has failed to  establish  it  is  reasonably
    likely he did not have an exit permit  and  accordingly  that  he  left
    illegally.

 7. Ms Smith submitted that the  fact  the  appellant  remains  on  reserve
    duties can only mean that he has  a  well-founded  fear  on  return  of
    having to resume national service.

 8. Mr Mills submitted that this was a  major  change  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and permission for the amendment had not been sought or granted.
     Even if the new ground were entertained, there was a question  whether
    the available evidence, including that considered by the Upper Tribunal
    in MST and others identified a real  risk  to  a  person  such  as  the
    appellant or a mere possibility that needed  investigating.   Mr  Mills
    argued that the  lack  of  evidence  before  Judge  Mathews  means  the
    appellant could not discharge even the lower standard of proof  in  his
    case.

 9. Mr Mills also argued that the original grounds of appeal could  not  be
    made out because the question of lawful exit had to be examined as  the
    situation was in 2008 and not as it is now.   Judge  Saffer's  findings
    were not in doubt because they are part of the credibility findings  of
    Judge Mathews, which are unchallenged.

10. I have considered the arguments and make the following findings.

11. Ms Smith's primary submissions seek to persuade  me  that  because  the
    appellant's  evidence  shows  he  does  not  fall  within  one  of  the
    categories of persons able to leave Eritrea lawfully Judge Mathews must
    regard him as a person who left unlawfully.

12. This argument is defeated by the  fact  both  Judge  Saffer  and  Judge
    Mathews found the appellant had not given a  credible  account  of  his
    circumstances in Eritrea before he left.  For this reason, both  judges
    concluded they could  not  find  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  the
    appellant left Eritrea unlawfully.  I recognise that the judges did not
    make a finding as to whether the appellant left lawfully, but there was
    no requirement for them to make  such  a  finding.   The  situation  is
    unchanged because Ms Smith  concedes  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
    credibility assessment.  It follows that it  is  impossible  to  decide
    whether the appellant left unlawfully or not because  his  accounts  of
    his circumstances in Eritrea are not believed.

13. This conclusion means I find there is no legal error in the  conclusion
    reached  by  Judge  Mathews  regarding  whether  the   appellant   left
    unlawfully.

14. The secondary submissions are that the appellant would be at risk as  a
    reservist aged 37 because he would be of interest to the authorities if
    forcibly returned.  This argument  depends  on  whether  the  appellant
    would be able to prove that he left lawfully; if he can, then it can be
    inferred he would not face a real risk for the reasons given in MST and
    others.   As  this  argument  developed  during  the  hearing,  I   was
    effectively asked to consider whether the  Eritrean  authorities  would
    have adequate records to show that the appellant had left  lawfully  on
    the assumption that if they did not then the  appellant  would  face  a
    real risk of being recalled to national service.

15. I have examined the approach taken to this issued by the Upper Tribunal
    in MST and others. From paragraph 300, the  Upper  Tribunal  considered
    the conflicting evidence and identified that there  was  a  possibility
    that a person of military service age  who  was  forced  to  return  to
    Eritrea and who could not  demonstrate  completion  or  exemption  from
    military service might be recalled to service.  But the Upper  Tribunal
    only identified this as a possibility.  The evidence was equivocal  and
    there was no clear overall picture.

16. Ms Smith had no evidence to develop the findings of the Upper  Tribunal
    and recognised that the finding that the  appellant  was  not  credible
    weakened her argument.   I  am  satisfied  that  although  there  is  a
    possibility the appellant could be recalled, the risk is below the real
    risk threshold because the evidence is  not  adequate.   Because  Judge
    Mathews found the appellant's claim not to be credible,  there  was  no
    need for him to consider this possibility, which in any event  was  not
    argued below.  Mr Mills categorised the possibility as speculative  and
    I agree.

17. It follows that I reject the secondary ground.

18. However, the finding that the protection grounds are not made out  does
    not undermine my decision that the decision and  reasons  statement  is
    infected with  legal  error  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's private and family life.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed because FtT Judge Mathews erred
in law.
I remake the decision to allow the original appeal to the extent indicated
above in terms of article 8 ECHR.


Signed                          Date         15 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
