
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12554/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th August 2017                       |On 22nd September 2017           |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     a s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     M J Edwards (Counsel)
     Instructed by: Adam Khattak Solicitors
For the Respondent:    D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS
 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 The Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them
    or any member of their family.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan who appeals a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Brien), promulgated on 7th February  2017,
    in which the judge dismissed his international protection  claim  based
    on his  fear  of  the  authorities  arising  from  the  publication  of
    oppositional articles he had written.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant's appeals with the permission of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Keane), granted on 9th June 2017. At the hearing before me,  and
    without objection from Mr Mills, Mr Edwards  renewed  the  ground  upon
    which the grant of permission was silent.

 4. There were three distinct challenges.

      a) Given that the judge had commented that there might be clues as  to
         his real identity within articles he had written under a pseudonym,
         he failed to give that finding adequate weight when concluding that
         the Appellant would not reasonably likely be exposed to a  risk  of
         persecution.

      b) The judge arrived at an irrational finding when concluding that the
         Appellant's ability to leave  Uzbekistan  in  2015  undermined  his
         claim to be sought  by  the  authorities  at  the  time  given  the
         proposition in LM (returnees - expired exit permit)  Uzbekistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 390 that officials based at the airport would not  have
         had a reason to stop the Appellant at the airport because he had  a
         valid pre-existing exit visa.  Mr Edwards argued that the  case  of
         LM showed that throughout the two years of their authorised  travel
         under an exit permit Uzbek passport bearers could freely leave  and
         enter Uzbekistan.  That would indicate to an airport-based official
         that there was a high degree of trust invested in the holder and so
         airport-based officials would not  have  had  reason  to  stop  the
         Appellant at the airport.  In those circumstances, it was an  error
         for the judge to rely on the Appellant's ease  of  passage  through
         the airport on exit as a factor undermining the credibility of  his
         account to be wanted by the authorities at the time.

      c) The judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding  that  the  critical
         articles had been fabricated for the purposes of the claim, so that
         the judge's finding that having written articles  critical  to  the
         regime for the purpose of the claim it was  not  reasonably  likely
         that he would continue to write such articles  on  return,  had  an
         unsound basis.  There was a qualitative difference between  writing
         a series of articles and finding a reputable  source  such  as  BBC
         World Service to publish them, and relatively  straightforward  sur
         place activity such as having a photograph taken on a demonstration
         outside an embassy.  Further if the Appellant would  cease  writing
         articles critical of the regime upon return only because of fear of
         persecution arising from  such  acts  then  he  would  nevertheless
         qualify for refugee status.

 5. Mr Mills relied on the rule 24 response submitting that:

      a) In respect of any risk arising from the sur place articles  written
         for the BBC the judge was satisfied that even  if  the  authorities
         were aware of them they would not be able to identify the Appellant
         because they were written under a pseudonym and whilst  they  might
         have clues as to his identity as the judge noted they would have to
         be very familiar with the Appellant's life here in  the  UK  rather
         than in Uzbekistan, and there was no  evidential  basis  to  assume
         such.

      b)  LM did not assist the Appellant the judge had found  that  it  was
         incredible  that  had  the  authorities  been  interested  in   the
         Appellant and required him to surrender his passport they would not
         have notified the airport so that even though he had at the time  a
         valid exit visa it would not have assisted him, being countermanded
         by the alert.

      c) In respect of the assessment of the sur place claim whilst Mr Mills
         accepted that writing articles  which  got  published  by  the  BBC
         represented a better effort than simply turning up at  the  embassy
         holding a flag and having a photograph  taken  it  was  nonetheless
         open to the judge to find that it was a cynical effort  to  bolster
         his claim.  The judge had set out reasoning which included  adverse
         credibility  findings  including  of  his  historical  account   of
         allegedly reporting to the police station, being required to return
         to the police station  bringing  his  passport  with  him,  and  of
         nonetheless being able to leave Uzbekistan on his own  passport  in
         the face of such interest.  Firstly, the  Appellant  asserts  close
         links to the ERK, the opposition party, however he was able to come
         and go  from  Uzbekistan  without  interference  until  July  2015.
         Secondly, the Appellant exaggerated his connection with  journalism
         claiming to have "studied" journalism when in fact he  had  studied
         computer science in Uzbekistan and had applied for a Tier 4 Student
         visa to study business in the United Kingdom.  Thirdly, he  claimed
         to  have  seen  one  of  his  witnesses  relatively   recently   in
         Uzbekistan, contrary to the evidence of  the  witness.   The  judge
         found his explanation that he might be confusing a recent  sighting
         of the witness with having  seen  him  as  a  child  as  expedient.
         Fourthly the articles for the BBC  which  the  Appellant's  witness
         indicated he knew the Appellant  had  written  all  post-dated  the
         claimed interest in him shown  by  the  authorities.   Fifthly  the
         Appellant had failed to claim asylum on his return  to  the  United
         Kingdom on 29th July 2015, only claiming in April 2016,  after  his
         extended student visa had expired in March 2016.

 6. In response Mr Edwards pointed out that it is not unknown  for  regimes
    to  monitor  internet  activities  without   knowing   the   real-world
    identities of the writers.  The qualitative nature  of  the  sur  place
    activities make a difference there as they  would  be  most  likely  to
    monitor the BBC World Service.

My Consideration

 7. I found no merit in the Appellant's appeal.

 8. The argument that there was information in  the  articles  which  could
    lead somebody to know that the Appellant had written them and that that
    might expose the Appellant to risk on return cannot properly be said to
    have been overlooked by the judge given his conclusion at [49  to  50].
    The example highlighted by the Appellant is that  in  his  articles  he
    revealed the nationality of his housemate. The judge took  all  of  the
    evidence into account but concluded that whilst some of the details  in
    some of  the  articles  might  have  given  clues  to  the  Appellant's
    identity, these would only help someone who knew the Appellant and  his
    life in the United Kingdom. Mr Edwards point that the authorities would
    likely monitor the publishing source and  so  be  likely  to  read  the
    articles does not undermine the judge's reasoning.  It  is  clear  from
    the decision that the judge had in mind the whole  of  the  Appellant's
    argument and evidence on the  point.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the
    finding is perverse, there being no evidence that the judge has  failed
    to take into account and his conclusion is one that is open to  him  on
    the evidence.

 9. I turn to the LM point. The judge found that  had  the  appellant  been
    required to report  to  the  authorities  so  they  could  prevent  him
    leaving, by physically taking and  cancelling  his  passport,  and,  on
    finding that he had failed to bring it with him, had he  been  released
    but required to report  again,  bringing  his  passport  with  him  for
    cancellation, the appellant would  be  unlikely  to  be  able  to  exit
    without any difficulty through the airport.  I find no merit  that  the
    finding is contrary to the case of LM.  LM was a case which was  purely
    concerned with whether or not people  could  experience  difficulty  on
    returning or leaving the country when their exit permit expired.   That
    is an entirely different situation from the question as to  whether  or
    not someone would be able to leave the country when they were wanted by
    the authorities as  a  suspected  political  dissident.   Although  the
    evidence to which Mr  Edwards  took  me  shows  me  what  underlay  the
    Tribunal's conclusion that there was an entry and  exit  permit  system
    operating in Uzbekistan, and that such  exit  visas  are  valid  for  a
    period of two years, the  evidence  took  his  point  no  further.  The
    strictness of the position  is  entirely  congruent  with  the  judge's
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  account  was  not  credible   being
    inconsistent with the country evidence of control, so that some sort of
    alert would have been forwarded to the airport authorities to stop  him
    in the event that he took the opportunity to immediately leave.

10. The judge fairly accepted that even though the evidence before him  was
    unexpectedly limited on the point, the fact  that  a  witness  recalled
    that the articles had appeared was sufficient to establish publication.
    The fact that the Appellant's articles  were  published  by  the  World
    Service does not disturb the judge's finding that they were  a  cynical
    effort to create evidence in support of an asylum claim. The judge took
    the publisher into account.

11. Mr Edwards' point that the judge  needed  to  give  strong  reasons  to
    justify the conclusion that the Appellant would stop  writing  articles
    because they were simply a cynical ploy  to  gain  asylum  rather  than
    because he was frightened of being persecuted is misconceived.   Having
    found that  the  articles  were  written  purely  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining an immigration benefit, to the point therefore that they were
    not a genuine reflection of the Appellant's own political  beliefs,  it
    is a nonsense to suggest that there would be any evidential  basis  for
    concluding that the Appellant would be likely to continue to write such
    articles on return to Uzbekistan even to the lower standard applicable.
     To extrapolate  further  to  the  hypothetical  position  that  having
    thought that he would maintain that fiction  on  return  the  appellant
    might then desist from doing so in order to avoid  persecution,  is  to
    extend the argument beyond speculation to the fantastical.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  reveals
    no error of law and it stands.



Signed                                  Date 21 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



