
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12656/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2017                   |On 15 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    [K F]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision on  4
    November 2016 refusing to grant asylum.

2.   The judge  accepted  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim,  as
    summarised at paragraph 38 of his decision.  He therefore accepted  the
    appellant's account that his father was working for the  government  in
    the police force.  He accepted that  the  family  home  in  Kunduz  was
    raided by the Taliban, his  father  was  taken  away  and  subsequently
    killed and the appellant and  his  family  were  able  to  escape  when
    government forces attacked Kunduz, and they  then  travelled  to  Kabul
    where his maternal uncle made arrangements for  the  appellant's  whole
    family to leave Afghanistan.  The appellant became separated  from  his
    mother in France.  At the date of the  hearing  the  appellant  was  14
    years and 6 months old.  The judge  accepted  that  he  was  reasonably
    likely to be at risk on return to Kunduz but considered that  he  could
    relocate to his home area in Kapisa or relocate to Kabul.  He therefore
    dismissed the appeal.

3.   The appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that in light of the judge's positive  findings,  the  judge  had
    erred in failing to consider the appellant's claim that he  was  unable
    to contact members of his extended family and also  the  reasonableness
    of internal relocation to Kapisa or Kabul in light of his youth.

4.   At the hearing before  me  Mr  Clarke  referred  to  the  statement  at
    paragraph 109 of the  decision  letter  that  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that  adequate  reception  arrangements  in  the  appellant's
    country were available.  In light of that concession  and  the  judge's
    positive findings, he considered that the appeal could not  be  opposed
    and conceded it.

5.   I am grateful to Mr Clarke for his realistic and  helpful  submissions.
    In light of the combination of the judge's positive  findings  and  the
    concession in the decision letter, I consider that it  has  been  shown
    that the judge's decision contained errors of law and as a  consequence
    for his decision  dismissing  the  appeal  is  substituted  a  decision
    allowing the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date     8 September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
