

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12430/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 24 October 2019                        |On 15 November 2019              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    B H I
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mohzan of Burton & Burton Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Gribble promulgated on 10 April 2019  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who arrived in the UK in January
        2016 illegally. The Judge noted that in his screening interview  on
        15 January 2016 the appellant claimed he was in fear of persecution
        from ISIS if returned to Iraq because they had come to his village.
        It was also noted the appellant had previously  claimed  asylum  in
        Austria in 2015.
     3. A decision refusing the appellant's application  was  issued  which
        the appellant  appealed.   In  his  documents  the  appellant  also
        claimed to be a convert to Christianity stating he may face a  real
        risk on that basis too. The respondent did not give consent to  the
        Judge  considering  this  new  matter.  An   application   by   the
        appellant's  representative  for  an  adjournment  to   allow   the
        respondent to consider additional submissions on that  issue,  sent
        on 7 March 2019, was refused.
     4. Having assessed the evidence, which was in the form of  documentary
        and oral evidence, the Judge set out findings of fact from [44], in
        which it is found the appellant's evidence has not been coherent at
        all. At [57] the Judge finds:


             57.  Therefore I do not accept his account beyond that  he  is
                  from a village near Dooz  Khormato  and  that  Da'esh/ISIS
                  fighters arrived in late 2014. He left  the  village  with
                  sufficient funds to get into Europe. I do not  accept  his
                  parents are dead or that his siblings were taken, or  that
                  his parents and siblings  were  killed  and  his  maternal
                  uncle was kidnapped. I do not believe that his uncle is in
                  Austria. [BHI] has a CSIDs in his home village.  He  left,
                  as many thousands of young men did, to escape the fighting
                  and sought to reach Europe for a better life.


     5. The Judge notes ISIS is no longer a force  in  Iraq  and  that  the
        appellant cannot be considered to be a refugee on the basis of  his
        political opinion at the date of the hearing. The  Judge  therefore
        considers whether the appellant's home area is one to which Article
        15(c) of the Qualification Directive applies and whether  returning
        the appellant to his home area or relocating to another part of the
        country will breach article 3 ECHR.
     6. The Judge considered the  evidence  provided  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's home area noting they pre-dated  the  CPIN  of  October
        2018. The Judge finds that  the  current  situation  in  Salahuddin
        Provinces is that ISIS are a spent force  in  the  area,  which  is
        safe.
     7. The Judge did not find the appellant's overall  account  reasonably
        likely to be true in  that  although  there  was  fighting  in  the
        appellant's home area in the past  things  have  settled  down  and
        people started returning there to rebuild their  lives.  The  Judge
        finds there is no force in saying the appellant's home  area  is  a
        place where simply being present creates  a  risk  of  violence  or
        harm. The Judge finds the appellant  is  unable  to  succeed  under
        Article 15(c).
     8. The Judge notes the appellant's removal  will  be  to  Baghdad  and
        finds there should be no difficulty in his obtaining a  replacement
        CSIDs before he has to return as he has relatives in Iraq  and  the
        Judge did not accept his account that his  parents  were  dead  and
        that his uncle could not be located. The Judge  notes  that  recent
        guidance says that all civil records for  Salahuddin  Province  are
        held in Baghdad enabling the appellant to obtain a copy of his CSID
        and obtain a travel document which he could  use  to  pass  through
        Baghdad on return to his home area.
     9. The Judge considers the question  of  internal  relocation  in  the
        alternative at [65] finding that the same is available to the IKR.
    10. Article 8 ECHR and any ability to  succeed  under  the  Immigration
        Rules is considered at [66 - 68]  in  which  the  Judge  finds  the
        appellant had not established an ability to succeed  either  within
        or outside the Rules.
    11. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge the First-Tier Tribunal on 3 May 2019, the  operative
        part of the grant being in the following terms:


             2.   It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected herself (a)
                  in that whilst Country Guidance case  of  AA(Iraq)  [2015]
                  states that Salah-al-Din is a contested  area,  the  Judge
                  finds that the country situation has  changed  by  placing
                  reliance on the CPIN report which arguably  has  not  been
                  properly made out  to  show  that  there  was  significant
                  evidence before the Judge to show that the current country
                  guidance case law was no longer  valid  guidance;  (b)  by
                  relying on the case of Amin v  SSHD  [2017]  CSOH  without
                  stating what principle applied to  the  Appellant's  claim
                  when it is not a country guidance case nor  does  it  make
                  any findings as to the substantive circumstances  in  Iraq
                  apart from the situation in Kirkuk and (c) by  failing  to
                  consider whether  the  Appellant  could  obtain  his  CSID
                  documentation within a  reasonable  time  with  particular
                  reference to paragraph 104 of AAH Iraq.


Error of law


    12. The appellant asserted the Judge erred in law in departing from the
        country guidance decision heard in 2015 which found the appellant's
        home is in a contested  area.  It  is  not  disputed  that  country
        guidance determinations should be followed unless  there  are  very
        strong grounds supported by cogent evidence for not doing  so.  The
        Upper Tribunal is currently reviewing the situation in Iraq with  a
        view to providing up-to-date country guidance but the same was  not
        before the Judge and has not yet been published.
    13. It is also the case that there have  been  substantial  changes  in
        relation to Iraq with the removal of ISIS by the Iraqi  authorities
        and their partner groups.  The  CPIN  specifically  refers  to  the
        appellant's home area which is said to  have  seen  consistent  and
        significant decline in security incidents and  civilian  fatalities
        and injuries with current numbers being typically  10  times  lower
        than they were in mid-2014. The Judge clearly analysed the evidence
        provided by the appellant as the same is specifically  referred  to
        in the determination under challenge.  The  Judge  notes,  however,
        that the appellant's material predated the CPIN which was issued in
        October 2018. Whilst a CPIN is not a country guidance  decision  it
        refers  to  a  number  of  sources   providing   credible   country
        information. The Judge's finding at [62] is that the  situation  in
        the appellant's home area has changed significantly  since  October
        2017 and that in the appellant's home area ISIS is  a  spent  force
        and that the area is  now  safe.  The  Judge  recognises  that  the
        Scottish case of  Amin  dealt  with  Kirkuk  but  was  entitled  to
        conclude that the  principles  applied  in  that  decision  equally
        applied to the appellant's home area; as they were based  upon  the
        threat from the same group. This has not been shown to be a finding
        outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the
        evidence.
    14. The Judge's conclusion at  [63]  that  there  is  no  risk  to  the
        appellant in his home village from ISIS in 2019 has not been  shown
        to be an irrational conclusion.
    15. In any  event,  the  Judge  also  considers  the  position  in  the
        alternative at [65] in the following terms:


             65.  If he could not return to his home area I need to look at
                  whether there is another part of Iraq he could  reasonably
                  relocate to. Here I note it  has  been  said  he  is  from
                  'Kurdistan' but I do not make that finding. With a CSID he
                  could get transport via air to Erbil in IKR. He could then
                  choose to join his family or he could stay and ask them to
                  join him. He is a Kurd who could enter with  documentation
                  and stay for a period of time. He  has  the  potential  of
                  obtaining work being a fit and healthy  young  man  and  I
                  find  he  would  not  face  the  risk  of  destitution  or
                  treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.


    16. The Judge clearly considered the evidence in  the  round  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and the findings are adequately
        reasoned.
    17. The appellant also asserts the Judge failed to consider whether  he
        would be able to obtain documentation with a reasonable  period  of
        time asserting the Judge failed to consider  the  country  guidance
        case of AAH (Iraq) at [104]. In that paragraph the  Upper  Tribunal
        was recording the evidence of Dr Fatah  rather  than  making  clear
        findings. Those findings appear later  in  the  decision  at  [106]
        where it was found:


             "The evaluation of whether there is  a  reasonable  likelihood
             that an applicant will not be  able  to  obtain  a  new  CSID,
             either directly or by way of a proxy, must be assessed against
             that  background.   Whilst  it   remains   possible   for   an
             undocumented returnee to obtain a new CSID whether he is  able
             to do so, or do so within a reasonable time frame, will depend
             on his individual circumstances."


    18. Guidance in relation to factors to be taken into  account  are  set
        out by the Upper Tribunal.
    19. The Judge did not accept the appellant's account that  his  parents
        were dead or that his siblings were taken or  killed  and  did  not
        believe his uncle was in Austria. The Judge clearly found that  the
        appellant has male relatives who remain in Iraq and at [64] writes:


             64.  In terms of article 3, removal  at  present  will  be  to
                  Baghdad. There should be  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  a
                  replacement CSIDs before he has to return. This is because
                  he has relatives in Iraq and I did not accept his  account
                  that his parents were dead and that his uncle could not be
                  located. The most recent  guidance  says  that  all  civil
                  records for Salahuddin Province  held  in  Baghdad  so  he
                  could ask his male relatives to attend to get  a  copy  of
                  his CSID to allow him to get a travel document. With  this
                  document, the guidance is clear that he could pass through
                  Baghdad and return to his home area.


    20. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the  Judge's  conclusions  they
        have not been shown to be outside the  range  of  those  reasonably
        open to the Judge on the evidence. The Judge  found  parts  of  the
        appellant's account to be incoherent and to lack  credibility.  The
        Judge finds the appellant is not a person  targeted  and  facing  a
        real risk of serious harm in Iraq. The adverse credibility findings
        and conclusions arising have not been shown to be infected by legal
        error.
    21. The determination shall stand.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 October 2019












