
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12136/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper     |                                     |
|Tribunal) Rules 2008                 |                                     |
|On 24 March 2021                     |On 6 April 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)


 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  I do so because this is a
    protection claim (see Guidance  note  2013  No  1:  Anonymity  Orders).
    Unless and until a court directs otherwise  the  appellant  is  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    refer to her.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.





The Background

 2. The respondent with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Williams) (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  14  September  2020,
    dismissed her protection claim.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused on 5 October 2020 by FtTJ  Chohan  but
    on renewal to the Upper Tribunal, UTJ Perkins granted permission on  17
    December 2020.

 4. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules') and is done so
    with the consent of the parties reflected in the email exchanges in the
    correspondence sent to the Tribunal on the 18th and 23rd March 2021.

 5. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules. Rule 2(2) explains that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly
    includes: dealing with  it  in  ways  that  are  proportionate  to  the
    importance of the case, the complexity of  the  issues,  etc;  avoiding
    unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the  proceedings;
    ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that  the  parties  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise  of
    the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding  delay,  so  far   as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

 6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    further the overriding objective;  and  to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal generally.

 7. Rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides:

         '34.-"

         (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
         any decision without a hearing.

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
         party when deciding whether to  hold  a  hearing  to  consider  any
         matter, and the form of any such hearing.

         (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
         must hold a hearing before making  a  decision  which  disposes  of
         proceedings.

         (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
         to-"

             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);

             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;

             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
             review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or

             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
             to rule 39, without a hearing.'

 8. In the light of the present need to take precautions against the spread
    of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
    Rules[1], directions were sent out to the parties.   In compliance with
    those directions, a Rule 24 reply from the respondent was issued on the
    9 January 2021.

 9. Having had regard to the  grounds,  the  decision  of  the  judge,  the
    submissions and the email correspondence from the respondent  dated  18
    March 2021 and to all the evidence before me, I  am  satisfied  that  a
    full account of the facts are set out in the papers  on  file  and  the
    issue to be decided is a  straightforward  one.  No  issues  have  been
    raised other than those addressed in the  written  submissions.  I  was
    mindful as to the circumstances when an oral hearing is to be  held  in
    order to comply with the common law duty of fairness  and  also  as  to
    when a decision  may  appropriately  be  made  consequent  to  a  paper
    consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board [2013]  UKSC  61;  [2014]  AC
    1115.

10.  In my judgment and in the light of the issues set out in  the  written
    submissions  there is no complexity which necessitates an oral  hearing
    to ensure fairness and that the decision is one which can properly  and
    fairly be made  on  the  papers  taking  into  account  the  overriding
    objective as set out in the Tribunal Procedure Rules which includes the
    issue of delay. This is a course the parties have consented to.

11. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2014. She made a claim for asylum in March 2014  which
    was refused in February 2015. Her appeal was dismissed on 16 July 2018.

12. Further submissions were submitted on her behalf in 2016, 2018 and also
    in 2019. However on 18 July 2019 further submissions were submitted  to
    the respondent which formed the basis  of  a  decision  to  refuse  her
    protection claim in a decision dated 18 November 2019.

13. The basis of her claim was that she was at risk of  persecution  and/or
    serious harm by her family. The respondent  did  not  accept  that  she
    would be at risk of persecution or serious harm at  the  hands  of  her
    family but in the alternative as she feared  nonstate  actors,  it  was
    considered that she could  obtain  protection  or  internally  relocate
    within Pakistan. Consideration was given to the country  materials  and
    in the light of the country guidance caselaw of KA and others (domestic
    violence risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010) UKUT 2016 and also SM (lone
    women - ostracism) CG [2016] UKUT67. For the reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision letter, it was not accepted that returning  as  a  lone  woman
    without family connections would lead to persecution or serious harm on
    return.

14.  The appellant appealed that decision it came  before  the  FtTJ  on  9
    September 2020. In a decision promulgated on   14  September  2020,  he
    dismissed  her appeal having found that she had not  given  a  reliable
    account  and in the alternative  even taken at its  highest,  he  found
    that there was sufficiency of protection within Pakistan from  nonstate
    agents and that she could internally relocate.

15. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the 25 September 2020 challenging  all
    aspects of the decision (I refer to  the  written  grounds  submitted).
    Permission was granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Perkins  on  17
    December 2020).

16. Since the grounds and the grant of  permission  further  correspondence
    with the tribunal has followed. In an email sent to the  tribunal  from
    the senior presenting officer  dated  18  March  2021,  the  respondent
    accepts that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    FtTJ as set out in the grounds of permission and grant of permission.

17. The respondent therefore invites the Tribunal to set aside the decision
    of the FtTJ and to remit the appeal to the FtT for a hearing where  the
    evidence will be considered and factual findings an assessment of  risk
    on return will be made.

18. Following that correspondence by email, a reply was received  from  the
    appellant's solicitors sent 23rd March  2021  in  agreement  with  that
    approach.

19. The grounds issued on behalf of the  appellant  challenge  the  adverse
    credibility findings made by the FtTJ, assert that there was a  failure
    of anxious scrutiny and that the FtTJ failed to reach properly reasoned
    conclusions both on the factual  account  and  also  on  the  issue  of
    relocation.

20. Having had  the  opportunity  to  give  further  consideration  to  the
    grounds, the respondent accepts that the grounds of challenge are  made
    out for the reasons set  out  in  the  grant  of  permission  and  that
    consequently the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of  an  error
    on a point of law and  that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remitted to the FtT for a further hearing.

21. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that
    decision I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice
    Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning  the
    disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

22. Both representatives submit that  the  venue  for  hearing  the  appeal
    should be the FtT in the event of an error of law being found.  I  have
    considered their submissions in the light  of  the  practice  statement
    recited above. As it  will be  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  give
    evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues, further  fact-finding
    will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk on return in the light
    of the relevant  evidence, and in my  judgement  the  best  course  and
    consistent with the overriding objective is for it to  be  remitted  to
    the FtT for a further hearing.

23. For those  reasons, and in the light of the parties'  agreement,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the FtT dismissing the  appeal  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law for the reasons set out in the
    grounds and the grant of permission. Therefore as the parties have  set
    out, the decision should be set aside and should be remitted to the FtT
    with no findings of fact preserved.  Whilst the Upper Tribunal has made
    an anonymity direction, on remittal before the  FtT  this  will  be  an
    issue that can  be  redetermined  following  any  submission  from  the
    parties.

Notice of Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal decision involves the making of
    an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside. The appeal shall
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or her family members. This direction  applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds             Dated:          24 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

