
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/12724/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On             the             29th              September              2017
             On the 3rd October 2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                MR RAHUL AMIN
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sharkett promulgated on the 13th March 2017,  in  which
      she dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  was  born  on  the  3rd
      September 1989.  He claimed asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  political
      opinion.  The Appellant's case is that he was actively  involved  with
      the Islami Chhatrashibir, whilst at university, which is  the  student
      wing of the leading opposition party in Bangladesh Jaamat-e-Islami. He
      claimed that he was at a real  risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to
      Bangladesh on account of his political opinion from the Awami  League.
      Judge Sharkett did not accept the Appellant's  account  was  credible,
      for the reasons set out within her decision, and  therefore  dismissed
      his asylum appeal.

   3. The Appellant has now sought to appeal against that decision, for  the
      reasons set out within the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   In  the  ground  of
      appeals it was argued, inter-alia, that  the  Judge  had  applied  the
      wrong standard of proof in asylum appeals and that she had referred to
      "the balance of probabilities" when making her findings.

   4. Permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer
      on the 8th May 2017  who  found,  having  considered  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal, that it was arguable that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge had directed herself appropriately regarding the lower  standard
      of proof applicable in the asylum claim she had not applied  it,  when
      making her findings.

   5. In the appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bates on behalf of
      the  Respondent  conceded  that  regrettably  the  Learned  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had materially erred, when making her findings, in that
      at paragraphs 81, 88 and 102 she had referred to making  her  findings
      on the "balance of probabilities".  He  conceded  that  this  was  the
      wrong standard of proof to be applied within an asylum claim and  that
      this did amount to a material error of law, such that the decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett should be set  aside.  He  conceded
      that credibility would have to be assessed again in its entirety,  and
      there should be no preserved findings of fact and argued that the case
      should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
      before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Sharkett.

   6. Regrettably, having carefully considered the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sharkett, it is clear that although  at  [21]  she  did
      properly set out that the burden of proof lies  on  the  Appellant  to
      substantiate the asylum claim and  that  the  applicable  standard  of
      proof is a "reasonable degree of likelihood", when actually making her
      findings regarding the factual basis which is said to have given  rise
      to the risk of persecution upon return, at [81] she  stated  "For  the
      above reasons I find, on the balance of probabilities,  the  Appellant
      was not being pursued by the Awami League, that they did not  come  to
      his house looking for him and that he was not in  hiding  between  the
      end of July 2010 until March 2011 when he left Bangladesh".  At  [88],
      although accepting the Appellant had been physically attacked she went
      on to find that "I find on the balance of probabilities the attack was
      not for a reason in connection to any  political  affiliation  of  the
      Appellant". Further, at [102] she found that "I am  not  satisfied  on
      the balance of probabilities  that  the  messages  produced  from  the
      WhatsApp group show evidence  of  political  involvement  with  either
      Islami Chhatrashibir or Jaamat-e-Islami".

   7. It was only thereafter she went on at [109] to find that "I  find  for
      the reasons stated above, the Appellant has been unable  to  discharge
      the low burden of proof on his to show  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      degree of  likelihood  that,  should  the  Appellant  be  returned  to
      Bangladesh, he would come within the Geneva Convention, in so much  as
      he is a person who, owing to a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted
      for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
      social group or political opinion is outside of  the  country  of  his
      nationality and is unable, or owing to  such  fear,  is  unwilling  to
      avail himself of the protection of that country.".

   8. In the Court of Appeal case of Karanakaran v Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department [2000] 3 ALL ER 449, Lord Justice Brooke, who gave
      the lead judgment with  whom  Lord  Justice  Robert  Walker  and  Lord
      Justice Sedley agreed, stated that although  in  the  House  of  Lords
      decision of Sivakumaran [1988] 1 AC 958 it was held that when deciding
      whether an applicant's fear of persecution  was  well-founded  it  was
      sufficient for a decision-maker to  be  satisfied  that  there  was  a
      reasonable degree of likelihood that the applicant would be persecuted
      for a convention reason if returned to his home country, that decision
      did not resolve the different but related question as to the  standard
      of proof a decision-maker should apply when  considering  evidence  of
      past or present facts, before he or she goes on to make the  necessary
      assessment of future risk.

   9. At page 20 of the judgment, Lord Justice Brooke endorsed  the  comment
      from Mr Justice Sackville in the case of  Rajalingam  [1999]  FCA  719
      that "There may be circumstances in which a decision-maker  must  take
      into account the possibility that alleged past  events  occurred  even
      though it finds that these events probably did not occur.  The  reason
      for this is that the ultimate question is whether the Appellant has  a
      real and substantial basis for his fear of  future  persecution.   The
      decision-maker must not foreclose  reasonable  speculation  about  the
      chances of the future hypothetical event occurring."

  10. As Lord Justice Sedley in his judgment warned "The decision-maker must
      not, by a process of factual findings on particular  elements  of  the
      material which is provided, foreclose reasonable  speculation  of  the
      chances of persecution emerging and make consideration of the whole of
      the material.  Everything capable of having a bearing has to be  given
      the weight, great or little, due to it... the facts, so  far  as  they
      can be established, are signposted on the road to a conclusion.".

  11. In such circumstances, although clearly it is for judges to  determine
      the extent to which reliance can be placed upon past events which  was
      said to have occurred, which then have to be  considered  against  the
      ultimate question as to whether or not an Appellant  has  a  real  and
      substantial basis was fear of future persecution. To apply a  "balance
      of probabilities" test to past events, is to apply the wrong  standard
      of proof.  I do find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett  she  has
      required elements of the factual background of the Appellant's  to  be
      proved "on the balance of probabilities", and has therefore foreclosed
      reasonable speculation on the chance of persecution emerging from  the
      consideration of the whole of the material.   I  therefore  do  accept
      that she has in effect applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  to  the
      factual background surrounding the asylum claim.  This  clearly  is  a
      material error of law, given that I cannot say that the decision would
      necessarily have been the same, had the Judge approached  the  factual
      background in the correct  manner.   I  therefore  do  find  that  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett does contain a material
      error of law and that in such circumstances her decision should be set
      aside in its entirety, with no preserved findings of fact.

  12. Given that as both parties agreed that the case will have to be  heard
      again ne novo and the entirety the appellant's credibility reassessed,
      I find that the amount of fact finding that is now  required  is  such
      that the matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
      rehearing. I direct that the matter  is  remitted  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharkett does contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before
any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
Sharkett;

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me and no such order having been made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 30th September 2017
