
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/12793/2018
     PA/06653/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2019                             |On 04 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   s p d s
                                   S L D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by TRP Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I
make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs
otherwise no report of these proceedings or any form of publication shall
directly or indirectly identify either claimant or their family members.

This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Anthony promulgated on 22 May 2019, allowing the appeals of
the claimants on both asylum and on human rights grounds.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell granted permission to appeal on 13 June
on the basis it was arguable that, notwithstanding the obvious care which
was taken in the preparation of the decision, the judge has omitted to
consider the matters mentioned above which are of plain significance, and
appeared to have determined the appeals largely on her view of
plausibility.  The matters mentioned are set out in the grounds and, in
summary, they are that the judge failed to address the respondent's case
for refusal adequately, in particular failed to consider the material
timeline, which included the fact that the first claimant had been returned
forcibly to Sri Lanka on 23 March 2010.  It is alleged the judge also
failed to consider the significance of the claimant's failure to claim
asylum in the United Kingdom when faced with such removal.  The timeline is
significant because at the date of his enforced return to Sri Lanka in
March of 2010 an arrest warrant had been issued some time earlier and the
claimant had been informed of it; it is accepted by Mr Pipe the claimant
was aware of it before he was returned.  Despite that, and despite the
enforced return, he did not claim asylum.

I should add at this stage that as a preliminary issue it was pointed out
that the application for permission to appeal referred to only, on its
face, PA/06653/2018, which is the second claimant's case, although it named
only the first claimant.  In the covering fax header for that application
sent to the Tribunal and to the claimants that PA/06653 number was crossed
out and replaced with PA/12793/2018.  This was all a bit of a mess in that
it is clear from the body of the grounds that the challenge was to the
judge's findings in relation to the first claimant and both parties agree
that in that regard the second claimant is largely dependent on the first
claimant.

Which number was intended to be referred to is further confused by the fact
that when Judge Manuell granted permission to appeal he headed the
permission document with both appeal numbers and purported to grant
permission in respect of both.  The point is whether there was in fact an
appeal against the decision in respect of the first or second claimant or
not.  For the sake of clarity, having heard submissions on the matter and
having heard Mr Pipe's concession that he is not prejudiced by these
technical difficulties, I grant permission to amend the application to
include both file names, both appeal numbers and both claimants so that the
grant of permission by Judge Manuell is valid and if it is necessary,
exercising the authority I have as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal to sit as
a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, I grant permission and extend time for
both the amendment to the application and to the grant.  That should take
care of the matter and no issue has been taken by either party with that
part of the decision.

The Secretary of State contends in the grounds that the judge failed to
engage with the timeline in reaching the credibility findings.  There is no
mention in the decision of the 23 March 2010 enforced return to Sri Lanka
of the first claimant and it is asserted this is a material error, failing
to resolve a clearly material part of this dispute between the parties.

The background is that the first claimant asserts that from the end of 2009
the Sri Lankan authorities had reopened a case against him in respect of
the death of his wife and an arrest warrant was out for his arrest.  His
case is that this was politically motivated based on their view that he was
associated with the armed wing of the LTTE.  His claim is that someone else
killed his wife during a break-in into the home.  In any event, he returned
to the UK in July of 2010 and he states that it was in 2013 that he found
out that he had been convicted in his absence and that he had been
sentenced to death.

The Rule 24 response points out that the respondent accepted a number of
facts including the following,

that the first claimant's wife had been unlawfully killed in July of 1995,

that the court documents tendered by him in support of his claim are
genuine,

that he was convicted of his wife's murder on 29 September 2013,

that he suffered two heart attacks within short succession in February and
March of 2018 and he suffers from heart failure as a medical condition and

it was accepted that his removal from the United Kingdom would be in breach
of Article 3 in the light of the combination of his medical condition and
prison conditions in Sri Lanka.

The respondent's refusal decision granted leave to the first claimant on
the basis that his removal would be in breach of Article 3.  In the
decision of Judge Anthony, the judge considered the second claimant's
private and family life and found that his removal would be a
disproportionate interference with his family life, essentially with the
first claimant, in the UK.  It had been pointed out that the Secretary of
State has not challenged that part of the decision, the Article 8 finding
allowing the appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

In support of his submissions, Mr Lindsay's submissions pointed out that
the 2010 enforced return had not been mentioned and directed me to
paragraph 25 of the impugned decision, which sets out the chronology and
totally omits to mention the 2010 enforced return.  The judge accepted,
based on the chronology it would appear, the first claimant's assertion to
have been able to bribe officials.  However, the point is made that if he
was being forcibly returned to Sri Lanka in March of 2010, how he could
bribe officials on return, and the second point being made is that before
me left the United Kingdom on that enforced return he failed to claim
asylum when he had an opportunity to do so and when it is accepted there
was an arrest warrant for him.

In response to that, Mr Pipe's submission is to take me to the decision in
some detail and to point out that the judge has taken, in his submission, a
view of all the evidence and whilst there is no specific reference to the
2010 enforced return, the judge has addressed the credibility of the claim
to be able to bribe officials with the assistance of his brother.  As the
judge set out at paragraph 71 of the decision, it was accepted and found as
a fact that the first claimant was only able to secure his safe passage
with the help of his brother and a friend, and my attention has been drawn
to the first claimant's witness statement in that regard.

The point being made for the respondent by Mr Lindsay is that if the judge
ignored these factors, then the credibility findings must be flawed because
they are very clearly points that would, in his submission, undermine the
claimants' credibility and if they have not been taken into account, then
it cast into doubt the rest of the findings.  It was said that no reference
was made whether the first claimant ever advanced any explanation for his
failure to claim asylum but in response to that, Mr Pipe has taken me to
his witness statement, where the appellant explains why he did not claim
asylum on that occasion as he did not want to claim asylum, hoping to be
able to work things out, and it was pointed out that at that time he had
not been convicted in his absence and was not facing the death penalty
although the proceedings had been reopened and a warrant issued.  In fact,
in the Rule 24 response reliance is placed on paragraph 9 to suggest that
the respondent's submissions are fatally undermined by the fact that the
respondent had already accepted that as of March of 2010 there was already
a warrant out for the first claimant's arrest in Sri Lanka and the court
documents in relation to that were accepted as genuine. There is no doubt
that the appellant was wanted by the authorities. It is suggested that it
is simply not open to the respondent to suggest that if the first claimant
were to genuinely have been at risk he would have claimed asylum in March
of 2010 and would not have been able to pass through the airport in Sri
Lanka in safety, where such a risk existed.  In that regard, I have been
referred by Mr Lindsay to the country guidance of GJ and others (post-civil
war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), which explained that
if a person was on a stop list such as because a warrant is out they would
have been detained and handed over to the authorities.  Mr Pipe's response
is to refer me to the claimant's explanation that he was, with the help of
his brother, able to secure his safe passage, effectively on the same
occasion, having left and then been returned at the same time in 2010 with
the help of his brother.

Looking at the decision as a whole and noting it is an extremely detailed,
carefully considered and staged approach the judge has taken in each issue,
I am not satisfied that the omission of inclusion of the enforced return
and the failure to claim asylum on that enforced return could have made any
material difference to the outcome of the appeal, given those matters which
were conceded by the respondent in relation to the arrest warrant, and,
secondly, the findings of the judge accepting the claim to be able to pass
through the airport with the help of his brother.

I accept Mr Pipe's submissions that it must be assumed that the judge had
the 2010 return in mind, that it did not escape the attention of the judge
even though it is not explicitly referenced.  The decision can properly be
read in that light. In this regard I note that it is not essential for a
judge to cite and resolve every issue in an appeal.  I accept the argument
that the issue is potentially relevant to the credibility of the claimant
but looking at the findings as a whole, in the round, I am satisfied that
even had the judge specifically addressed those findings, the judge would
have found in favour of the claimant.



Decision

In the circumstances, for the reasons cited, I find that the making of the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error
on a point of law such as to require the decision to be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.

The outcome of the appeal will stand as made.

     [pic]
                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 August 2019




To the Respondent
Fee Award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 August 2019


