
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12330/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 11 February 2019                 |On 25 February 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monson (the judge), promulgated on 1  October  2018,  by
    which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of  her
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. In essence, the Appellant's  claims  involved  the  following  threads.
    First, she asserted that she was at risk from an ex-partner, R, who had
    pursued and harmed her in the past and who, it was said, would be  able
    to do so once again if the Appellant were to return  to  Bolivia.   She
    would not be afforded sufficient protection from  the  authorities  and
    she would be unable to relocate.  Second, the  Appellant  suffers  from
    mental health problems and these would of themselves lead to risks,  or
    at least significant problems, on return.




The judge's decision

 3. It is clear that the judge put a good deal of effort into his  decision
    and there is a considerable amount of analysis of the evidence, running
    from [75] to [93].  It is quite apparent from these passages  that  the
    judge was decidedly unimpressed by various  aspects  of  the  evidence,
    finding there to be inconsistencies and a lack of what he  believed  to
    have been reasonably obtainable  supporting  documents,  amongst  other
    issues.

 4. Ultimately, the judge concluded that the ex-partner would  not  pose  a
    risk to the Appellant on return and that the Appellant  was  neither  a
    refugee nor a person whose removal would expose to her Article  3  ill-
    treatment.

 5. In respect of the medical issue, the judge concluded that there was  no
    real risk of suicide  or  of  the  Appellant  being  unable  to  access
    relevant treatment in Bolivia.  The appeal was duly  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds are lengthy.  Many  of  them  take  issue  with  particular
    aspects of the judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence  ranging  from
    expert reports to the Appellant's vulnerability (in light of her mental
    health),  the  medical  evidence  itself,  and   country   information.
    However, it may be  said  that  ground  1  encapsulates  the  strongest
    overall point, namely that the judge had failed to set out  any  actual
    findings of fact on the Appellant's claim, as opposed to an analysis of
    the evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  on  6  January  2019.   She
    regarded many of the more detailed grounds as amounting to little  more
    than an attempt to reargue the Appellant's  case.  However,  she  found
    ground 1 to have greater  merit.   The  grant  of  permission  was  not
    limited in its scope.




The hearing before me

 8. Ms Sanders relied on the grounds as a whole.  In respect  of  ground  1
    she submitted that it was  impossible  to  detect  any  clear  findings
    within the relevant section of the judge's decision.  There was a  good
    deal of analysis and it was clearly the case that the  judge  was  less
    than impressed with several aspects of the Appellant's claim.  However,
    Ms Sanders submitted that actual findings were required, and there were
    none.  The overall conclusions towards the end of the decision did  not
    amount to such findings.

 9. In addition, Ms Sanders relied  on  particular  aspects  of  the  other
    grounds relating to the Appellant's mental health and the  effect  that
    this would have on her both on return and respect  of  her  ability  to
    have presented her evidence when preparing the appeal (she had not been
    called to give oral evidence in light of expert  medical  evidence  and
    the Respondent's representative at the hearing  had  accepted  that  no
    adverse inference should be drawn as a result of this).

10. For his part Mr Tufan acknowledged the absence of the clear findings of
    fact but suggested that these could be implied from what the judge  had
    in fact set out.  The judge had rejected a number  of  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's claim and it  could  be  inferred  that  doing  so  he  was
    rejecting the core elements of the case as a whole.




Decision on error of law

11. With a degree of hesitation I conclude that there are  material  errors
    of law in the judge's decision.

12. As mentioned previously, he did undertake a fairly detailed analysis of
    the evidence.  The fact is however that he has not  stated  any  actual
    findings of fact.

13. I fully appreciate that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be
    read holistically, sensibly, and in the context  that  each  and  every
    aspect of the evidence does not  have  to  be  specifically  addressed.
    Having said that, it  seems  to  me  that  the  Appellant  (indeed  any
    appellant) is entitled to see the factual  basis  upon  which  ultimate
    conclusions are reached.

14. There is some merit to Mr Tufan's submission that one  can  infer  from
    what the judge has said that he was  essentially  rejecting  everything
    the Appellant was saying.  In my view  one  should  be  cautious  about
    adopting this approach, however.  There  are  aspects  of  the  judge's
    reasoning which do not represent a clear  picture  of  whether  he  was
    rejecting everything or only some parts of the claim.  For example,  it
    is not clear whether the judge was accepting  that  the  Appellant  had
    ever suffered at the hands  of  her  ex-partner;  it  is  also  unclear
    whether he judge found that he had ever been able to  track  her  down.
    It is difficult to discern whether the judge was accepting that  family
    court proceedings had taken place at all and, if  they  had,  what  the
    effect of these were.

15. In addition, I agree with Ms Sanders  that  the  judge  seems  to  have
    failed to make clear findings on the unchallenged medical  evidence  as
    it related  to  the  appellant's  mental  health.   This  evidence  was
    potentially relevant to two issues: the assessment of credibility;  the
    Appellant's position on return to Bolivia.  Whilst it appears from [96]
    and [98] that the judge was accepting the mental health problems,  this
    does not seem to have been factored into the credibility assessment and
    nor has it been placed in the context of the Appellant's  arguments  on
    her position on return,  as  set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument  and
    supported by relevant country information.

16. In my view there are material errors here and I must  set  the  judge's
    decision aside.




Disposal

17. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
    necessary fact-finding, this is clearly a case that has to be  remitted
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   a   complete   rehearing.    Both
    representatives were agreed on this course  of  action  should  I  find
    there to be material errors of law.

18. The remittal shall involve a complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  All
    aspects of the protection and human rights claims must be addressed.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 19 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





