
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/12492/2018
     PA/12493/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 1 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              (1) Marwa Jabeen
                               (2) Iqra Tariq
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Maksud, instructed by International Immigration
                    Advisory Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                  (Decision given orally on 12 March 2019)

Introduction

 1. The appellants are sisters, born in 1995 and 1998 respectively, and are
    both nationals of Pakistan.  They entered the United Kingdom on  2  May
    2010 as accompanied children of their mother, who  at  that  time  held
    leave to enter as a visitor.  On 5 October 2010  the  appellants  were
    named as dependants on their mother's asylum  claim.   This  claim  was
    refused on 3 November 2010 and a subsequent appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was dismissed in a decision of Judge Edwards  promulgated  on,
    or around, 7 January 2011.

 2. The protection claim advanced by the family at that stage was a fear of
    the appellants' father (their mother's  husband)  in  Pakistan.   In  a
    lengthy decision, Judge Edwards rejected the core of the  evidence  put
    forward in support of  this  claim  (see  para  37  of  Judge  Edwards'
    decision).  In September 2012, the appellants were served with  notices
    identifying them as overstayers.

 3. The appellants  attained  majority  in  2013  and  2016,  respectively.
    However, it was  not  until  17 April  2018  that  they  each  made  a
    protection claim.  These claims were pursued on the same basis  as  the
    claim pursued by their mother in 2010 and  2011  (on  which  they  were
    dependents). As already indicated, the First-tier Tribunal rejected the
    truth of the evidence their mother  put  forward  in  support  of  that
    claim.

 4. The appellants claims were each rejected by the Secretary of  State  in
    decisions of 16 October 2018.  The appellants appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and those appeals were heard  on  the  same  occasion  by
    Judge Davies and dismissed  in  a  single  decision  promulgated  on  6
    December 2018.

Decision of FtT (6/12/18)

 5. The First-tier Tribunal took the  findings  of  Judge  Edwards  as  its
    starting point  (as  required  by  the  starred  Tribunal  decision  of
    Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1, and the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  AA
    (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040). It was, in particular, acknowledged by
    both representatives before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  starting
    point in the  instant  appeal  should  be  the  findings  made  in  the
    appellants' mother's appeal (see paragraph 27).

 6. Moving on, the First-tier Tribunal found as follows at paragraphs 54 to
    56 of its decision:

         "54.     ... it is wholly unbelievable that one of  the  appellants
             would be left in the care of neighbours whilst her mother  and
             the other appellant came to the United Kingdom on a visit that
             their father would not be  aware  of  that.   I  am  satisfied
             applying the lower standard of proof that both the  appellants
             and their mother  have  fabricated  an  account  of  having  a
             genuine fear of being killed  or  seriously  harmed  by  their
             father.  I do not accept that the appellants cannot go back to
             live in Pakistan with their father.  Their lack of credibility
             also leads me to conclude that on the lower standard of  proof
             they have other relatives in Pakistan.

         55.  It is clear the appellants' family have attempted to enter the
             United Kingdom on visit visas when they had  no  intention  of
             returning to Pakistan.  The appellants' mother  perpetrated  a
             deception on the immigration authorities in that regard and it
             seems to me on the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  they  have
             utilised  the  ability  to  visit  relations  in  the  UK   to
             circumvent Immigration Rules ...

         56.  I have taken account of the medical  evidence  that  has  been
             produced regarding the appellants'  health  issues  and  their
             supposed risk of suicide.  I do not accept it is credible that
             their  condition  in  this  regard  comes  about  because   of
             treatment meted out to them by their father.  It may  well  be
             that their condition arises  from  the  uncertainty  of  their
             status in the  UK  but  it  is  clear  that  even  though  the
             appellants' mother and siblings have leave to remain they  can
             return to Pakistan as a family unit.  I  do  not  accept  that
             they are estranged from their father as claimed ...

         58.  I also take into account the delay which took place before the
             appellants sought international protection in their own  right
             in the United Kingdom that is yet further evidence  they  have
             sought to utilise the immigration system in the UK  to  remain
             here when they had no right to do so ...".

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The grounds of appeal pursued before the Upper  Tribunal  are  twofold:



      1) There First-tier Tribunal failed to give lawfully adequate  reasons
         for rejecting the truth of the witnesses' evidence; and

      2) In considering Article 8 ECHR the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
         consider whether the appellants met the requirements of  paragraphs
         276ADE (iv) of the Rules, and  instead  undertook  a  single  stage
         process under Article 8 rather than the two-stage process  required
         by the case law.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Welsh, in
    a decision sent to the parties on 1 February 2019.

Decision and Discussion

 9. Taking the grounds in turn, whilst I accept that the reasons  given  by
    the First-tier Tribunal would lack the required  thoroughness  if  this
    were an appeal in which there were no  previous  findings  of  fact  to
    provide a starting point for any consideration, that though is not  the
    case here. The context within  which  the  reasons  are  given  in  the
    instant case is important.

10. This is a case  in  which  there  has  been  a  previous  comprehensive
    rejection of the truth by a First-tier Tribunal of the account tendered
    by the appellants' mother on, to all intents  and  purposes,  the  same
    claimed factual matrix.  It is in this  context  that  an  analysis  of
    whether the FtT provided  adequate  reasons  must  be  set.  Given  the
    starting point for such consideration I conclude that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has provided sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the  account
    given by the appellants. In truth, there was nothing of  substance  put
    before the instant First-tier Tribunal which was capable of leading  it
    to diverge from the findings of Judge Edwards on the protection claim.

11. In his submissions, Mr Maksud asserts that  it  was  unlawful  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to take account of the delay by the  appellants  in
    claiming asylum given that they  were  previously  dependent  on  their
    mother. However, as already identified, the appellants reached the  age
    of majority in 2013 and 2016  respectively,  having  been  served  with
    notices of identifying them as overstayers in 2012. There was clearly a
    substantial delay (many years) by each of the  appellants  in  bringing
    protection claims independently of their mother and  I  find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was fully entitled to take account  of  such  delay
    when coming to its conclusions.

12. Turing next to the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  on
    the Article 8 ground. I  accept  that  any  Tribunal  determining  such
    ground could be expected to undertake the two-stage process, the  first
    stage  being  an  assessment  of  whether  an   appellant   meets   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules - the Rules being  the  Secretary
    of State's view of where the public interests lies. In the instant case
    the only provision of Rules relied upon by the appellants is  paragraph
    276ADE (vi).  In order to succeed under this provision, the  appellants
    were required to demonstrate  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to their integration into life in Pakistan.

13. At the hearing today I invited Mr Maksud to identify the  evidence  put
    forward to the First-tier Tribunal in support of the  submission  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellants integration  into
    life in Pakistan.  In response Mr Maksud observed that  the  appellants
    would have no family to assist them in Pakistan and that  their  father
    would ill-treat them if they returned.   This  though  is  exactly  the
    aspect of the appellants case  that  was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when considering the protection claim. The First-tier Tribunal
    specifically rejected the appellants contention to  be  estranged  from
    their father and it was also concluded that the appellants could return
    as a family unit to Pakistan. The  protection  claim  was,  of  course,
    determined on a lower standard of  proof  to  that  applicable  to  the
    article 8 ground.

14. In such circumstances,  given  the  rejection  of  the  evidence  which
    underpinned the only ground under the Immigration Rules relied upon  by
    the appellants, I do not accept that it is a material  failure  by  the
    Tribunal not to consider whether the appellants  met  paragraph  276ADE
    (vi). In my view, there was no possibility, on the  findings  made,  of
    the appellants successfully establishing that the requirements of this,
    or any other of the Immigration Rules, had been met.   That  being  the
    only substantive challenge to the Article 8  decision,  I  also  reject
    that ground.

15. In conclusion, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is  an
    adequate and lawful response to the evidence that was  put  before  it,
    given that there  had  been  a  rejection  of  substantially  the  same
    protection case by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  2010.   I  therefore
    dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.


Signed:
Mark   O'Connor                                                    Date   29
April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
