
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12329/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 6 November 2020               |On 10th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     ME
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C. Philps, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr M.  Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appeals  with  permission
         against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bart-
         Stewart) (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed  her
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         30 January 2020. Permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Haria  on
         1 April 2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision of the FtTJ
         at paragraphs 1-15. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  On  26
         October 2019 she was refused leave to enter the  UK  on  the  basis
         that she had made false representations in obtaining her visa. On 4
         November 2019 removal directions were set for 8 November 2019. On 5
         November 2019 she claimed asylum in  the  removal  directions  were
         cancelled. Screening interview took place on 6 November 2019  later
         followed by substantive  asylum  interview  on  22  November  2019.
         Further representations were submitted dated 26 November 2019.

      4. The factual basis of her claim was  that  she  was  born  into  the
         Christian faith, both parents  being  Christian.  She  married  her
         husband in 2002 who was Muslim. They had children together  and  he
         had 4 Muslim wives. From a date in  2017  he  became  verbally  and
         physically abusive trying to force  the  appellant  to  convert  to
         Islam. Their eldest son converted, and he was also  trying  to  get
         the appellant to change her religion. Her family and her  husband's
         family were unable to intervene. On 1 June 2019  incident  occurred
         where her husband chased her whilst holding a machete. The youngest
         child ran behind and fell into a pit full of water and drowned. The
         appellant also sustained an injury to her shoulder.  The  appellant
         reported to  the  incident  to  the  police  and  her  husband  was
         arrested, interviewed, and then  released.  It  was  following  his
         release he made threats to kill her.

      5. In a decision letter dated 2 December 2019 the  respondent  refused
         her protection claim.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  she  was  a
         Christian of Nigerian nationality, the claim that she was  at  risk
         from a husband on the basis that she refused to convert to Islam or
         that her son would kill her was not accepted.  The  respondent  set
         out within the decision letter issues of credibility concerning her
         account and also consideration was given to Section 8 of the Asylum
         and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, et cetera) Act 2004 in the
         light of her immigration history and when the claim for asylum  was
         made.

      6. The respondent considered that even taking the case at the  highest
         and accepting that the appellant had a genuine subject  to  fear  a
         return to Nigeria, the respondent was of the view that there was  a
         sufficiency of protection provided by the  authorities  in  Nigeria
         and that she could relocate to another part  of  the  country.  The
         claim on human rights grounds was also refused for the reasons  set
         out in the decision letter; she did not have a partner,  parent  or
         dependent child in the United Kingdom in respect for private  life,
         there was a short period of residence and it was not accepted  that
         they would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
         Nigeria. The respondent therefore refused her claim.

      7. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT on
         24 January 2020. In a decision promulgated on 30 January  2020  the
         FtTJ dismissed her  appeal  finding  that  she  had  made  a  false
         protection claim to avoid  removal  and  that  she  had  failed  to
         substantiate her factual claim. As a result, the FtTJ did not go on
         to consider sufficiency of protection or internal relocation.

      8. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  and  permission  was
         granted on 1 April 2020.

      9. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     10. The hearing took place on 6 November 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

     11. I am grateful to Ms Philps and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  and
         helpful oral submissions. Ms  Philps,  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant relied upon the written grounds of appeal. There  was  no
         Rule 24 response from the respondent.

     12.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and  their  clear  oral  submissions.  At  the
         conclusion of her oral submissions which were based on the  written
         grounds, Mr Diwnycz conceded that there were material errors of law
         in the decision of the FtTJ and that the  decision  should  be  set
         aside.

     13. Therefore the parties are in agreement that  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ cannot stand as a result of the errors of law that are set out
         in the appellant's grounds of challenge and that given  the  errors
         relate to the assessment of the evidence including the  credibility
         of the factual issues, both parties are also in agreement that  the
         appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

     14. In those circumstances, it is not necessary for me  to  give  great
         detail as to why the decision should be set aside. However, I shall
         set out in brief terms why I am in agreement with the  position  of
         the parties before the Tribunal.

     15. The thrust of the grounds relates to the assessment of  credibility
         made by the FtTJ. Ms Philps on behalf of the appellant relied  upon
         grounds 1 to 3 as set out in  the  written  grounds.  Dealing  with
         ground 1, it is  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  erred  in  failing  to
         consider evidence relevant to whether  the  appellant  had  been  a
         victim of domestic violence by reference to the rule 35 report. The
         FtTJ at [40] records that the respondent did not dispute  that  the
         appellant was a victim of torture. There had been a rule 35  report
         before the Tribunal dated 13/12/19  which  reached  the  conclusion
         that the appellant may have been a victim of torture  by  reference
         to the clinical findings which it was  said  were  consistent  with
         that claim. The injuries noted including a scar on the  right  side
         of the abdomen of 2 cm, a scar of 4 cm on her left forearm and 2  x
         3cm scar on her left breast. This evidence has been produced whilst
         the appellant was in detention and after the  decision  letter  had
         been provided.

     16. The Tribunal at [42] accepted that  the  appellant  may  have  been
         subjected to violence by her husband but did not accept that it was
         on account of his requirement that she change religion.  Ms  Philps
         pointed out that at the end  of  the  decision  the  FtTJ  at  [55]
         changed its position  by  stating  "I  do  not  consider  that  the
         appellant has been a  victim  of  domestic  violence".  Mr  Diwnycz
         accepted that these  were  mutually  contradictory  findings.  When
         looking at the decision, if the initial  view  taken  at  [42]  was
         later changed by the evidence, to lead to the finding at  [55],  no
         reasons were given for disregarding the Rule  35  report  and  what
         appears to be an accepted fact that the appellant was a  victim  of
         torture (or may have been a victim of torture). This would only  be
         an error if it were material to the outcome. However  even  if  the
         judge found that her fear of persecution was not based on religion,
         if the appellant was a victim  of  domestic  violence,  a  separate
         assessment was required as to whether she was at risk  of  harm  on
         that basis in the light of the objective country materials.  It  is
         therefore accepted that the error was a material error because  the
         evidence  of  domestic  violence  would   have   led   to   further
         consideration of state protection or the lack of  and  of  internal
         relocation; both issues had been addressed on the basis of  ongoing
         risk in the decision letter that were not considered by  the  judge
         as a result of the earlier assessment.

     17. Ms Philps also  submitted that the assessment of whether she was  a
         victim of domestic violence had not been undertaken by reference to
         the evidence as a whole and that the  judge  made  no  findings  or
         reference to her witness statement  (the  written  evidence)  which
         gave further detail. This was a material  error  in  light  of  the
         criticism made at [42] where the FtTJ  observed  that  her  account
         given in the asylum interview was "vague and inconsistent" and that
         remained the case in the oral  evidence.  However  as  set  out  at
         paragraph 13 of  the  grounds,  relevant  details  had  been  given
         concerning the asserted abuse during  the  time  the  parties  were
         married.

     18. As to ground 2, is  concerned  the  weight  placed  on  the  asylum
         interview and  screening  interview  rather  than  considering  the
         evidence as a whole.  When  considering  issues  of  weight  it  is
         usually stated that  if  a  FtTJ  gave  insufficient  weight  to  a
         particular aspect it is only if it can be properly be said that  as
         a consequence the judge who decided the appeal has arguably made an
         irrational decision that such a submission  can  succeed.  In  this
         case the parties  are  in  agreement  that  the  FtTJ  reached  the
         credibility findings based on the asylum interview and  that  great
         weight had been placed on what was said in  the  interview  without
         considering the appellant's witness statement. It was common ground
         that on four separate occasions during the interview it is recorded
         that a question had to be "repeated and rephrased"  (see  questions
         27, 59, 72 and 87). Therefore, that  was  a  matter  to  take  into
         account before placing weight on the asylum interview. Furthermore,
         despite the difficulty in understanding, the judge  found  that  it
         damaged the appellant's credibility because she did not mention  at
         interview all the facts about her husband's decision to  force  her
         to convert religion and a criticism  was  made  that  she  did  not
         mention that the appellant's fourth wife with a specific  "trigger"
         of this decision. However, she did mention that the problem started
         in 2017 which was consistent with the date on which the fourth wife
         was brought live at their house (see  46))  and  thus  that  was  a
         finding made which did not take account of the evidence.

     19. This leads to ground three. The FtTJ  found  that  the  appellant's
         account of her daughter's death lacked  credibility.  However,  the
         parties are in agreement that the judge made a  material  error  of
         fact. The evidence led on behalf the appellant was that her husband
         had chased out of  the  house  with  a  machete  and  the  youngest
         daughter had run after her and then fallen into a pool of water and
         drowned. The judge considered this at  [47]  finding  "it  is  also
         unclear how the child drowned when the appellant was also with  her
         in this pool of water". However, the appellant had not claimed that
         she fell into a pool of water (see question 71 paragraph 13 of  the
         witness statement). It  is  also  accepted  that  the  findings  in
         relation to this event were based solely on  implausibility  rather
         than by reference to the evidence. By way of example, the  Tribunal
         found that it was "unclear why her  seven-year-old  daughter  would
         have run out of the house with her at midnight".  Ms Philps submits
         that the Tribunal was impliedly finding  that  it  was  implausible
         that young child witnessing her  mother  being  attacked  by  their
         father would follow their mother. Similarly, the Tribunal also made
         a finding stating, "she said she screamed it might be expected that
         there would be some commotion, yet  the  police  did  not  attend."
         Again, finding that it is implausible that a woman would scream  in
         the middle of the night in a city, but the police did  not  attend.
         Both findings fell foul of  Y  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1223  at
         paragraph 25 where it is stated:

             "the fundamental (approach this principle) is that  (a  judge)
             should be cautious before finding an account to be  inherently
             incredible, because there is a considerable risk that he  will
             be over influenced by his own views  on  what  is  or  is  not
             plausible,  and  those  views  will   have   inevitably   been
             influenced by Zen  background  in  this  country  and  by  the
             customs and ways are in society.  It  is  therefore  important
             that he should seek to view it appellant's account of  events,
             as Mr Singh rightly argues, in the context  of  conditions  in
             the country from which the appellant comes."

     20. There was also a further error of fact as set out at  paragraph  20
         of the grounds.

     21. Whilst the FtTJ did identify  inconsistencies  within  the  written
         documentation relied upon by the appellant, the parties agree  that
         in light of the errors set  out  in  relation  to  the  credibility
         findings as a whole, that the assessment made did not give "anxious
         scrutiny" to the claim advanced by the appellant. It  is  therefore
         agreed by the parties that the decision cannot stand and should  be
         set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

     22.  I have therefore considered whether it should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

     23. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal  should
         be the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for  the
         appellant  to give  evidence  and   to  deal  with  the  evidential
         issues,  further  fact-finding  will  be  necessary  alongside  the
         analysis of risk on return in the light of the relevant documentary
         evidence, including the expert evidence, and in  my  judgement  the
         best course and consistent with the overriding objective is for  it
         to be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing.

     24. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set  aside  with  no
         findings of fact preserved.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
 It will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    8 November 2020
