
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12279/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 June 2017                          |On 12 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              Tracy Ladi Alfred
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Tamsons Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Delivered orally on 29 June 2017)

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal brought against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Hussain,  promulgated  on  6  January   2017,   dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
    21 October 2016 refusing a human rights claim.

Grounds of Challenge

 2.  The  pleaded  grounds  of  appeal,  which  are  drafted  with  admiral
    succinctness by Mr Tampuri, take four points of challenge to the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision:

      a) the First-tier Tribunal failed to make any findings in relation  to
         the application of Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009;

      b) the First-tier Tribunal failed to give any consideration to Section
         117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

      c) the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  carry  out  a  proportionality
         assessment as required by the guidelines set out in  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 27; and

      d) in considering the Article 8 ECHR claim outside of the  Rules,  the
         First-tier Tribunal erred in directing itself  that  the  appellant
         was required to demonstrate that her circumstances were compelling.



 3. The grant of  permission  loosely  identified  an  arguable  additional
    ground, in following terms:

         "The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  (arguably)  failed  to  adequately
         consider Article 8 particularly in the light of  her  sister  being
         granted leave to remain in what appears to have been  very  similar
         circumstances.  It is arguable the  differential  treatment  has  a
         bearing on the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to  refuse  the
         appellant leave to remain."

 4. I invited Mr Tampuri to  particularise  the  terms  of  ground  he  was
    seeking pursue arising out of aforementioned  'observations'  of  Judge
    Coker, primarily so as ensure that Mr Clarke had a  proper  opportunity
    to engage with it. In response Mr Tampuri characterised the  ground  in
    the following terms:

         The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  take  account  of  the
         appellant's sister's witness statement of December 2016 when coming
         to its conclusions on the Article 8 ECHR ground.

 5. During his submissions, Mr Tampuri  sought  to  pursue  yet  a  further
    ground of  challenge,  i.e.  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    concluding within paragraphs  44  and  45  of  its  decision  that  the
    appellant's evidence, given to the effect that she  had  no  family  in
    Nigeria, was not truthful.  Having  carefully  considered  all  of  the
    circumstances of the case I refused  to  admit  such  ground,  for  the
    following reasons.

 6. The aforementioned ground first crept into appellant's case during  the
    course of Mr Tampuri's oral submissions. No formal application was made
    to amend  the  grounds  of  challenge,  even  after  the  Tribunal  had
    identified that the ground was not pleaded and that permission had  not
    been sought, or granted, to rely upon it.

 7. In any event, insofar as the submissions made by Mr  Tampuri  could  be
    treated  as  an  application  to  amend  the  grounds,  there  was   no
    explanation provided as to why this ground was being introduced at such
    a late stage in the proceedings i.e. half way through oral submissions.
    This is particularly significant given that permission  to  appeal  was
    granted over a month ago, and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was promulgated nearly six months ago.

 8. Had I admitted the ground I would, nevertheless, have concluded that it
    lacks any merit.  The conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal, found  in
    paragraphs 44 and 45 of its decision, are  well-reasoned  and  are  not
    irrational.

Decision and Discussion

 9. Returning to the grounds that have been admitted, I first consider  the
    additional ground identified in Judge Coker's grant of permission,  and
    characterised by Mr Tampuri in the terms identified above.

10. I begin by observing that the witness statement drawn on behalf of  the
    appellant's sister (A6-A8 of the appellant's bundle) for the most  part
    sets out the chronology of the claims she  made  to  the  Secretary  of
    State and how those claims led to her being granted of indefinite leave
    to remain. Such matters take  up  the  first  nine  paragraphs  of  the
    statement. There are then two remaining  substantive  paragraphs  which
    state as follows:

         "[10] My sister and I went though a lot of trauma since  were  kids
         (sic). We lost our father and  believe  our  mother  is  no  longer
         alive. When we were brought to the UK we were both very  young  and
         innocent. We are now fully grown adults with children of  our  own.
         We only have ourselves, our aunt  and  our  children  left  in  the
         world.

         [11] There is nothing to return to in  Nigeria,  she  doesn't  know
         anywhere in that country apart from Kaduna where we were  born.  As
         Christians, none of (sic) can live in peace in Kaduna  and  I  know
         for certain that my sister will  suffer  immeasurably  if  she  was
         forced out of this country. She will be a stranger in  her  country
         of birth starting her life all over again."

  11.    All the material  matters  set  out  in  the  appellant's  sister's
    witness statement are the subject of consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, albeit such evidence is not  attributed  to  the  appellant's
    sister - for example, paragraphs 1, 21 and 22  incorporate  comparisons
    between the appellant and her sister's  contact  with  the  immigration
    authorities. There is also reference in paragraphs 18, 19 and 20 of the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to  the  claimed  circumstances  in  the
    appellant's home area in Nigeria.

7.   I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disregarded the appellant's sister's statement as now claimed.
    In any event, I find that there is nothing in  the  appellant's  sister
    statement which could have led the First-tier Tribunal  to  come  to  a
    different conclusion.  In reality the statement made by the appellant's
    sister, when set in the context of the evidence as a whole, adds little
    or nothing to the appellant's case.

8.   Moving on to the assertions that the First-tier Tribunal (i) failed  to
    take account of Article 8 outside the Rules (ii) failed to engage in  a
    proportionality assessment  and/or  (iii)  misdirected  itself  to  the
    correct legal test when considering Article 8 outside the  Rules,  none
    of these grounds have any merit.

9.   In my conclusion, it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  undertook
    an assessment of Article 8 outside of the Rules. This is  exactly  what
    the First-tier Tribunal says  it  is  doing  in  paragraph  49  of  its
    decision and the assertion to the contrary is not made out.

10.  I also reject the appellant's contention that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in directing itself that the  appellant  was  required  to
    demonstrate that "her circumstance is compelling" when  assessment  was
    being made in relation to  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules.  It  is
    important that this direction is seen in the context of the  Tribunal's
    earlier conclusion that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. When  viewed  in  that  context  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's direction is entirely consistent with approach  set  out  by
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  at  [33].   Such
    consideration incorporates the proportionality assessment identified as
    the fifth stage of the suggested framework identified by the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar.

8.   I do accept, however, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to
    engage with the considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.
    Whilst this may be an error of law it is not one  that  is  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.  The primary  difficulty  for  the
    appellant in establishing this ground is that there are no features  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act in play in the instant case that have  the
    capability of operating in her favour.  Case law relating the relevance
    of an appellant's ability to speak English and an applicant's financial
    stability clearly identifies that, at best, such features  are  neutral
    in the proportionality assessment.  All of  the  other  subsections  of
    section 117B, save for section 117B(6) which is not applicable  on  the
    instant  facts,  are  only  capable  of  operating  adversely   to   an
    appellant's claim.

9.   Moving on, looking at paragraph 49, it is also clear  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had in mind Section 55 and  the  best  interests  of  the
    child when undertaking its considerations. Although  that  phrase  does
    not appear in anywhere  in  the  decision,  the  Tribunal  referred  in
    paragraph 49 thereof to the welfare of the children.

10.  There was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  suggesting  that
    the two children  (aged  2  and  3  at  the  relevant  date))  had  any
    independence from their mother. There is only one parent known  to  the
    children, and  no  evidence  was  provided  about  the  father.  It  is
    inevitable in such circumstances that it will be in the best  interests
    of the children to stay with the appellant, even if she is removed.  On
    the very limited evidence that  was  available  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it is difficult to see what else it could have said  and  what
    other conclusion it could have reached regarding the best interests  of
    the children.

10.  I finally deal with  the  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion on the Article 8 ground was irrational.  Reliance was placed
    on certain features of the appellant's case said to compel a conclusion
    favourable to her, in particular, on the fact that the  appellant  left
    Nigeria at the age of 17, that she has two young children and a  sister
    in the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  she  has  no  other  relatives  or
    connections in Nigeria.

11.  I first observe that the First-tier Tribunal  rejected  the  contention
    that the appellant has no relatives remaining in Nigeria [44] and [45].
    I have refused permission to challenge that finding.  Furthermore,  the
    First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of all of the  relevant  features
    of the appellant's claim and in my view, on the basis of  the  evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal, its conclusion  was  not  only
    open to it, but was inevitable once it had been  established  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

12.  I therefore refuse this appeal, concluding that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal and that it is to remain  standing.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


