
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/12176/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 June 2017                           | On 05 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Bayoumi instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  respondent  ("BS").   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Suffield-Thompson)  which   allowed   the
    respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated  22
    October 2016 to  refuse  the  respondent's  claim  for  asylum.   Judge
    Suffield-Thompson found that the respondent, who is a citizen of India,
    would be at real risk of persecution if he returned to India because he
    is gay.

The Grounds of Appeal

 3. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  against  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson's decision by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kimnell)
    on 17 January 2017 on the basis that the judge had failed to take  into
    account the Country Guidance case of  MD  (same-sex  orientated  males:
    risk) India CG [2014] UKUT 65 (IAC).   Further,  no  reasons  had  been
    given by the judge for departing from  MD.  In  addition,  the  grounds
    argue that the judge was wrong  to  place  significant  weight  on  the
    expert report of Dr C Osella.

Discussion

 4. It was accepted before us that the judge had been referred  to  the  CG
    case of MD which was set out and relied upon by the Secretary of  State
    at, for example, paras 16, 17 and 21 of the  refusal  letter.   It  was
    also accepted that the judge  had  made  no  reference  to  MD  in  her
    decision.

 5. Mr Kotas, on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that it  was  a
    material error of law to fail to take into account  the  applicable  CG
    case of MD.  He submitted that it was not open  to  the  respondent  to
    argue, as was done in the rule 24 response, that there  was  sufficient
    material to depart from the CG decision when the Tribunal had  made  no
    reference to MD.

 6. Ms Bayoumi, who represented the respondent, submitted  that  the  judge
    had referred to material post-dating MD at  paras  30  and  31  of  her
    determination showing, inter alia, that the  position  of  gay  men  in
    India did give  rise  to  a  well-founded  claim  of  persecution.   In
    addition, Ms Bayoumi referred us  to  a  number  of  documents  in  the
    respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (at  pages  38,  39,
    41, 43 and 44) which dealt with the position in India post-MD.

 7. It is clear from the case law in the Court of Appeal that a failure  to
    apply  a  country  guidance  decision  unless  there  is  good   reason
    constitutes an error of law.  Hence, in R (Iran) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
    982 at [27] where it was accepted that:

         "Any failure to apply a CG decision unless there was  good  reason,
         explicitly stated, for not doing so would constitute  an  error  of
         law in that a material consideration had been  ignored  or  legally
         inadequate reasons for the decision had been given."

 8. Further, in SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940, the Court  of  Appeal
    noted that:

         "...  Tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take  Country   Guidance
         determinations into account, and to follow them unless very  strong
         grounds supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying  their
         not doing so."

 9. The country guidance in MD is summarised in the head note as follows:

         "a.  Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code 1860  criminalises  same-
             sex sexual activity.  On 2 July  2009  the  Delhi  High  Court
             declared section 337 IPC to be  in  violation  of  the  Indian
             Constitution insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts
             between adults in private.   However,  in  a  judgment  of  11
             December 2013, the Supreme Court held  that  section  337  IPC
             does not suffer from the vice of unconstitutionality and found
             that the declaration of the Delhi High  Court  to  be  legally
             unsustainable.

         b.   Prosecutions for consensual sexual acts  between  males  under
             section 377 IPC are, and have always been, extremely rare.

         c.   Some persons  who  are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  same-sex
             oriented males suffer ill treatment, extortion, harassment and
             discrimination from  the  police  and  the  general  populace;
             however, the prevalence of such incidents is  not  such,  even
             when taken cumulatively, that there can be said in general  to
             be a real risk of an openly same-sex oriented  male  suffering
             treatment which is persecutory or which would otherwise  reach
             the  threshold  required  for  protection  under  the  Refugee
             Convention, Article 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive,  or
             Article 3 ECHR.

         d.   Same-sex orientation is seen socially, and  within  the  close
             familial   context,   as   being   unacceptable   in    India.
             Circumstances for same-sex oriented males are  improving,  but
             progress is slow.

         e.   It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
             an open same-sex oriented male (or a person who  is  perceived
             to be such), who is able to demonstrate a  real  risk  in  his
             home area because of his particular circumstances, to relocate
             internally to a major city within India.

         f.   India has a large, robust and accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
             support network, mainly to be found in the large cities."

10. As MD makes clear, prosecutions  for  consensual  sexual  acts  between
    males are "extremely rare".  The offence in s.377 of the  Indian  Penal
    Code 1860, criminalising  consensual  sexual  acts  between  adults  in
    private, was upheld as constitutional by the Indian Supreme Court on 11
    December 2013.  Internal relocation is, in general, a viable option.

11. First, in our judgment, Judge Suffield-Thompson was wrong not to  begin
    her consideration of the respondent's claim to be at risk as a gay  man
    in India by considering and following, unless there was good reason not
    to do so, the approach in MD which favoured the  Secretary  of  State's
    position.

12. Second, we are not satisfied that even if she had done  so  the  reason
    she offered at paras 29 et seq amounted to "good reasons".   There  she
    said this:

         "The penal code in India is clear.  Section 377 of the Indian Penal
         Code 1860 criminalises (male) same sex activity.  This was  removed
         from the code in 2014 but in 2016 was  reinstated  which  shows,  I
         find, a shift in thinking.  On this basis alone  I  find  that  the
         Appellant could be at risk if he were to be a gay man in India  and
         the fact that there are over 25 Million gay men in India  does  not
         alter my finding."

13. Her first reason given in  para  29  is  difficult  to  follow.  It  is
    difficult to understand on the dates  given  what  was  the  "shift  in
    thinking"  identified  as  important  by  the  judge.   The  chronology
    concerning the constitutional challenge to s.377 of  the  Indian  Penal
    Code 1860 was that it was declared unconstitutional by the  Delhi  High
    Court on 2 July 2009 but, in a judgment dated  11  December  2013,  the
    Supreme Court reversed that decision.  It is not immediately obvious to
    see what was "removed from the Code  in  2014":  nothing  was  and  the
    decision that s.377 was unconstitutional was  made  in  2009.   Nothing
    appears to have occurred in 2014 and reference to  "in  2016  [it]  was
    reinstated"  is  likewise  not  founded  in  the  time  frame  of   the
    constitutional challenge.  What seems to have occurred in 2016 is  that
    the Supreme Court on 2 February 2016 agreed to hear an  appeal  against
    its 2013 ruling which upheld the constitutionality of s.377.

14. The judge's second reason offered in para 29 - that  the  existence  of
    s.377 meant that  "[on] this basis alone  I  find  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk if he were to be a gay man in India ..."  -  flies  in
    the face of the CJEU's decision in Minister Voor Immigratie En Asiel  v
    X, Y and Z (Cases C-199/12 to C-201/12) [2014] Imm AR 1 at [55] that:

         "... the mere existence  of  legislation  criminalising  homosexual
         acts cannot be regarded as an act  affecting  the  applicant  in  a
         manner so  significant  that  it  breaches  the  level  of  serious
         necessary for a finding that it constitutes persecution within  the
         meaning of Article 9(1) of the Directive."

15. The judge was, therefore, wrong to say that the mere criminalisation in
    s.377 of same-sex sexual activity was "alone" sufficient to  find  that
    the respondent was at risk of persecution as a gay man in India.   What
    had to be assessed was the incidence of  enforcement,  punishment  etc.
    The judge's statement does, in any event, run contrary to the  guidance
    in MD which was given in the full knowledge of  the  existence  of  the
    offence in s.377 as is clear from para (a) of the head note.

16. As Ms Bayoumi pointed out to us the judge did, in  fact,  consider  two
    pieces of background evidence at paras 30-31.  There she said this:

         "30.     The Respondent submits that in the last 150 years only 200
             people have been arrested under this law.   I  do  not  accept
             that this is correct.  I have before me  (Appellant's  bundle,
             pages 38-49) pieces of objective evidence to  show  that  this
             submission is incorrect.  In an article entitled  'Erasing  76
             crimes, Nearly 1,500 arrested last year under India's anti-gay
             law', dated 17 October 2016,  it  states  (Appellant's  bundle
             pages 39-40):

                  'Almost 1,500 people were arrested last year under section
                  377, India's colonial-era anti-gay law, the Times of India
                  and Equal Eye reported.  It was unclear how many of  those
                  arrested, if any, were  involved  in  consensual  same-sex
                  relations.  The figure was more than double the figure  in
                  the earlier report on the number of arrests under  section
                  377 during the previous year.'

         31.  The Appellant gave oral evidence to say that his  parents  are
             totally against gay men and that  they  have  beaten  him  and
             bullied him into marrying and that they will not  support  him
             in anyway if he lives as a gay man.  This is supported by  the
             independent evidence before  me.   In  an  article,  dated  21
             October 2016, entitled 'Human Dignity Trust UK: 52% of gay men
             without peer support  suffer  violence'  (Appellant's  bundle,
             page 42) states:

                  'A recent survey conducted across five Indian states found
                  that gay men who seek peer support  were  far  safer  than
                  those living with their parents, most often without outing
                  themselves.  More than half of all men who  face  physical
                  violence (52.4%), sexual abuse (55%) and emotional torture
                  (46.5%) were still living with their parents and mostly in
                  the closet according to the survey.'

17. There is, in our judgment, two difficulties with the judge's reasoning.
     First, the judge misunderstood the Secretary of State's  position  set
    out in the first sentence of para 30.   In  the  decision  letter,  the
    respondent pointed out, based upon evidence in MD at [129]  that  "less
    than 200 persons" had been prosecuted  under  s.377  in  the  last  150
    years.  The evidence cited  by  the  judge  from  "Erasing  76  crimes"
    related to arrests.   That  did  not  contradict  the  evidence  in  MD
    concerning "prosecutions".  Second, the evidence relied on in paras  30
    and 31 lacked in itself the  necessary  weight  to  amount  to  "cogent
    reasons" for departing from the CG decision in MD.  That is, of course,
    apart from the fact that the judge did not explicitly reason  from  the
    starting point of MD and seek "cogent reasons" for departing from it.

18. Although Ms Bayoumi  referred  us  to  a  number  of  other  background
    documents in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  bundle,  the  judge  made  no
    reference to them and they could  not,  therefore,  form  part  of  her
    reasons for actually or hypothetically departing from MD.

19. Finally, as regard the expert report of Dr Osella the judge dealt  with
    this at paras 32-36 as follows:

         "32.     I now turn to the report  of  Dr.  C  Osella  (Appellant's
             bundle, pages 24-35).  She is a Reader in Social  Anthropology
             at the School of Oriental and African Studies  (SOAS)  and  is
             part  of  the  advisory  editorial  board  for  two   journals
             'Contributions to Indian Sociology' and 'Journal of South Asia
             Research' and she is the author of books  and  articles  about
             India and its attitude  to  differing  sexualities.   For  the
             purposes of this appeal I find her to be an expert.

         33.  Her entire report, I find, is of enormous help to me in making
             my findings but I quote below just some of  the  report  which
             has specific impact  on  this  case.   Her  report  states  as
             follows:

                  'It is difficult to imagine how  the  appellant  could  in
                  fact  return  to  India  at  this  point   when   he   has
                  acknowledged his sexual orientation and begun to live as a
                  homosexual.' (para.7)

                  'Reinstatement of section 377 has been a clear  signal  to
                  Indian homosexuals of no-tolerance and to  non-homosexuals
                  of    support    for    the    longstanding    "sin/mental
                  illness/perversion" paradigm.' (para 7c)

                  'It has often been recorded  that  when  neighbourhood  or
                  vigilante  killers  execute  hate  crimes   against   non-
                  conforming subjects-even to the level of murder- then  the
                  police do not prosecute or properly investigate the crime.
                   On the other hand, there is evidence of both case  cover-
                  ups  and  even  of  police  involvement  in  hate  crimes,
                  including murder.' (para.7f)

         34.  The Respondent submits that India is a huge country  and  that
             the Appellant will be safe if he  internally  relocates.   The
             report of Dr. Osella states as follows:

                  'Regarding   the   internal   flight   option:   This   is
                  impracticable on several grounds.....It  is  difficult  to
                  imagine how the appellant could return to  India  at  this
                  point, or how internal flight  would  work.   India  is  a
                  society which has been characterised by  sociologists  and
                  psychologist alike as being  composed  not  of  autonomous
                  individuals but of  people  who  are  deeply  embedded  in
                  ethnicity,  community  and  family.   It  is   in   effect
                  impossible to live unless  one  has  and  can  demonstrate
                  oneself to have a tight social networks around.' (para.8a)

                  'The position of people who have had to run away from home
                  because  of  family  breakdown  is  more  than  precarious
                  economically, socially and mentally with a  high  risk  of
                  suicides.' (para.8b)

         35.  This is an  Appellant  who  has  already  made  three  suicide
             attempts when he was living in India due to his family  trying
             to bully and beat him into marrying a woman.

         36.  Finally, and I find this most significant in this appeal.  She
             states:

                  'The HO in its  decision  is  failing  to  appreciate  the
                  degree to which Indian social, cultural and political life
                  is quite different from that in the UK, and the degree  to
                  which public  and  state  hostility,  including  violence-
                  towards  same  sex  desiring  subjects   exists   and   is
                  legitimised in state and public discourse alike.' "

20. We see considerable merit in Mr Kotas's  submission  that  Dr  Osella's
    conclusions appear to be sweeping generalisations.  Importantly, as set
    out by the judge, those conclusions are not set in the context  of  the
    CG decision in MD.

21. In the result, the judge failed to found her reasons for  allowing  the
    appeal in the context of the country guidance decision of MD by failing
    to have regard to it.   Her reasons given at paras 29-36 do not seek to
    justify a departure from it and we are unable to say that those reasons
    would clearly amount to "cogent reasons" to depart from the CG decision
    of MD.

22. Consequently, for  the  reasons  we  have  set  out  above,  the  judge
    materially erred in law in allowing the respondent's appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

Decision

23. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the respondent's
    appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of a material error of law
    and we set it aside.

24. The appeal will be  relisted  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision, namely whether the respondent has established that he  is  at
    real risk of persecution as a gay man returning to India.

                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 4 July 2017

