
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number
PA/12221/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Birmingham
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2019                         On 13th September 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       In person
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was
   dismissed in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry promulgated on
   the 13th of March 2019. The Judge accepted that the Appellant is gay but
   found that he would not be at risk in Algeria on return.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal maintaining that his life
   would be in danger in Algeria if returned and that his life was
   significantly better in the UK. Permission was granted on the basis that
   the decision was insufficiently nuanced and may not have adequately
   addressed the risks that the Appellant would face on return.

3. The Judge was obliged to apply the guidance in OO (Gay Men) Algeria (CG)
   [2016] UKUT 65 (IAC). From that case the guidance is that where a man is
   known to be gay the threat to him comes from his family and unless there
   is an unusual feature of the Appellant which would attract adverse
   attention contrary to what usually happens the treatment of homosexuals
   in Algeria does not amount to persecution.

4. The Judge accepted that the Appellant's risk came from his family but
   there is nothing in the evidence that shows that there were any features
   unique to the Appellant that would meet the guidance in paragraph 6 of
   the headnote in OO. The Appellant's evidence of his fear of the men with
   beards and tight minds was not borne out in the country guidance and
   there was no supporting evidence before the Judge that would have
   justified departing from OO.

5. The Appellant's submissions at the hearing before me reflected the
   concerns he raised before Judge Perry and in the grounds of application.
   I would accept that the Appellant has a subjective fear of return to
   Algeria. However, that is not borne out by the guidance in OO and the
   Appellant cannot bring himself within the risk categories that were
   binding on Judge Perry and me.

6. For the reasons given above the legal framework that applies means that
   there is no basis for finding that Judge Perry erred in law. Accordingly
   the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of Judge Perry
   remains as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal, I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 5th September 2019
