
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12527/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 23 January 2020                   |On 11 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               M K (Pakistan)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr P Anderson, Counsel instructed by E&M Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of [initials] who is the subject  of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State has permission to appeal against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese on 30 September 2019,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against her refusal of international protection.  The
    claimant is a Pakistani citizen.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not anonymise its  decision.   This  is  an
    asylum appeal and the Upper Tribunal has decided to  anonymise  of  its
    own motion.

 3. Ms Bassi for the Secretary of State confirmed that the claimant's  core
    account is not in dispute:  the claimant came to the United Kingdom  to
    study, her parents having identified an approved husband for  her  (the
    only remaining unmarried male cousin in the family) and engaged her  to
    him.  The claimant's father is said  to  be  a  well  known  artist  in
    Pakistan, which makes him powerful and influential across Pakistan.  In
    June 2016, while her engagement was being arranged,  the  claimant  met
    another man in Pakistan, and they began a relationship.  The claimant's
    partner was also promised to a cousin of his in marriage.

 4. The claimant's Tier 4 visa was granted on 19 August 2017, valid  to  30
    September 2020.  She left Pakistan on 18 September  2017,  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom on 19 September 2017.  The claimant's  partner  from
    Pakistan was already in the United Kingdom on holiday and he picked her
    up from the airport.  After that, they met every day and by 11  October
    2017, she was pregnant with his child.

 5. The claimant wrote to her parents telling them that she had met  a  boy
    she liked, and they replied, telling her to focus on her studies.   She
    then wrote and told her parents that she was  pregnant  and  they  said
    that unless she had a termination they would kill her.  The parents  of
    the claimant's partner sent him voice notes to tell him that  he  would
    be killed for getting a girl pregnant without being married to her  and
    going against their wishes for him to marry a cousin  to  whom  he  was
    already promised.

 6. The claimant and her partner went ahead with  the  pregnancy  and  have
    subsequently married.  The claimant was  six  months  pregnant  with  a
    second child at today's hearing.

 7. The only issue before the First-tier Tribunal and before  me  today  is
    not the overall credibility of the claimant and her husband but whether
    they would be at risk on return to Pakistan, for the reasons set out in
    her evidence at [11]-[12]:

         "11.  The  [claimant]  and  her  partner  gave  evidence  that  the
             identification card system [in Pakistan] is  relevant  in  big
             cities and this would make it very difficult for them to  live
             there.  She gave  evidence  that  she  comes  from  a  wealthy
             family, her father is an artist and  he  is  wealthy  and  has
             powerful connections.  The outreach of her father she  claimed
             would enable him to make contact with her and  this  with  the
             need to carry an identification card would make  it  difficult
             for her and her partner to reside peacefully in Pakistan.

         12.  The [claimant] also gave evidence that she has  an  uncle  who
             also has a lot of power and influence".

 8. The judge accepted that evidence and found at [13]  that  the  claimant
    and her husband would not be able to relocate internally  in  Pakistan,
    and that there would be insufficient domestic protection because of the
    influence of both of their families, but  particularly  the  claimant's
    family whom the judge found to have "tremendous  power  and  wealth  in
    Pakistan".

 9. At [14], the First-tier Tribunal decision records that the Secretary of
    State did not accept the evidence set out at [11]-[12] but  was  unable
    to produce evidence to the contrary.   There is no  obligation  on  the
    Secretary of State to produce rebuttal evidence, but findings  of  fact
    and credibility are a matter for the fact-finding Judge in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, who has seen and heard the  oral  evidence;   the  Upper
    Tribunal may not interfere with findings of fact and  credibility  save
    in the very limited circumstances set out at [90] in  the  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

10. The  finding  in  relation  to  internal  relocation  therefore  turned
    entirely on the credibility of the claimant's evidence  overall,  which
    the judge accepted.

Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier Judge
    had arguably placed on the Secretary of State the burden of  disproving
    the wealth and influence of the claimant's uncle and father and various
    cases are cited in the grounds.  No specific reason for challenging the
    overall credibility of the claimant's evidence is given in the  grounds
    and at the Upper Tribunal hearing, Ms  Bassi  was  unable  to  identify
    anything in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which ought  to
    have led the judge to reach a different conclusion.

12. The Secretary of State's appeal is in effect simply a disagreement with
    adequately reasoned findings of fact and credibility  which  the  judge
    was entitled to reach.

13. There is an error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision because the
    appeal is allowed on both asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    That is wrong because humanitarian protection is only  available  where
    asylum is not.

14. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  that
    extent and substitute a decision allowing the claimant's appeal.

DECISION

15. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law

    I set aside the decision and remake the  decision  in  this  appeal  by
    allowing it.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      9 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
