

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/12035/2016

                                                 PA/12040/2016

                                                 PA/12042/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 17th January 2018                   |        On 20th February 2018       |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     AF
                                      W
                                      E
                                     Appellants

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones instructed by Farani-Javid-Taylor
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants  in
this determination identified as AF (first appellant), W  (second  appellant
and E (third appellant). This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellants sought and were granted permission  to  appeal  against
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes who dismissed their
      appeals  against  a  decision  of  the   respondent   refusing   their
      international protection claim. Permission was granted on the  grounds
      that it was arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes  did  not
      explain why he rejected the second appellant's evidence, that  it  was
      arguable there was a failure to engage with oral evidence, that it was
      unclear what findings had been made about the second appellant's fears
      and that although the judge rejected the transcript of  the  recording
      of the telephone call, he has still placed some adverse reliance  upon
      it.


        Background


   2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. AF applied for asylum. Linked
      to her application and the respondent's decision are her two  children
      W (born 2001) and E (born 2011). The basis of  the  asylum  claim  was
      that she and/or her two daughters will face domestic  violence  and/or
      be killed by AF's husband, Mr A,  and  that  W  will  be  forced  into
      marriage by her father, AF's husband. AF claimed to have been a victim
      of domestic abuse by her husband; that he has been threatening her and
      that in March 2016 Mr A informed her that he intended to  marry  W  to
      someone of his choice.


   3. The appellants applied for and were granted visit visas. They  entered
      the UK on 5 February 2016 and claimed asylum on 18th April  2016.  The
      application for asylum was refused on 17 October 2016 and  it  is  the
      appeal against that decision which was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Jerromes on 17th May 2017 and dismissed for reasons set out in a
      decision promulgated on 31st May 2017.


        Error of law


   4. Mr Bramble acknowledged that the judge had not stated what  weight  he
      gave to W's evidence - whether he accepted her evidence or not and the
      impact upon his decision of that evidence. There  was,  he  said  some
      confusion as to the exact meaning  of  paragraph  27  of  W's  witness
      statement which should have been resolved through oral evidence and in
      a finding by the judge.  He submitted that even though no finding  had
      been made in connection with her evidence, there were  other  findings
      which, taken  overall,  resulted  in  the  conclusion  that  the  main
      appellant and the two children could return to Pakistan.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal judge heard evidence from W and her mother. He
      failed to consider this evidence and reach a finding on the weight  to
      be given to it, in reaching his decision. The evidence was critical to
      an evaluation of the risks posed to the family on return  to  Pakistan
      given that the judge accepted the main appellant had been  the  victim
      of domestic violence.

   6. The judge erred in law in failing to take into  account  and  reach  a
      finding on direct evidence given. That feeds into the finding on  risk
      on return. I set aside the decision to be remade.

        Remaking the decision

   7. There was no interpreter booked. I indicated that  the  only  evidence
      that  would  be  required,  given  the  submissions  made  during  the
      discussion on whether there was an error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision, would  be  that  of  W.  Ms  Jones  expressed  some
      concerns whether that should proceed today given that Mr  Bramble  may
      not  have  received  training  on  the  interviewing   of   vulnerable
      witnesses. I indicated that I was sure that Mr Bramble, if he has  not
      had specific training, was  aware  of  the  proper  safeguards  to  be
      considered and that questioning would be restricted to the issues that
      were in dispute.  I  put  the  hearing  back  for  Ms  Jones  to  take
      instructions and,  having  taken  instructions  she  agreed  that  the
      hearing could proceed and that W would give evidence  in  English  (in
      which she was fluent).


   8. In the event, Mr Bramble had no questions; I had a few.

   9. In her oral evidence W confirmed that she had  heard  her  father  and
      mother arguing on the phone because it was on speaker phone because it
      was being recorded. Her father had telephoned earlier and  her  mother
      had told her grandmother who had said  that  when  he  calls  back  to
      record it and then play it back to her uncle, who was not in the house
      at the time of the phone calls. W said she heard her father  say  that
      he wanted her to get married to someone of his choice  and  she  heard
      her mother say that she did not want this.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that  AF  had  been  a  victim  of
      domestic violence. This finding was not challenged by the respondent.


  11. The appellants rely upon an expert report by Uzma Moeen, former senior
      lecturer in Pakistani law at several law colleges  in  Pakistan  since
      1996 and an Associate of the  Asian  Legal  Advice  Service,  UK.  She
      records in her report her full understanding of her duty in  providing
      expert  reports.  She  set  out  in  detail  her  qualifications   and
      experience and Mr Bramble took no issue either with her  expertise  or
      the content of her report. The First-tier Tribunal judge had  accepted
      the background evidence with regard to forced marriages.


  12. Mr Bramble stated that if I were to accept that W's father intended to
      force her to marry then there would be a risk on return.  He  accepted
      that internal relocation was not a viable possibility because the need
      to register would mean that the appellants could be traced. Mr Bramble
      acknowledged that  the  evidence  indicated  that  Mr  A  retained  an
      interest in the appellants but that the core of the case came down  to
      a decision on whether or not he intended to force W to  enter  into  a
      marriage of his choosing. Crucial evidence  in  that  regard  was  the
      alleged telephone conversation on 7th March 2016, upon  which  W  gave
      oral evidence.


  13. That telephone call took place in Urdu.  A  non-certified  translation
      was provided and there was some confusion as to who actually  provided
      the English transcript, whether it  was  a  cousin  or  brother  or  a
      mixture of both. If  that  were  the  only  evidence  of  the  claimed
      telephone   conversation   that   would   be   very    unsatisfactory.
      Nevertheless, W's evidence was highly consistent and corroborative  of
      the content of the telephone conversation. W  gave  very  little  oral
      evidence before me but gave extensive evidence, it seems, before First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Jerome. Her evidence was  believed  and  formed  a
      significant element of the First-tier Tribunal judge's  findings  that
      AF had been physically and mentally abused and that W herself had been
      physically abused. W's oral evidence before me  provided  more  detail
      than was in  her  witness  statement  of  how  the  recording  of  the
      telephone conversation came about. Other evidence from NHS records and
      counselling records is supportive of  W's  evidence  both  as  to  the
      domestic violence and the threatened forced marriage.


  14. I find W credible and accept her  evidence.  I  find  that  Mr  A  did
      telephone AF and threaten her and say that he intended  to  arrange  a
      marriage for W to a person of his choice. I find that AF  objected  to
      this and there ensued an argument between them. I  am  satisfied  that
      the threat of forcing W is not only perceived by W to be a real threat
      but is in fact a real threat.


  15. Mr Bramble confirmed that if I were to make the findings as set out in
      paragraph 14 then there was no need for me  to  further  consider  the
      issues. W would be at risk of a forced marriage, the family  could  be
      traced, internal relocation was not a viable option and there  was  no
      sufficiency of protection.


  16. The objections by AF to W's marriage  would,  I  find,  place  her  at
      serious risk of further violence from her husband who  would,  because
      of the registration system outlined in the expert report, be  able  to
      trace her.


  17. Accordingly, I am satisfied that all three appellants are at  risk  of
      being persecuted for a Convention reason if removed to Pakistan.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and re-make the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it.

     Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


[pic]

                                    Date 15th February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
