
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12355/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 01 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  WALID [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Smeaton, Counsel for Kamberley Solicitors,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a dual national of Egypt and  Iraq  born  on  3  March
    1970.  He appealed the decision of the  respondent  dated  16  November
    2017 refusing his asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    claims.  His appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Oxlade on 4 and 7 March 2019 and was dismissed on  asylum  grounds  but
    allowed on humanitarian protection grounds  and  human  rights  grounds
    under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR, in a  decision  promulgated  on  15  March
    2019.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Robertson on 8 April  2019.
    The permission states that it is arguable that  the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in law in  only  considering  the  length  of  the  appellant's
    absence from Iraq when assessing the feasibility of relocation to Iraq,
    particularly as it is specifically stated  in  BA  (Iraq)  [2017]  UKUT
    00018 (IAC) that length of absence alone is insufficient  to  establish
    risk on return.  The permission states that it is  also  arguable  that
    inadequate reasons were given for finding that the appellant would  not
    have assistance in Iraq from family with accommodation and the securing
    of a CSID card, particularly as he has an expired Iraqi passport.   The
    permission states that inadequate reasons were given for the  appellant
    being destitute if returned to Iraq.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He submitted that the First-Tier Judge  made  a  finding  that
    this appellant will be an obvious target for  kidnapping  based  on  BA
    [2017] UKUT 00018.  This is at paragraph 58 of the First-Tier  Tribunal
    decision.  The Judge, because of this risk,  allows  the  appeal  under
    Article  3  of  ECHR.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that   the
    conclusion in the said case  of  BA  has  been  overlooked  and  I  was
    referred to paragraphs 55 to 58 of BA which state that Article  3  will
    not be breached based on a risk of kidnapping alone.

 6. The Judge also finds that the appellant will be at risk of  destitution
    and  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  again  this  is  not  a
    sufficient reason for Article 3 to be engaged.

 7. With regard to the Judge's reasoning the Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that it is inadequate.  The appellant is a male, he speaks  Arabic,  he
    is healthy, he is of working age, he has half-siblings in  Baghdad  and
    he has had previous employment.  The appellant's evidence is that he is
    a musician and has also done humanitarian work.  The Presenting Officer
    submitted that relocation to Baghdad would be reasonable in this  case.
    He submitted that if the appeal is to succeed adequate reasons have  to
    be given and the Judge has not given these.

 8. He submitted that at paragraph 58 of the decision the Judge  states  "I
    am not satisfied that the appellant can rely on family support in  Iraq
    for accommodation  or  work  or  in  obtaining  his  CSID  card."   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant's family has helped him
    in the past and I was asked to consider the case of  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944 and AAH (Iraq) [2018].  He referred to Dr Fatah's evidence
    in this.  The doctor finds that the appellant can apply for a CSID card
    by proxy.  In the said case of AAH it is stated that all the  documents
    required for entry can be obtained within a very short period of  time.
    He submitted that this is an appellant who has an expired passport  and
    so it should be straightforward for him to get a CSID.

 9. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  although  there  is  a  high
    unemployment rate in the IKR in Iraq, the appellant will not be  living
    there and this is irrelevant.  He submitted that this appellant will be
    returning to Baghdad.  He submitted  that  all  the  reasons  given  in
    paragraph 58 of the First-Tier Tribunal's decision are inadequate.   It
    is speculation when the Judge states that the  appellant's  family  may
    not support him.

10. The Presenting Officer referred to the case of Saeed  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    442, which refers to destitution and states that  where  the  cause  of
    that destitution is not on the part of the state, this is not a  reason
    for Article 3 being breached and he submitted that paragraph 60 of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal's decision must be wrong.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge states that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to this appellant going to Iraq but there is
    inadequate reasoning about this relating to Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.

12. Counsel for the appellant made her submissions referring to the case of
    Saeed and Article 3 of ECHR.  She submitted that this is  an  appellant
    who has PTSD based on the evidence on file, so  Article  3  has  to  be
    considered on medical issues.  She submitted that it would be difficult
    for this appellant to integrate in Iraq as he has never  stayed  there.
    She submitted that the Judge has not considered  the  country  guidance
    case of AA dated in 2017 and she submitted that this is  a  later  case
    than the said  case  of  Saeed.   She  submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    carefully considered the appellant obtaining  a  CSID.   She  submitted
    that the case of Saeed is very different from this case.  She submitted
    that there is a real risk of destitution in this claim  and  the  Judge
    has given very detailed reasons about this in his decision.

13. She submitted that this appellant cannot go back to Egypt and this  has
    been accepted and not challenged.  She submitted that what the Judge is
    considering is the appellant going back to Iraq and I was  referred  to
    paragraphs 52 and 54 of the decision.  She  submitted  that  the  Judge
    refers to the cases of AAH and BA and  gives  proper  reasons  for  his
    findings and she submitted that the grounds of application are merely a
    disagreement with the Judge's decision.

14. Counsel submitted that with regard to the case of BA  at  paragraph  68
    onwards, kidnapping could be a real problem for this appellant.  I  was
    referred to Dr George's report.  He is concerned about  the  kidnapping
    situation and she submitted that the case of BA  does  not  state  that
    there is an absence of risk but submits that many  situations  are  not
    reported and if the appellant is found to be Westernised he would be at
    heightened risk.  She submitted therefore  that  it  was  open  to  the
    Tribunal to find that there is a risk of kidnapping in  Iraq  for  this
    appellant.  She submitted that what has to be considered is  cumulative
    risk.  Although kidnapping on its own might  well  not  be  enough  for
    there to be a real risk, the Judge is  stating  that  there  are  other
    reasons which  should  be  considered  along  with  the  real  risk  of
    kidnapping.  The appellant is Westernised, he does  not  have  a  local
    accent, he has no local  knowledge,  he  will  be  returning  from  his
    Egyptian upbringing, he has never been to Iraq, and she submitted  that
    there must be a real risk to him on return when all these  matters  are
    considered together.

15. She submitted that the Judge has used a holistic approach. His decision
    is not perverse and relating to this aspect of the claim  there  is  no
    error of law.

16. With regard to the risk of destitution and Article 8, Counsel submitted
    that again all the evidence in the round has to be taken into  account.
    She submitted that the Judge has made it clear in the decision  why  he
    has reached the decision she has and it cannot be  right  to  say  that
    once the appellant has obtained a CSID or is able  to  get  one,  there
    will be no risk of destitution under Article  3.   She  submitted  that
    although the case  of  AA  in  2015  was  reconsidered  in  2017,  this
    particular point has not been changed.

17. Counsel submitted that there is no evidence that the appellant's family
    in Iraq can support him.  The Judge has properly  considered  this  and
    has stated that if the appellant is returned to  Baghdad,  irrespective
    of whether he has a CSID or not this does not mean that he will be able
    to get employment.

18. She submitted that the Presenting Officer stated that the Judge has not
    properly considered the case of AAH but I was referred to  paragraph  7
    of the decision in which the Judge states that the appellant might well
    get a CSID if he gets help from his family, but finds that  this  might
    be very difficult.  The Judge refers to the appellant being a musician,
    never having lived in Iraq and the high unemployment rate in  the  IKR.
    She submitted that at paragraph 57 proper  reasons  are  given  by  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge and it is not clear whether the appellant has
    actually broached the subject of asking his step-brother  in  Iraq  for
    help if he is returned there.

19. She submitted that the Judge states that this appellant cannot rely  on
    family support and this finding was open to the Judge.  The  Judge  has
    properly considered whether this appellant can get  family  support  in
    Iraq and has found that it is unlikely that he will be able  to  do  so
    and she submitted that the Judge  has  given  proper  reasons  for  the
    finding that the appellant cannot rely on his step-family to help  him.
    Counsel submitted that the reasons given in the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
    determination justify the Judge's decision and the appellant will be at
    risk of an Article 3 breach if he goes to Iraq.  With regard to Article
    8 Counsel submitted that the same findings are relevant.

20. She submitted that the case law has been referred to by the Judge.   He
    has taken into account that this appellant is 50 years old and  he  has
    given reasons for finding that there are very significant obstacles  to
    his integration in Iraq.  This is not a young man who will be  able  to
    get work easily.  She submitted  that  there  are  clearly  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Iraq and these have been pointed out in
    the  decision.   She  submitted   that   the   Judge   has   considered
    unemployment, accommodation and the fact that the appellant  has  never
    stayed in Iraq.  She submitted that Article 8 will be engaged  if  this
    appellant is sent there.


21. Counsel submitted that as the appellant has not stayed in Iraq he  will
    require assistance to get work or help and he  will  therefore,  as  an
    outsider, be  at  risk  of  kidnapping.   Counsel  submitted  that  the
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge should stand.

22. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 57  in  the  Judge's
    decision, although the Judge has referred to issues which  could  be  a
    problem without a CSID, this appellant is likely to be able  to  get  a
    CSID quickly, so these matters will not  be  a  problem  for  him.   He
    submitted that in Baghdad the unemployment rate is only  9.7%  and  the
    appellant has a family who can help him  when  he  gets  to  Iraq.   He
    submitted also that the appellant, if he is unable to get a job,  could
    well set up his own business and become self-employed.

23. I was asked to find that the Judge has not given proper reasons for his
    decision and I was asked to allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

Decision and Reasons

24. The grounds of application state  that  the  Judge  has  insufficiently
    addressed the appellant's feasibility of return to Iraq.   The  grounds
    state that all the material facts were  not  considered  by  the  Judge
    relating to humanitarian protection and Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.

25. First of all I am going to consider the risk of kidnapping in  Baghdad.
    The Judge has carefully quantified all the reasons why  this  appellant
    could be at risk of kidnapping.  The grounds state that the reasons are
    too speculative but I find that although there is no real risk on  this
    ground alone to the appellant, when this risk  is  taken  into  account
    with other matters, this is relevant.

26. The appellant speaks Arabic and the family he has  in  Iraq  are  half-
    siblings but although they are in touch he has never met them and there
    is no evidence of their ability to assist him  if  he  is  returned  to
    Baghdad.  The grounds state that the Judge's  reasons  are  speculative
    but I find they are relevant.

27. With regard to the obtaining of a CSID,  the  grounds  state  that  the
    appellant can  obtain  a  CSID  through  the  Iraqi  Embassy  with  the
    documentation he  possesses,  being  an  out  of  date  passport.   The
    appellant has not met his relatives in Iraq  and  I  find  that  he  is
    likely to have difficulty getting them to vouch for him if  he  has  to
    get documentation from Iraq.  I also find that even with a CSID,  based
    on the objective evidence and the case law there could still be a  risk
    of destitution.  The appellant could get a job other than as a musician
    and he has experience in humanitarian work but, this  is  an  appellant
    aged 50, going to Iraq where he has never been and I do not  find  that
    it is speculative to find that it would be extremely difficult for  him
    to find alternative work or even similar work to that which he has done
    and I certainly do not believe he could set up his own business.

28. All these matters have to be considered in the round.  There is a  risk
    of kidnapping, there is a risk of destitution, there is a risk  of  the
    appellant being unable to obtain a  CSID  either  in  this  country  or
    through his relatives in Iraq.  It is speculative  to  think  that  his
    half-siblings who he really does not know well, will  help  him  if  he
    goes to Iraq.  There is no evidence about their situation there  and  I
    find that it would be unduly harsh for this appellant to have to go  to
    Iraq at his age with these issues based on the  situation  in  Iraq  at
    present and the fact that he has never stayed there.

29. The Judge has considered all the relevant case law and has detailed the
    issues which he finds go against the appellant's return to Iraq, in the
    decision.  There is no inadequate reasoning and all the matters  raised
    in the grounds have been properly dealt with in the First-Tier Tribunal
    decision.

30. I have considered the case of Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 0013  which  deals
    with the unduly harsh test and I have considered the  case  of  SSHD  v
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 which states that the concept of integration
    into a country is a broad one.  It is not confined to the mere  ability
    to find a job or sustain life whilst living in the other country.  What
    has to be decided is whether the  individual,  the  appellant  in  this
    case, would be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how  life
    and the society in that other country was carried out  and  whether  he
    would have an opportunity to be accepted there.  He would  have  to  be
    able to operate on a day to day basis in  that  society  and  build  up
    within a reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
    substance to the individual's private and family  life.   I  find  that
    based on these cases the First-Tier Tribunal's  decision  allowing  the
    appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human  rights  ground
    (Articles 3 and 8) should stand.

31. There is no material error of law in  the  Judge's  decision  and  must
    stand. The appeal of Walid [M] should be allowed, not on asylum grounds
    but on humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

    Anonymity has not been directed.




    Signed                                  Date 28 June 2019

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray

