
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12926/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 5 August 2019                     |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                                THUPEESAN [K]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pall, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by A&P Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Lawrence ('the judge'), dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against
         the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection and human rights applications.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  On  8  November  2018  he
         appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  him
         asylum, based on:

          i. his suggested well-founded fear of persecution as a result  of
             political opinion;

         ii. case law in terms of country guidance;

        iii. there being substantial grounds for believing he would face  a
             real risk of suffering serious harm on return from the UK; and



         iv. Article 8 being engaged in terms of  his  family  and  private
             life.

      3. The judge refused the appeal on all grounds following a hearing  on
         18 April 2019. A lengthy exposition  of  the  judge's  reasons  was
         promulgated on 1 May 2019.

      4. In granting permission to appeal from that decision,  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Alis indicated that the grounds  of  onwards  appeal
         disclosed arguable errors of law, in that:

          i. The renewed grounds argued that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
             erred in relation to the  approach  he  took  to  the  medical
             evidence, by making mistakes of fact and in carrying  out  the
             risk assessment.

         ii. The recent decision of KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for
             Home Department [2019] UKSC 10 reinforced  the  weight  to  be
             attached to scarring expert reports and this combined with the
             absence of any acknowledgement that the  appellant  may  be  a
             vulnerable witness and treated as such, amounted to  an  error
             of law.

        iii. The fact the First-tier Tribunal judge made  adverse  findings
             on the medical evidence affected the judge's approach  to  the
             account provided.

      5. It is against this background that the appeal is listed before me.

      6. Relevant to the outcome of this onward appeal was a concession made
         by the parties at the outset of the hearing. Mr Muquit and Ms  Pall
         indicated that, having discussed the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
         decision, they were  satisfied  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  3
         respects, namely that:

          i. the judge in  approaching  credibility  had  not  sufficiently
             factored in the medical evidence in the round;

         ii. the judge had  not  addressed  whether  the  appellant  was  a
             vulnerable witness;

        iii. the judge had made various mistakes  of  fact,  including  the
             basis of the appellant's detention, his Liberation  Tigers  of
             Tamil Eelam (LTTE) activities in Sri Lanka, and  the  scarring
             and medical evidence.

      7. Both parties were in agreement that this matter should be  remitted
         back to the tribunal below to start again.

      8. Notwithstanding  the  parties  being  in  agreement,  and  although
         persuasive, it is still necessary for me to apply my  own  mind  to
         whether the decision should be set aside and the matter  sent  back
         to the First-tier Tribunal.

      9. I bear in mind that this Upper Tribunal should be slow to interfere
         with findings of fact made by a judge at first instance. An  appeal
         may only proceed on a material error of  law,  not  a  disagreement
         over the facts.

     10. Nonetheless, as part of the fact-finding exercise, it is  necessary
         for the judge to demonstrate that he  or  she  has  carried  out  a
         balancing  exercise,  weighing  the  evidence  before  reaching   a
         reasoned conclusion.

     11. Having reviewed the determination, I am concerned about the way  in
         which the judge approaches  credibility.  This  ties  in  with  the
         scarring report. The judge's conclusion on the  medical  report  is
         largely based on his  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
         arrested in 2018 (as the appellant  had  not  demonstrated  to  the
         lower standard he was arrested 'in January or February 2018').

     12.  That  finding  was  in  turn  based  upon  paragraph  46  of   the
         determination, which  deals  with  the  appellant's  claim  he  was
         arrested, tortured and interrogated in 2018. The  judge  identifies
         that in his first interview the appellant claimed this  was  on  15
         February 2018, but in a later statement changes this to 15  January
         2018. This led the judge to conclude that: 'It is not credible that
         the appellant should be confused about the date he  was  arrested'.
         That may  be  so,  the  events  were  relatively  recent,  and  the
         appellant is not a minor, but 25 years of age by this time.

     13. However, the issue is whether the judge should have  looked  beyond
         'the date' evidence before reaching his conclusion on how  credible
         the account was. The concern being that the judge does  not  appear
         to balance his finding in this regard with other factors  that  may
         have been relevant to credibility. The appellant had suggested  the
         discrepancy was down to a note-taking error.

     14. Counsel for the appellant had made an application at the outset  of
         the first hearing (in his skeleton argument) for the  appellant  to
         be treated as a vulnerable witness. The judge does  not  appear  to
         address this at all. In my view he should have  done,  if  only  to
         dismiss the proposition.

     15. This point is borne out by the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  2
         of 2010, Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance:

             "The Decision should record whether the tribunal has concluded
             the appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
             sensitive individual, the effect the tribunal considering  the
             identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence  before
             it and thus whether the tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the
             appellant has established his or  her  case  to  the  relevant
             standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
             to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a
             state of mind."

     16. The scarring evidence was central to the appellant's claim  he  had
         been subjected to torture. The examining doctor appears to conclude
         that the scarring on the appellant's body was typical of torture. I
         make no finding in that regard, save to say that on one level  that
         might have been consistent with the appellant's claims.

     17. Therefore, before  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
         tortured in January 2018 or February 2018 because he got  the  date
         wrong in interview, the  judge  should  also  have  considered  the
         scarring report as one of the ingredients that  may  have  gone  to
         support the appellant's case, together with the  other  aspects  of
         his account, if only to assess whether the lower standard  was  met
         (and then if not, dismiss the appellant's  claim  on  interrogation
         and torture).

     18. If the judge had done so, but  concluded  the  pendulum  had  swung
         sufficiently towards the appellant's account (and I repeat, I  make
         no finding in that regard) that  may  then  have  been  a  relevant
         factor in determining whether the appellant was  vulnerable,  which
         in turn may have provided another explanation for  the  error  with
         the date in interview.

     19. My concern is that in relation to the  assertion  of  interrogation
         and torture, the judge has in effect put the cart before the horse.
         There are a number of cases that suggest the judge took  the  wrong
         approach: Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367and  most  recently  KV  (Sri
         Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] UKSC 10.
         In SA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Department [2006] EWCA
         Civ 1302, the Court of Appeal affirmed the  reasoning  of  Mibanga,
         namely that all evidence including  medical  evidence,  had  to  be
         considered before findings of credibility or fact  could  be  made.
         The court  held  that  the  purpose  of  medical  evidence  was  to
         "corroborate and/or lend weight to the account of the asylum seeker
         by a clear statement as to the consistency of old scars found  with
         the history given."

     20. Paragraph 14 of the Joint President's guidance,  which  deals  with
         the assessment of evidence, states:

             "14. Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses  and  the  appellant
             compared to those who are not vulnerable, in  the  context  of
             evidence  from  others  associated  with  the  appellant   and
             background  evidence  before  you.  Where  there  were   clear
             discrepancies in the oral evidence,  consider  the  extent  to
             which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was
             an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity."

     21. While in my view the judge makes reasoned  findings  about  certain
         aspects of the evidence, I am not persuaded that he has  considered
         the appellant's claim in the round, the cumulative  effect  of  the
         evidence  and  then  looked  to  assess  the  credibility  of   the
         appellant's claims in  light  of  all  that  has  been  said.   His
         dismissal of the expert  report  based  in  part  on  his  previous
         finding that the appellant had not been detained  and  tortured  in
         2018 renders the decision susceptible to challenge. The purpose  of
         obtaining the report was to  assist  with  the  difficult  task  of
         analysing whether the scars were the result of torture. The role of
         the medical expert is to offer an opinion about the consistency  of
         their  findings  with  the  asylum-seeker's   account   about   the
         circumstances in which the scarring was sustained. The judge should
         have considered this more fully.

     22. In my judgement, the tribunal's failure to  consider  all  evidence
         including medical evidence before findings of credibility  or  fact
         were made amounts to an error of law.

     23. For the above reasons, including the concession, I  set  aside  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit this  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal  to  begin  again.  Neither  party  were  in  a
         position to proceed before me to substantive hearing and  it  would
         have been unfair for me to have expected them to do so.

     24. As a result, this matter will need to be re-listed in the  tribunal
         below.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Hatton Cross on 18  April
2019 under reference PA/12926/2018 is set aside.

AND

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to begin again.



No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and I saw no reason to depart from the general  rule  in
this case.



Signed   [pic]
     Date 18 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams
