
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12612/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|Without a hearing                    |On 10 June 2020                      |
|4th June 2020                        |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                                     SA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  SA.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




      1. In a decision promulgated on 22nd November 2018, FtT  judge  Hillis
         dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision
         refusing his protection claim. That decision was upheld in  so  far
         as his appeal against  the  refusal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
         grounds was concerned but was set aside in so far as  the  decision
         dismissed  his  humanitarian  protection  grounds  of  appeal.  The
         humanitarian protection appeal was remitted to  the  FtT  and  came
         before FtT judge Fisher who dismissed the appeal  for  reasons  set
         out in a decision promulgated on 31st January 2020.

      2. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by FtT judge Bird on
         11th March 2020. Directions for the further conduct of  the  appeal
         were sent and, in the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision
         was made for the question of whether there was an error of law  and
         if so whether the decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside  to
         be determined on the papers.

      3. Both parties complied with the directions save that the  respondent
         filed her submissions late for which I grant an extension of  time.
         Neither party objected to the decision on error of law being  taken
         on the papers.

      4. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and  the  respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me   are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

    FtT Decision

      5. The appellant relied in evidence upon a  CSID  which  he  said  was
         genuine, although the FtT judge noted this contradicted the witness
         statement which he adopted. The FtT judge identified that the issue
         before him was whether the CSID  the  appellant  had  provided  was
         reliable and whether the appellant had  any  family  in  Iraq.  The
         respondent  maintained  the  position  that  she   had   previously
         asserted, namely that the CSID was a forgery.  The FtT judge  found
         that none of  the  personal  characteristics  referred  to  in  SMO
         (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC)
         applied to him. The judge  accepted  that  an  individual  with  no
         relevant documents or information about the  civil  register  would
         have no realistic prospect of obtaining a CSID  and  that  physical
         presence at  the  Civil  Affairs  Department  in  Kirkuk  would  be
         necessary for the appellant to obtain an INID.  The  judge  records
         the  appellant  "insisted"  his  CSID  was  genuine   despite   the
         contradiction with his written statement. The Judge found:

             "15. ... the vague document verification evidence before me is
             insufficient to establish that the CSID was a forgery. On  the
             basis that the document is reliable, as the Appellant claimed,
             there is no reason he could not use it or, at the very  least,
             a copy of the information thereon, to obtain a replacement  at
             the Consulate. If, on the other hand, I were to be  wrong  and
             it is not a  genuine  document,  his  credibility  is  further
             reduced. I do not believe he would not  know  the  information
             required to obtain a replacement CSID. ... I conclude that  he
             is in fact in contact with his family and that  his  visit  to
             the Red cross was nothing more than a  rather  unsophisticated
             attempt to prove to the  contrary.  If  necessary  his  family
             would be able to provide him with  the  information  which  he
             would need to obtain a replacement CSID from the Consulate  in
             the UK.

             ...

             17.  I do not accept that the Appellant lacks the  information
             that would enable him to obtain a replacement CSID in  the  UK
             if a replacement is necessary. He would then be able to safely
             return to his home area of Kirkuk."

    Error of law

      6. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on five grounds:

         (i)  Ground 1:

         The FtT judge materially erred in law in placing  reliance  upon  a
         document which was not relied upon by the respondent  that was  not
         in evidence in the appeal, did not form part  of  the  respondent's
         cross examination or submissions and  there  was  no  evidence  the
         document was still available.

         (ii) Ground 2:

         The appellant's correct evidence was that he believed the  ID  card
         to be genuine at the time he produced it to the respondent; he  was
         not  given  the  opportunity  to  confirm  the  document   on   the
         respondent's file was  his  CSID  card;  he  has  been  denied  the
         opportunity to engage with evidence.

         (iii)    Ground 3:

         There was no basis  upon  which  the  judge  could  make  alternate
         findings that the appellant could recall his personal  details,  if
         he were incorrect in his finding that the document was reliable.

         (iv) Ground 4:

         There was no evidence to support the FtT finding that the appellant
         was in contact with his family or that they could provide him  with
         necessary information to obtain relevant documentation.

         (v)  Ground 5:

         The FtT judge erred in relying upon  previous  adverse  credibility
         findings which, although a starting point, could not  be  used  for
         general credibility findings on a different factual issue.

    Grounds 1 and 2

      7. The appellant's own evidence relied upon at the hearing before  the
         FtT judge was that he had a genuine identity document; his evidence
         was not that  at  the  time  he  submitted  the  documents  to  the
         respondent he thought they were genuine but now accepted they  were
         not. He did not assert in his oral evidence to the  judge  that  it
         was not genuine, rather he asserted it was. He did not, through his
         legal representatives, seek an  adjournment  for  the  document  in
         question to be produced. He did  not  either  in  his  evidence  or
         through counsel submit that he had been disadvantaged by  the  non-
         production of the document in question or that he sought production
         of the document in question or that he did not accept the  document
         was not available or give evidence why he erroneously  thought  the
         document to be genuine. He was legally represented  throughout.  It
         is  incorrect  to  assert  that  the  appellant  was  in  some  way
         'ambushed' by the  questions  regarding  the  document,  given  his
         evidence and the lack of any objection by his legal representatives
         or him. There was no assertion  that  he  did  not  understand  the
         interpreter or that there had been interpreting  misunderstandings.
         It was clear that the  issue  at  large  in  the  hearing  was  the
         reliability or otherwise of the document.

      8. There was no error of law by the FtT judge either in the conduct of
         the appeal or the findings regarding the evidence that was  clearly
         and plainly relied upon by the appellant.

    Ground 3

      9. The judge did not err in law in finding, as an alternate, that  the
         appellant could, if the document were not  genuine,  recollect  his
         personal details. The judge made clear findings with regard to  the
         reliability of the document. It was  open  to  the  judge  to  make
         findings on evidence that was before him as to the  credibility  of
         the appellant, drawing on previous findings of adverse  credibility
         and Tribunal decisions. The findings that the  appellant  would  be
         able to recollect his personal details were findings that were open
         to him on the evidence before him.

    Ground 4

     10. The judge considered the evidence before  him  of  the  appellant's
         contact and claimed contact with his family. The  finding  that  he
         remained in contact with family members  was  a  finding  that  was
         plainly open to him on the evidence. It was open to  the  judge  to
         make  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's   claims
         regarding his family taking full account, as the judge did, of  the
         appellant's claim overall. There is no error of law  by  the  judge
         finding the appellant remained in contact with family members.

    Ground 5

     11. There is no error of law  by  the  judge  in  relying  on  previous
         adverse credibility findings in  accordance  with  Devaseelan.  The
         appellant maintained a previously discredited claim with no further
         evidence. It is not a case of a  different  factual  scenario;  the
         appellant's claim has to  be  viewed  holistically  and  the  judge
         considered the evidence before him  holistically  and  reached  the
         decision in that context. There is no error of  law  by  the  judge
         taking into account and using previous adverse credibility findings
         as a starting point.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision. The decision of the FtT dismissing the
    appeal stands.







    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
4 June 2020
