
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12267/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 30 April 2018                      |On 08 May 2018                         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M R Oliver (the judge), promulgated on 8  January  2018,
    in which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's decision of 8
    November 2017.  The Appellant, a citizen  of  Albania,  had  based  her
    protection claim on matters relating  to  forced  marriage  and  sexual
    abuse prior to her departure from her country.  The Respondent rejected
    the claim.

The judge's decision

 2. Put briefly, at [30] and [31] the judge rejects the Appellant's account
    "in its entirety".  This is based primarily on matters of  plausibility
    and the absence of corroborative evidence, in particular  from  various
    family members.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. In essence the grounds make the following assertions.  First, that  the
    judge failed to take  the  Appellant's  young  age  into  account  when
    assessing her evidence as to past events.  Second, the judge failed  to
    make sufficient findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's  claim.
    Third, the judge  failed  to  provide  any  or  any  adequate  reasons.
    Fourth, the judge in effect was requiring corroborative  evidence  from
    the  Appellant.   Fifth,  the  judge  failed  to  deal  with  an   oral
    application for an adjournment at the hearing before him.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on 27 February 2018.  It is right  to  say  that  the  judge  was  more
    impressed with some of the grounds than others.  Having said  that  the
    grant of leave was not expressly restricted in any way.

The hearing before me

 5. At the outset Mr Jarvis, in his customary fair  and  pragmatic  manner,
    made a number of observations relating to the  decision  under  appeal.
    Without conceding anything he acknowledged that the judge did not  seem
    to have taken account of the Appellant's minority at the time at  which
    material events  are  said  to  have  occurred  in  Albania.   He  also
    recognised what seemed to be a lack of findings and/or reasons relating
    to the judge's criticisms of the absence of corroborative evidence  and
    other aspects of the Appellant's case.

 6. For her part Miss Gherman confirmed that she did not have any  evidence
    relating to the claimed oral application for an adjournment before  the
    judge.  There was no witness statement from  previous  Counsel  and  no
    note of hearing either.  I  pointed  out  to  Miss  Gherman  that  when
    assertions are made in grounds relating to  procedural  matters  it  is
    very often important  (even  if  not  strictly  necessary)  to  provide
    written evidence of what is said to have happened or not happened at  a
    hearing.  I indicated  to  both  representatives  that  the  Record  of
    Proceedings on file made no mention  of  an  oral  application  for  an
    adjournment.  I noted that a written application for an adjournment had
    been refused on the papers prior to the hearing before the judge.

Decision on error of law

 7. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    several material errors of law in the judge's decision.

 8. It is right that during the processing of the protection claim  in  the
    United Kingdom and at the hearing the Appellant was  over  the  age  of
    eighteen.  To that extent she was not a "vulnerable witness" within the
    meaning of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.  However,
    it is clear that at the time at which claimed events are said  to  have
    occurred in Albania, the Appellant was a minor.  She  had  only  turned
    nineteen in the early autumn of 2017, some three months after  arriving
    in this country.  In light of this I agree with the observation made by
    Mr Jarvis  that  her  young  age  was  a  relevant  consideration  when
    assessing her credibility in general, whether she would  have  obtained
    corroborative evidence at any time, and also  whether  there  were  any
    credible explanations as to why corroborative  evidence  had  not  been
    adduced.  On the face of the judge's decision there is no reference  to
    the Appellant's young age at material times, and I see  no  substantive
    consideration of this factor in [30] and [31].  There is an error here.

 9. There is also in my view a lack of adequate reasons in [30]  and  [31].
    Judges are entitled  to  express  themselves  relatively  briefly,  but
    sufficiently clear reasons must be  provided  and  these  reasons  must
    relate to material aspects  of  the  claim  being  put  forward  by  an
    Appellant.  In this case, the wholesale rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    account appears on the face of it to have been based in very large part
    by a lack of corroborative evidence (something which  is  not  a  legal
    requirement of course) and the judge's view of  what  was  or  was  not
    plausible.  It is somewhat difficult to discern any assessment  of  the
    Appellant's own evidence,  whether  in  respect  of  specific  findings
    and/or reasons for rejecting it.  An absence of corroborative  evidence
    can be relevant to credibility, but really only  insofar  as  it  means
    that the fact-finder has only the word of the Appellant to go by.  This
    can make it more difficult for an Appellant to  succeed,  depending  on
    their own individual credibility, but it is by no means impossible.  To
    this extent I agree with the second of  Mr  Jarvis's  observations  and
    find there to be a further error here.

10. In respect of factual findings, there are in a sense none save for  the
    bald, overarching conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  story  was  being
    rejected in its entirety.  In a protection claim with at least a couple
    of strands to it, it is  in  my  view  important  for  an  unsuccessful
    Appellant to be able to see what specifically the Tribunal is saying in
    terms of their case.  That has not occurred here, and that is an error.

11. I acknowledge that at the end of [30] the judge has apparently made  an
    alternative conclusion that in any event the  Appellant  could  receive
    state protection or could internally relocate.  In this case  that  is,
    with respect, insufficient.  There is no  detailed  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's particular factual circumstances in relation to  either  of
    these two issues.  That is in part because there has been a failure  to
    make relevant findings of fact.

12. I leave aside the issue of the adjournment.  There is no clear evidence
    before me to show that an oral application was in fact made.  I make it
    clear this issue had no bearing on my overall conclusion that the judge
    has erred.

13. It is clear that the errors identified above are material. In light  of
    this I exercise my discretion under section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set the judge's decision aside.

Disposal

14. Both representatives were agreed that this  appeal  would  have  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  In light of paragraph 7.2 of  the
    Practice Statement, I agree.  It is quite clear  that  there  has  been
    insufficient findings of fact in this case.  All  material  aspects  of
    the Appellant's claim are in dispute and she is entitled for her  claim
    to be looked at afresh, with a full and detailed  assessment  conducted
    as to the credibility of her account.  To this end, I issue  directions
    below.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

This  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a   complete
rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1. The appeal is remitted to the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre.


 2. The remitted hearing shall not be before First-tier Tribunal Judge M  R
    Oliver.


 3. An Albanian interpreter is required.


 4. There will be three witnesses at the remitted hearing.


 5. It is expected that the remitted hearing will have a time  estimate  of
    four hours.


 6. The Appellant will be serving a consolidated bundle upon both the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Respondent in due course.




Signed   [pic]             Date: 1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


