
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12646/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 7 August 2019                     |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|Judgment given orally                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 Khader [Y]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McTaggart, instructed by BP Crawford & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Somalia against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent dated 31 October 2016, refusing his  asylum  and  protection
    claims.  These had been  based  on  his  membership  of  the  Bandhabow
    minority clan.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  for  reasons  given  in  his  decision
    promulgated 28 March 2018.  In a decision dated 27 December 2018  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and directed that it be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. As explained by Judge Rintoul in [2] of his decision:

         "2.  The appellant's case is that he is a member of  the  Bandhabow
             minority clan.  His case is that he has a well-founded fear of
             persecution in Somalia alternatively, that, following MOJ  and
             others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  and
             as he cannot return to his  home  area,  Afgoye,  his  removal
             would be in breach of the Geneva Convention and/or that he  is
             entitled to remain on humanitarian protection grounds."

 4. The appellant's first asylum claim was refused  in  2011.   His  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  27
    May 2011.  Further submissions to the Secretary of State led to another
    decision which was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 23 September
    2014.  More submissions were again made in September 2016, in  response
    to which the Secretary of State was satisfied amounted to a fresh claim
    and thus giving rise to a  right  of  appeal.   As  observed  by  Judge
    Rintoul in his error of law decision:

         "6.  At this point it should be noted that in the first decision of
             the First-tier Tribunal, the judge did  not  accept  that  the
             appellant was from a minority clan or was ever in fear of  Al-
             Shabaab and it was  unexplained  why  his  relative  in  Saudi
             Arabia did not seek to have him join  him  there  rather  than
             making a trip to the United Kingdom.  It was also  found  that
             he could rely upon his family in Saudi Arabia to assist him in
             the manner that they had enabled him to  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom.

         7.   On the next occasion  the  judge  found,  given  new  evidence
             comprising expert report and the appellant's aunt, that he  is
             a member of the Reer Hamar sub-clan Bandhabow as claimed,  the
             judge finding that he could return to his home area of  Afgoye
             and, in the alternative, that he could relocate to  Mogadishu.



         8.   The appellant's case is that the situation has now changed and
             that the uncle who lived in Saudi Arabia  has  now  died.   He
             provided evidence of that in the form of  a  certificate  from
             the Somali Consul General  in  Saudi  Arabia  which  had  been
             obtained by a friend, Mustafa  Abdi,  whose  father  lived  in
             Saudi Arabia who obtained the documents and had them  sent  by
             DHL to the United Kingdom.  It was also said that his aunt  is
             unable to assist him as she is reliant on benefits herself."

 5. Judge Rintoul also observed in [14]:

         "14. There is in the summary at [56] to [58] any observations  made
             about the safety or otherwise of  Afgoye,  merely  [a]  stated
             that it was  not  accepted  that  he  could  not  relocate  to
             Afgoye."

 6. The natural inference from the above is that it was accepted  that  the
    appellant could not relocate to Afgoye.  The proposal was for  the  re-
    hearing to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal today.  That has  not  been
    possible  because  the  Tribunal  administration,   despite   receiving
    assurances  otherwise,  had  not  been  able  to   provide   a   Somali
    interpreter.

 7. On further exploring the aspect touched  on  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul in [14] and the refusal letter which he referred to, Mr Diwnycz
    clarified the Secretary of State's position as follows.   There  is  no
    Convention risk to the appellant in Afgoye; the  sole  issue  therefore
    being of his return to that town and being destitute as a result.  This
    was stated at the hearing before Judge Rintoul by the  then  Presenting
    Officer, Mr P Duffy.  It seems to me therefore that the scope  of  this
    appeal is wider than that observed by Judge Rintoul in his decision.

 8. Given the clarification by Mr  Diwnycz  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position it is necessary to decide whether the appellant  would  be  at
    risk, and if so, on what basis, in  Afgoye.   If  the  answer  to  that
    enquiry is in the affirmative, the next question is  whether  he  could
    reasonably relocate to  Mogadishu.   To  my  mind  that  would  involve
    extensive  fact-finding  on  two  important  aspects,  particularly  in
    respect of the issue of  whether  the  appellant  can  be  returned  to
    Afgoye.  It would be necessary for the deciding tribunal to have regard
    to the observations by Lord Justice Hamblen in the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  v  MS  (Somalia)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1345,  in
    particular his observations between [73] and [76] of his judgment as to
    the correct approach to be taken to consideration of whether Article  3
    is made out in respect of the particular risk, and the  guidance  given
    by the Upper Tribunal in its country guidance decision in MOJ.

 9. Accordingly, the direction of Judge Rintoul is varied;  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for its further consideration.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date  20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson




