


IAC-AH-CJ-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12074/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2019                           |On 13 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    MAAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel instructed by Woodlands
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 30 October 1974,
    is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Shanahan ("the judge") promulgated on 2 May 2019 refusing his
    protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant claims to be at risk in Sri Lanka from:

      a) the government, because of (perceived) involvement with and
         fundraising for the LTTE whilst in the UK;

      b) two LTTE supporters he knew in the UK (whom he refers to as "Ravi"
         and "Muthu") who have influence in Sri Lanka and blame him for
         their deportation from the UK; and

      c) his former wife's brother.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is as follows:

      a) He is a Tamil.

      b) He was adopted and raised by a Muslim family.

      c) Prior to coming to the UK as a student, he had not had any
         involvement with the LTTE or difficulties with the authorities in
         Sri Lanka.

      d) He entered the UK in 2000 as a student and remained in the UK after
         12 December 2001 even though he no longer had leave to do so.

      e) In 2003 he met a group of Sri Lankans who were members of, and
         raised money for, the LTTE.  I will refer to them as "the LTTE
         group".  The LTTE group included amongst them men called Ravi and
         Muthu.

      f) The LTTE group forced the appellant to assist them and also stole
         from him.

      g) The appellant did not inform the UK authorities (because he was
         worried about his immigration status) or his solicitor (because she
         was Sinhalese and he feared she was involved with the authorities
         in Sri Lanka).

      h) In 2007 the appellant returned to Sri Lanka, using an emergency
         travel document.  Soon after arriving in Sri Lanka he married (in
         December 2007) and had a son.

      i) In October 2010 he divorced.

      j) In 2010 he moved to Kandi and in November 2010 he remarried.

      k) His former wife's brother threatened to kill him and he reported
         this to the police in 2013.  He has not heard from his former
         brother-in-law since 2013.

      l) On 19 April 2016 Ravi and Muthu, accompanied by police officers,
         came to his house in the middle of the night and took him to an
         unknown location.  He was accused of reporting Ravi and Muthu to
         the UK authorities resulting in their deportation.  He was also
         accused of being an LTTE informant and of having collected money
         for the LTTE; and was subject to beatings and torture for a period
         of four days from police officers and soldiers.  Amongst other
         things he suffered a severe shoulder injury and attempted sexual
         assault from soldiers.  Ravi and Muthu told him that they were LTTE
         members and had influence with politicians which is how they
         managed to locate him.

      m) He was taken to hospital as a consequence of injuries suffered at
         the hands of soldiers and managed to escape.  After escaping he
         lived at his wife's family home (working from home whilst there)
         until he left Sri Lanka in January 2018 using a false passport.

      n) He now suffers from PTSD and depression, and is at risk of suicide.

 4. When refusing the appellant's protection claim the respondent noted
    that there was not a record of him leaving the UK in 2007 and that he
    arrived in Dublin in January 2018 with a forged biodate page on his
    passport.

 5. The respondent did not accept any of the appellant's account.  Amongst
    other things it was not accepted that he had been threatened in the UK
    by the LTTE group, that he had returned to Sri Lanka in 2007 or that he
    had been detained and subject to abuse and torture in Sri Lanka.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge did not find the appellant credible.

 7. He began his assessment of the appellant's credibility by considering
    the expert and background evidence that had been adduced.

      a) Firstly, the judge considered the evidence of consultant
         psychiatrist Dr Singh who prepared a report dated 17 February 2019.
          At paragraph 30 the judge stated that:

              "having considered the expert's report it is clear the
             appellant suffers from moderate symptoms of PTSD and I take
             this into account in assessing his evidence as required by the
             Presidential Guidance".

      b) Secondly, the judge considered the report of Dr Martin, consultant
         in emergency medicine, dated 21 February 2019 in which the
         appellant's injuries and scarring were assessed in accordance with
         the Istanbul Protocol.  The judge noted Dr Martin's conclusion that
         the appellant's injuries were consistent with injuries
         intentionally and unwillingly caused by a third party and at
         paragraph 35 stated:




             "I have taken account of Dr Martin's report on the basis that
             the appellant's injuries are consistent with his account as
             opposed to highly consistent, typical or diagnostic".




      c) Thirdly, the judge referred to a report by Ms Jansz regarding the
         current circumstances in Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 36 the judge
         stated that this report was considered along with the respondent's
         Country Policy and Information Note Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism
         V5.0 June 2017 ("the 2017 CPIN"), the Freedom from Torture Report
         dated February 2019, the UNHCR Report dated February 2019 and the
         Groundviews Sri Lanka Report dated 2018.

 8. The judge then considered the appellant's account. His most significant
    findings regarding the appellant's credibility were the following:

      a) The judge did not find damaging to the appellant's credibility that
         there was no documentary or photographic evidence to corroborate
         his involvement with the LTTE group.

      b) The judge noted that according to the appellant's account he did
         not encounter any adverse interest from the authorities in Sri
         Lanka arising from his involvement with the LTTE group between 2007
         and January 2016 despite the sophisticated intelligence of the
         authorities and their interest in seeking out those involved, or
         perceived as being involved, with the LTTE abroad.

      c) The judge stated that if Ravi and Muthu were deported in or around
         2007 it is unclear why it took them nine years (2007-2016) to
         locate the appellant whilst if they were not deported from the UK
         until later it is unclear why they would blame the appellant given
         that he left the UK in 2007.

      d) According to the appellant's account, following his escape from
         hospital in 2016 he lived for over a year at his wife's family home
         and maintained a business there without encountering any
         difficulties from the authorities or from Ravi and Muthu.  The
         judge commented that given the sophistication of intelligence
         services in Sri Lanka (and that Ravi and Muthu had previously been
         able to find the appellant) the fact that he was able to live
         unhindered with his wife's family indicates a lack of interest on
         the part of the authorities.  At paragraph 45 the judge stated

              "The fact that he was able to continue living there and
             carrying on with his business demonstrates that he was of no
             interest to the authorities or anyone else".

      e) With regard to the appellant's claimed fear of his former brother-
         in-law, the judge noted that, according to the appellant's account,
         there has been no contact between them since 2013. The judge stated
         that there was no satisfactory explanation why the appellant's
         brother-in-law would want to kill the appellant or would have the
         influence either to locate the appellant or to kill him with
         impunity.

      f) The judge found that the evidence as to why the appellant was a
         Tamil was vague and noted that he was raised as a Muslim.

      g) The judge described as vague the appellant's evidence about how he
         came to learn that the LTTE group was collecting funds for the
         LTTE.  At paragraph 50 the judge stated:

             "I have considered his evidence about his involvement with the
             group in UK and note the vague evidence he provided about how
             he knew they were LTTE members and that they were collecting
             for the LTTE.  In light of my findings about the other aspects
             of his claim I am not satisfied that he was involved with such
             a group or that he would be identified as a member of the
             LTTE.  His evidence is that he was never involved with that
             group and there is little to show that he would now be
             suspected of such involvement, particular[ly] given his
             residence in Sri Lanka during a period when the authorities
             were and continue to seek out those involved as set out in the
             background information."

 9. The judge concluded that the appellant had not established that he had
    a well founded fear of persecution from the authorities, Ravi and
    Mathu, or his brother-in-law.

10. The judge considered the appellant's claim that removing him from the
    UK would breach articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR because of his mental
    health (depression and PTSD) and suicide risk. At paragraphs 53-55 the
    judge considered Dr Singh's report as well as the appellant's GP
    records and a letter from Let's Talk - Wellbeing concerning the
    appellant's suicide risk.

11. At paragraph 56 the judge considered the availability of mental health
    services in Sri Lanka. The judge noted that the country evidence
    describes facilities in Jaffna but not Kandi, where the appellant's
    wife resides. The judge found that the appellant would be able to
    relocate to Jaffna if necessary in order to access such services.  At
    paragraph 60 the judge concluded:

         "I have found that the appellant faces no real risk of ill-
         treatment or in-human on return.  I bear in mind that the Article 3
         threshold is particularly high as set out in N [2005] UKHL 31 and
         having regard to the more recent decision in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018]
         EWCA Civ 64 which considered that whilst N was binding authority up
         to Supreme Court level, Paposhvili relaxed the test only to a very
         modest extent.  In this appeal the appellant will be returning to
         his home country where his wife and her parents will be available
         to support him and ensure he has the appropriate treatment if
         necessary.  While Sri Lanka's mental health facilities are not of
         the same standard as the UK there are facilities and I have no
         sufficient evidence before me that the appellant will not be able
         to obtain fluoxetine or other appropriate medication and access
         mental health facilities if required.  I am satisfied that any risk
         of suicide can be managed in both the UK and in Sri Lanka."

Grounds of Appeal

12. The first ground of appeal challenges the judge's rejection (in
    particular at paragraph 50 of the decision - quoted at paragraph 8(g)
    above) of the appellant's claim to have been forcibly recruited to, and
    involved with, the LTTE group. The following arguments are made:

      a) The judge failed to recognise that the claims about the LTTE group
         were the "centrepiece of his appeal such as to require careful
         consideration in their own right".

      b) Insufficient reasons were given for rejecting this part of the
         appellant's claim.

      c) The judge improperly relied on other adverse findings (concerning
         risk from his former brother-in-law and having Tamil ethnicity)
         that were not indicia of risk from or arising in consequence of his
         involvement with the LTTE group.

      d) The judge referred to the appellant's evidence as "vague" without
         considering whether any vagueness was attributable to his
         vulnerability, in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance
         on vulnerable witnesses, and as explained by Doctor Singh.

      e) The judge failed to engage with the substance of the report by Dr
         Jansz and in particular failed to recognise that this report, as
         well as the objective evidence more generally, is consistent with
         the appellant's account.

      f) The judge erred by failing to engage with the fact that, as was
         found in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
         [2013] UKUT 00319, the appellant would be interviewed on return and
         he cannot be expected to lie either about his involvement with the
         LTTE group or about having used false documents to leave Sri Lanka.
          It is submitted that for either or both of these reasons he would
         be at risk of detention and consequent ill-treatment.

      g) The approach taken by the judge was inconsistent with SB (Sri
         Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 160 CA, where at paragraphs 41-44 it
         is stated:

             "41. The decision of the FtT turns upon the credibility of the
                  appellant's evidence.  The credibility of an appellant
                  often lies at the centre of these cases.  Evidence is
                  often indirect.  So, in this case there was no direct
                  evidence of the risk posed to the appellant if returned,
                  for example, from the Sri Lankan authorities confirming or
                  denying that the appellant was of interest to them and, if
                  so, for what reason.  The judge did not have the stop list
                  referred to in the Country Guidance.  He did not have
                  evidence from those supposedly detaining Major Alwis
                  confirming that he was in fact detained, and for what, and
                  whether he had named the appellant as potentially
                  complicit in anti-government activities.  Evidence before
                  a Tribunal will therefore frequently be circumstantial and
                  based upon the credibility of an appellant's account.

             42.  Some of the indirect evidence is recognised (in Country
                  Guidance) as a fair proxy measurement of risk, such as
                  whether a person has been able to pass unhindered through
                  an airport at a point in time when he or she should have
                  been at risk, or whether the person has engaged in
                  activities known to place that person in present jeopardy
                  of arrest.  But other pieces of evidence are remote from
                  any indicia of, or proxy for, risk and concern only
                  whether the individual is telling the truth which itself
                  is then used in deciding whether the individual's account
                  of the risk posed by return, is credible and truthful.

             43.  In this case certain pieces of evidence fell within the
                  Country Guidance (especially paragraph 7(a) and (d)) as
                  being pertinent to the assessment of risk.  But much of
                  the evidence was remote from the issue of risk and went
                  only to general credibility.  Such background material can
                  be relevant to the analysis but it needs to be borne in
                  mind that per se it indicates little about risk and, as
                  the judge properly recognised, even genuine asylum seekers
                  might exaggerate or fabricate evidence in order to reduce
                  the risk their case is wrongly rejected.

             44.  All of this explains why first instance judges need
                  carefully to assess credibility and why appellate courts
                  will accord due deference to the fact finder who is
                  experienced in sifting evidence of this sort.  But it also
                  explains why an appellate court needs to be able to
                  satisfy itself that the fact finder has at least
                  identified the most relevant pieces of evidence and given
                  sufficient reasons (which might be quite concise) for
                  accepting or rejecting it."

13. The second ground of appeal submits that the judge erred by failing to
    make a clear finding (or to formally reject) the appellant's account of
    detention and torture and by failing to engage with contemporaneous
    medical evidence that corroborated the appellant's account.

14. The third ground of appeal submits that the assessment of article 3 and
    article 8 ECHR in relation to the appellant's medical condition was
    deficient because the judge:

      a) did not treat the medical report as independent evidence and was
         irrational in questioning whether the appellant was feigning his
         condition when he had accepted the appellant's vulnerability;

      b) failed to consider the evidence of lack of available psychiatric
         treatment in the appellant's home area; and

      c) failed to consider the risk of ostracism from the appellant's
         wife's family arising from the stigma associated mental health
         problems.

Submissions

15. Building on the second ground of appeal, Mr Draycott submitted that as
    the judge had not rejected the central part of the appellant's account
    about having been tortured and detained in 2016 there was no basis upon
    which to reject the claim as if the appellant had been tortured and
    detained as claimed it is clear he would be at risk on return.

16. He also submitted that the judge had "fastened onto" the appellant
    being able to remain in Sri Lanka for almost two years following his
    escape from detention but that this should not have been treated as
    determinative of the appeal.

17. Mr Draycott was critical of paragraph 50 of the decision, arguing that
    the use of the term "vague" was inappropriate given the Judicial
    Presidential Guidance concerning vulnerable witnesses. He argued that
    the judge failed to address whether the vagueness was attributable to
    the appellant's PTSD in light of the psychiatric evidence of Dr Singh.



18. Mr Draycott also argued that the decision was deficient for failing to
    engage adequately, or at all, with the expert evidence from Ms Jansz
    which was consistent with the appellant's account.

19. He also highlighted paragraphs 42-44 of SB (Sri Lanka) (cited above)
    arguing that the judge's approach was inconsistent with the guidance
    given by the Court of Appeal in that case on how to deal with issues of
    credibility that are peripheral and remote from the issue of risk.  He
    argued that the credibility finding in respect of the appellant being
    able to live with his wife's family for over a year was remote from the
    issue of the membership of the LTTE group.

20. Mr Draycott also submitted that the judge had failed to address the
    risk the appellant would face on return as a consequence of having used
    a false passport to illegally leave Sri Lanka and that would arise from
    being questioned at the airport where he could not be expected to deny
    his role within the LTTE in the UK.

21. Ms Everett argued that, reading the decision as a whole, it is clear
    that the judge has looked holistically at the evidence.  She noted that
    the judge had given clear self-directions that accurately stated the
    law, including the necessity to have regard to the Presidential
    Guidance in relation to vulnerable witnesses.  She argued that the
    findings in the decision do not indicate that the judge failed to
    follow the self-direction.

22. She argued that Mr Draycott had taken paragraph 50 of the decision out
    of context and that it needs to be read alongside and as part of the
    overall credibility findings.

23. Ms Everett submitted that the judge was entitled to attach significant
    weight to the implausibility of the appellant's claim to have resided
    with his wife's parents for over a year after escaping from the
    authorities and to have carried on a business, without encountering
    difficulties.  She argued that there was nothing in the decision to say
    that this was treated as determinative but in any event the judge was
    entitled to give it very significant weight.  She argued that the
    appellant appears to be trying to have it both ways: either the
    authorities wanted to find him after his escape from detention, or they
    did not; and if they were interested in him it is not plausible that
    they would not have found him at the home of his wife's family.

24. As to the argument that the judge failed to have regard to the evidence
    of Ms Jansz, Ms Everett's submission was that the judge did not reject
    the appellant's account of being press-ganged into the LTTE group on
    the basis of implausibility, but rather rejected it because his
    credibility as a whole was not accepted.  The fact that the country
    expert considered that the appellant's account was consistent with
    objective evidence did not undermine the reasoning of the judge.

25. Ms Everett did not accept that the objective evidence supported that a
    returnee would be at risk merely because they had left Sri Lanka
    unlawfully. She submitted that the appellant would be able to tell the
    truth on return without fear because the truth, as found by the judge,
    was that he had not been involved with the LTTE in any way.

Discussion

Ground 1: Rejecting the appellant's account of having been involved with
the LTTE group in the UK was irrational, not supported by adequate (or
proper) reasons, ignored his vulnerability, was inconsistent with objective
and expert evidence, and was inconsistent with SB.

26. The first ground of appeal advances numerous arguments which challenge
    the judge's finding at paragraph 50 of the decision that the appellant
    was not involved with the LTTE group as he claimed. For the reasons set
    out below, I am satisfied that the judge's findings at paragraph 50
    were reasonably open to her for the reasons she gave; that the judge's
    reasoning was consistent with the evidence; and that proper regard was
    had to the appellant's vulnerability.




27. It is plain from reading paragraph 7 of the decision (where the judge
    accurately set out, in detail, the appellant's account of being
    forcibly involved with the LTTE group) together with paragraphs 50
    (where the judge did not accept the appellant was telling the truth
    about his involvement with the group) that the judge has engaged with,
    and appreciated the materiality to the appeal of, this aspect of the
    appellant's account. The contention that the judge failed to consider
    it, or recognise its importance, therefore lacks any basis.




28. According to the appellant's account, the only reason he was detained
    in 2016 was because of his involvement with the LTTE group between 2003
    and 2007 and because former members of the LTTE group (Ravi and Mathu)
    were seeking him.  Clearly, if he had not had any involvement with the
    LTTE group there would have been no reason for the authorities (or for
    Ravi and Mathu) to have had an interest in him in 2016. Therefore, the
    appellant's claim to have been involved with the LTTE group is
    inextricably linked to his claim to have been detained and tortured in
    Sri Lanka in 2016. In the absence of the former there would simply be
    no reason for the latter to have occurred.


29. Accordingly, the detention and torture in 2016 is not peripheral to or
    remote from the core issue of whether the appellant was being truthful
    about the LTTE group; on the contrary, it is central to, and goes to
    the heart of, that question. If the account of detention and torture
    was not plausible then it was entirely reasonable for the judge to
    infer that the appellant was not being truthful about the LTTE group,
    even if it is plausible, in light of the objective evidence, that such
    a group existed.


30. The judge has given two reasons why the appellant's claim to have been
    detained and tortured in 2016 is not plausible. The first is that, by
    his own account, between 2007 and 2016 the appellant lived in Sri Lanka
    without any interest from the authorities or anyone else despite the
    objective evidence (as confirmed in GJ) showing that the authorities
    had an interest in apprehending, or at least questioning, people who
    had been involved with the LTTE outside of Sri Lanka.  Given the
    sophistication of the Sri Lanka intelligence services (as is described
    in GJ) the judge found it implausible that the appellant, if he were
    telling the truth, would attract no interest for almost a decade.




31. Secondly, the appellant's account was that after his escape from
    detention he was able to live (and operate a business) from his wife's
    family home for over a year without the authorities apprehending him.
    Given the ease with which he could be located (as he was at his wife's
    family home) the judge found it implausible that, if the appellant's
    account of escaping detention were true, he would not have been located
    by the authorities. The judge found the appellant's explanation that
    the authorities (and Ravi and Muthu) were not interested in his wife to
    be irrelevant, as the issue was whether the authorities could locate
    him at his wife's family home, not whether they were interested in his
    wife.




32. These are cogent and clear reasons for rejecting the appellant's
    account of involvement with the LTTE group resulting in his detention
    and torture; and therefore I do not accept that the judge gave
    insufficient or inadequate reasons; or that the judge has relied on
    evidence that is remote from any indicia of risk.


33. Nor is there merit to the argument that the judge failed to take into
    account the appellant's vulnerability. There is nothing in the
    psychiatric evidence which supports the view that the appellant,
    because of his mental health, would be vague about his involvement with
    the LTTE group. The judge was entitled to have regard to the vagueness
    of the appellant's evidence. In any event, the judge gave cogent
    reasons (summarised above in paragraph 30 - 31) for rejecting the
    appellant's account as implausible that did not rely on a finding that
    the appellant had been vague.




34. The appellant's reliance on SB is, in my view, misconceived. In SB, the
    Court of Appeal found that the Tribunal had, when evaluating
    credibility, inter alia, failed to address relevant matters and reached
    conclusions that were illogical and inconsistent. No such criticism can
    be made of the judge in this case. The judge has given cogent reasons
    why the appellant's case was not accepted. There are no material parts
    of the evidence that have been omitted from consideration and there is
    no inconsistency or failure of logic in the evaluation of the evidence.




35. It is correct, as submitted by Mr Draycott, that the judge has not
    engaged in any detail with the evidence of Ms Jansz. However, as
    submitted by Ms Everett, there was no need for her to do so. The
    appellant's account of involvement with the LTTE group was not rejected
    because the existence of such a group (or his being coerced to assist
    such a group) was found to be implausible, but rather because the
    appellant's claim about what happened to him in Sri Lanka as a
    consequence of his involvement with the LTTE group was rejected as
    implausible. The evidence of Ms Jansz on this point was not disputed,
    and therefore no error arises from failing to set it out or confirm in
    terms that it was not disputed.





36. The appellant's contention that the judge failed to address the risk
    arising from giving a truthful account at the airport on return can be
    dealt with briefly for the reasons given by Ms Everett: if, as the
    judge found, the appellant was not a member of the LTTE group than he
    would not need to mention this when giving a truthful explanation to
    the authorities in Sri Lanka. He would merely be a failed asylum
    seeker. The extant country guidance caselaw GK does not support the
    contention that a failed Tamil asylum seeker would be at risk on return
    solely on that basis, and there was no evidence before the First-Tier
    Tribunal that could, on any legitimate view, justify a departure from
    country guidance case law on this.

Ground 2: The judge failed to make any, or adequate, finding about the
detention and torture of the appellant

37. Mr Draycott is correct that the judge did not clearly state in terms
    that the appellant's account of being detained and tortured was
    rejected. However, it is plain from reading the decision as a whole
    that the judge did not accept that the appellant had been detained and
    tortured. Firstly, the only reason the appellant gave for the detention
    and torture was his involvement with the LTTE group and the judge
    explicitly at paragraph 50 found that he had not been involved as
    claimed. Secondly, the judge gave reasons (as summarised above) why she
    has not find the appellant's claim to be of interest to the authorities
    plausible. Thirdly the judge made a clear finding at paragraph 45 that
    that the appellant's ability to live with his wife's family meant that
    the authorities had no interest in him.




38. The appellant adduced a document from Sri Lanka titled "medical
    certificate" which states that he suffered an injury to his left
    shoulder and right hand and leg because of an assault. The appellant
    submits that the judge erred by failing to make reference to this
    document. I disagree. The Sri Lankan "medical certificate" was of
    little, if any, relevance because it does not indicate (or express a
    view on) the context in which the appellant was assaulted. There is
    nothing, for example, in the medical certificate which suggests the
    assault was the result of torture as opposed to a fight or street
    crime. In considering the appellant's injuries, the significant
    evidence was that of Dr Martin, who prepared a report in accordance
    with the Istanbul protocol. The judge has given careful consideration
    to Dr Martin's report and therefore I find unpersuasive the argument
    that there has been a failure to consider material evidence about the
    appellant's injuries.


Ground 3: Article 3 and article 8 ECHR and the appellant's medical
condition

39. There is a very high threshold to be met where it is argued that
    because of non-availability of medical treatment or a heightened risk
    of suicide removal from the UK would breach article 3 or article 8
    ECHR. That threshold is set out in N v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2005] UKHL 31 and is confirmed in the context of suicide in
    RA (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
    Civ 1210. The evidence of Dr Singh that the appellant suffers from PTSD
    and that there is a risk he would experience recurrent suicidal
    ideation if removed from the UK falls a long way short of the type of
    evidence that would be needed to establish that removal from the UK
    would breach article 3 or article 8 in a context where there is no risk
    from the authorities in the country of return.




40. The grounds argue that the judge failed to treat Dr Singh's evidence as
    independent. This argument is not tenable because the evidence of Dr
    Singh taken at its highest does not come even close to the threshold in
    N and RA.


41. The submission that the judge failed to consider the lack of treatment
    in the appellant's home area is unpersuasive because the judge
    explicitly addressed this, finding that there was no evidence that the
    appellant could not obtain fluoxetine, which is the medication he
    currently takes, or that he could not in any event relocate to Jaffna
    where treatment would be available. It is notable that, according to
    the appellant's own account, when he returned to Sri Lanka in 2007 he
    relocated to a different part of the country (where he had his first
    marriage) and there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to
    support a contention that he could not relocate again.


42. The appellant argues that the judge failed to consider that he might be
    ostracised by his wife's family. However, given the nature and extent
    of his mental health problems as described by Dr Singh, there would be
    no infringement of article 3 (or article 8) on medical grounds even in
    the absence of any family or friends to provide assistance. As
    explained above, this is not a case that, based on the medical evidence
    that was before the judge, could, on any legitimate view, succeed under
    article 3 (or article 8) on medical grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not
contain a material error of law and stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated: 6 January 2019               |

