
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12516/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2021                  |On 01 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YKA
                       (Anonymity direction made made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkin instructed by Barnes Harrild Dyer
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant, who is recorded as having been  born  on  1  January
        2001, claimed to be a national of Syria. A judge of the  First-tier
        Tribunal  ('the  Judge')  concluded  at  [28]   of   the   decision
        promulgated on 24 September 2019:

        28.  Applying the lower standard of proof, I take into account  the
             Appellant's age when he first claimed asylum  and  as  at  the
             date of the hearing. Considering the points made above  namely
             being unable to infer answers are  correct  in  the  SAI,  the
             Appellant's  evidence  being  vague  and   inconsistent,   not
             providing  evidence  which  was  easily  obtainable  and   the
             language analysis report, in the round I  do  not  accept  the
             Appellant is Syrian.

     2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application by a judge of the Upper Tribunal on  13  July
        2020, the operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

        The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially
        erred in law in  failing  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  is
        admissible to Egypt and/or removal there; the Appellant claiming to
        be Syrian and without any documentation in  support  of  him  being
        Egyptian and without the Respondent being able to obtain any travel
        document on his behalf either.

        Whilst it may not be material to all grounds of appeal  before  the
        First-tier Tribunal, it is arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        simply failed to engage or make findings on an issue in the  appeal
        as to whether regardless of the Appellant's nationality,  he  would
        be removable to Egypt. It will be for the parties  to  address  the
        extent of such submission to the First-tier Tribunal as the  record
        of proceedings shows this only as a short point and  not  developed
        in the way it had been in the grounds of  appeal.  Materiality  may
        well be in issue as well given the factual findings by  the  First-
        tier Tribunal about the Appellant's attendance at the embassy.

     3. Before the Tribunal Mr Parkin accepted the grounds of appeal were a
        very narrow and technical point but asserted the Judge had erred in
        law in relation to the same.

Error of law


     4. The observation in the grant of permission  relating  to  the  very
        limited extent to which this point was raised before the First-tier
        Tribunal, as compared  to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  is  factually
        correct, although there is limited reference to  show  this  was  a
        matter relied upon by the appellant.

     5. The appellant's claim is recorded by the Judge at [22] where it  is
        written:

        22.  The Appellant's oral evidence was limited with regards to  his
             nationality. He has said  he  tried  to  go  to  the  Egyptian
             embassy to prove he  is  not  Egyptian.  I  do  not  have  any
             evidence of an application or even a witness statement of  the
             adult  who  should  have  accompanied  him  to   submit   this
             application, given his young age.  In  his  witness  statement
             dated 02 May 2019 he again asserts he is Syrian and claims his
             lack of knowledge is due to receiving no education  and  being
             kept at home by his mother. However as explained in  paragraph
             20, he was but I simply do not know if  they  are  correct  or
             not. Therefore, I find his evidence on this is inconsistent.

     6. Contrary to the submission made by Mr  Parkin,  the  Judge  made  a
        finding in relation to the appellant's claim  he  had  visited  the
        Egyptian embassy; namely that insufficient weight could  be  placed
        upon the claim the appellant had made. The specific finding by  the
        judge "I do not have any evidence of an application" is  clearly  a
        finding within the range of those available to the  Judge  that  it
        was not made out that the appellant's claim was true. It is also an
        important aspect of this case that the appellant's claim, which was
        based upon a real risk if he was returned  to  Syria  as  a  Syrian
        national, was shown to be  totally  without  merit,  leading  to  a
        finding it was more likely, even to the lower  standard  applicable
        in an asylum appeal, that the appellant  is  Egyptian.   The  whole
        basis on which he had therefore  claimed  international  protection
        had been found to be a lie. Although Mr Parkin submitted  that  his
        specific instructions are that his client does not agree with  this
        finding, it has not been appealed.

     7. Mr Parkin places reliance  upon  an  argument  that  the  appellant
        "probably falls within a category of individuals described as being
        impossible to remove for legal or practical reasons".

     8. Mr  Parkin  in  his  grounds  of  18  June  2020  relies  upon  two
        authorities being Neshanthan (cancellation or  revocation  of  ILR)
        [2017] UKUT 00077 (IAC and Sapkota [2011] EWCA Civ 1320.

     9. As noted by the headnote of Upper Tribunal in Patel  (consideration
        of Sapkota - unfairness) [2011] UKUT 00484 (IAC), the  decision  in
        Sapkota [2011] EWCA Civ 1320 is based  on  a  public  law  duty  to
        exercise s.47 powers where fairness requires it, having  regard  to
        the factors  considered  in  Mirza  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  159  and  TE
        (Eritrea) [2009] EWCA Civ 174. It does not amount to an  inflexible
        rule that the power must always be exercised.

    10. Before the Upper Tribunal and subsequent appeal  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal a new point had been taken by  the  appellants,  namely  the
        Secretary of State's failure to make a removal decision at the same
        time as, or shortly after, the decision to refuse leave  to  remain
        was unlawful. That argument, which failed before the Upper Tribunal
        and the Court of Appeal  became  the  principal  issue  before  the
        Supreme Court in Patel [2013] UKSC 72. At [27] of that judgment  it
        is written "......The powers  to  issue  removal  directions  under
        section 10 of the 1999 Act and section 47 of the 2006 Act (like the
        power to issue notices under section 120 of the 2002 Act) are  just
        that - powers. Their statutory purpose is as part  of  the  armoury
        available  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  enforcement  of
        immigration control. Any extra protection provided to an  appellant
        is  incidental.  Neither  section  can  be  read  as  imposing   an
        obligation to make a direction in any particular case,  still  less
        as providing any link between failure to do so and the validity  of
        a previous immigration decision. As Burnton LJ said in the Court of
        Appeal [2013] 1 WLR 63, para 73:  "This  language  is  clearly  and
        unequivocally the language of  discretion,  not  duty,  and  it  is
        simply not open to the court to interpret it as  imposing  a  duty.
        For the court to  do  so  is  to  amend  the  legislation,  not  to
        interpret it.".

    11. There was no duty upon the Secretary of State to  issue  a  removal
        direction and, indeed,  none  have  been  issued  in  this  appeal.
        Indeed, the guidance to caseworkers' states:

        You can only set removal directions (RDs) if the following criteria
        are met:

        . no outstanding casework barriers

        . detainee is fit to fly

        . authority to conduct  a  family  separation  is  obtained,  where
        necessary - refer to

        the guidance on family separations for further information

        . appropriate level of authorisation for removal is obtained

        . valid travel document (or valid travel document agreement) held -
        as an

        exception if the detainee is to be removed on a charter flight, RDs
        may be set

        while  the  emergency  travel  document  (ETD)  is  still   pending
        agreement.

    12. The respondent was therefore unable to set removal directions or to
        undertake the necessary checks and procedures to facilitate removal
        whilst the appeal process was ongoing. The criticism raised  by  Mr
        Parkin of the failure of the Judge to consider that  the  Secretary
        of State has had no more success in  obtaining  documentation  than
        the appellant or showing that the Egyptian authorities  are  likely
        to accept the appellant is of Egyptian nationality misses the point
        that at that stage of the proceedings there was no obligation  upon
        the Secretary of State to do so; any  difficulties  in  the  return
        process not being relevant to the protection  appeal  in  which  no
        evidence of a real risk if returned to Egypt had been made out.

    13. Mr Parkin's submission that this is also a human rights appeal  and
        that leaving the appellant in limbo may  create  a  situation  that
        will be contrary to his article 8  rights  is  noted,  but  such  a
        submission is  clearly  premature  at  this  stage.  There  was  no
        obligation upon the Secretary of State to issue removal  directions
        and to have ascertained whether the appellant will be  admitted  to
        Egypt until there was a clear finding by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        that his claim to be a national of Syria and a person entitled to a
        grant of international protection on that basis was either accepted
        or rejected.

    14. As soon as it is practically  possible  to  do  so,  to  secure  an
        Emergency Travel Document (ETD), the case worker will  1)  Complete
        the ETD  form,  and  2)  Email  completed  form  to  the  Sheffield
        documentation team. If the requisite documents are obtained details
        of a removal window a notice of removal can be served.

    15. In relation to Neshanthan, the scope of that hearing is clearly set
        out at [3-5] of that decision in the following terms:

        3.   This case raises two issues. The first issue  is  whether  the
        judge materially erred in  law  in  deciding  that  an  immigration
        officer has power to cancel a  person's  ILR  when  the  individual
        arrives at a port of entry  after  an  absence  abroad.  The  judge
        decided that the respondent had power to cancel the appellant's ILR
        following his arrival in the United Kingdom on  23  September  2014
        after a short absence abroad. The appellant contends that only  the
        Secretary of State has power to cancel ILR.

        4.   If the first issue is decided in the appellant's favour,  this
        would be determinative of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal. The
        judge's decision would be set  aside  and  the  appellant's  appeal
        against the respondent's decision allowed on the  ground  that  the
        decision was not in accordance with the  law,  a  ground  that  was
        available to him at the time he lodged his  appeal  (on  2  October
        2014) and which he did raise in his grounds of appeal. There  would
        be no need to consider the second issue.

        5.   The second issue is whether permission to appeal to the  Upper
        Tribunal should be granted on the appellant's renewed  application,
        made at the hearing before me,  for  permission  to  challenge  the
        judge's finding that the appellant had  fraudulently  obtained  the
        English language test certificate which he had used in the previous
        application  of  25  May  2012.  If  the  renewed  application  for
        permission is granted, then whether the judge materially  erred  in
        law in reaching his finding that  the  appellant  had  fraudulently
        obtained his  English  language  test  certificate.  UTJ  Blum  had
        refused permission on this ground.

    16. In relation to the first issue the Tribunal found:

        71.  To summarise my conclusions on the first issue:

         i)  Article 13 of the 2000 Order applies to  holders  of  ILR  who
        travel to a country or territory outside the common travel area  so
        that their ILR does not lapse but continues  if  Article  13(2)-(4)
        are satisfied.

         ii) If the leave of  such  an  individual  continues  pursuant  to
        Article 13(2)-(4) of the 2000 Order,  an  immigration  officer  has
        power to cancel their ILR upon their arrival in the United Kingdom.

         iii)     The grounds upon which such leave may  be  cancelled  are
        set out at para 321A of the Rules.

         iv) Section 76 of the 2002 Act is an  alternative  and  additional
        power, available to the Secretary of State,  to  revoke  indefinite
        leave to enter or ILR in the circumstances described at s.76(1)-(3)
        of the 2002 Act.

    17. At [104] of the decision, in  respect  of  the  second  issue,  the
        Tribunal wrote "I therefore  reject  the  renewed  application  for
        permission. Even if I have power to reconsider UTJ  Blum's  refusal
        of permission on paras d-f of the written grounds, paras d-f of the
        written grounds and paras 3-6 of the skeleton argument  are  wholly
        unarguable".

    18. Neither  authority  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  supports  the
        proposition that in a case in which there was insufficient evidence
        before the Judge to establish that the appellant  fell  within  the
        category of a person it was  impossible  to  remove  for  legal  or
        practical reasons on the facts, the First-tier Tribunal  materially
        erred in law by not so finding.

    19. It may be the case that if an individual has  been  shown  to  fall
        within this category on the basis of cogent evidence of attempts to
        remove having failed for whatever reason, and the  consequences  of
        their situation of being in legal limbo resulting in  circumstances
        sufficient to amount to a breach  of  that  article  8  rights,  an
        individual may be entitled to remain in the UK on  that  basis.  It
        has not been shown on the facts before the First-tier Tribunal that
        this is such a case.

    20. It was not disputed before the First-tier Tribunal that the  burden
        of substantiating the claim is upon the appellant. I  find  on  the
        basis of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, considered in the
        round, and in light of the failure of the  appellant  to  discharge
        the burden of proof upon him to establish that what  he  claims  in
        relation to  his  alleged  approach  to  the  Egyptian  Embassy  or
        inability to be readmitted to Egypt is made out, that the Judge has
        made no arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss
        the appeal.



Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.

    22. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 16 February 2021

