
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12838/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 12th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                KRISTINE [G]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


         1. The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to
            appeal the decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  who
            allowed Ms [G]'s appeal against the refusal of her human rights
            appeal on Article 8 grounds. He dismissed  her  appeal  against
            the refusal of her international protection claim.


         2. Permission was granted on the grounds that it was arguable  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge had  given  inadequate  reasons,  had
            failed to afford adequate weight to the public interest and had
            made a flawed assessment of Ms [G]'s credibility.

         3. Ms [G] did not appear before  the  Tribunal.  She  had  earlier
            notified the Tribunal that her former solicitors were no longer
            instructed, and correspondence should be addressed  to  her  at
            her home address. Ms [G] was sent a Notice of Hearing  for  8th
            April 2019. For medical reasons, of which Ms [G]  notified  the
            Tribunal, that hearing was adjourned. A notice of  hearing  for
            today was sent to her at her last notified address. She did not
            attend the hearing and provided no explanation why she did  not
            attend. No-one attended on her behalf. The  Notice  of  Hearing
            has not been returned to the Tribunal undelivered.

         4. I am satisfied she has been properly served  with  the  hearing
            date, and, in the absence of an adequate  explanation  for  her
            non-appearance, I am satisfied the hearing can proceed  in  her
            absence.

         5. The First-tier Tribunal judge  set  out  Ms  [G]'s  immigration
            history which, briefly, is as follows:


             a. She left Armenia, the country of which she is  a  national,
                on 6th January 2015 using papers she had been given  by  an
                agent and travelled to Greece.


             b. She  remained  in  Greece  until  25th  February  when  she
                arrived, by air, in the UK travelling on  false  documents.
                She claimed asylum after questioning about the passport.


             c. Whilst in Greece she had been living with a Greek  national
                since November 2016; he is also in the UK.



         6. Ms [G]'s asylum, Article 3 and  humanitarian  protection  claim
            was found by the First-tier Tribunal judge  to  be  lacking  in
            credibility and was dismissed. There has  been  no  application
            for permission to appeal those findings.


         7. The First-tier Tribunal judge made the following findings  with
            regard to her family life/Article 8 claim:


            66. In relation to the Appellant's family life, I am  satisfied
                to the lower standard set out in Kala  that  the  appellant
                has been in a long-term relationship  cohabiting  with  her
                common-law husband since November 2016, they having met the
                month before.


            67. I am satisfied  that  they  live  together  effectively  as
                husband and wife and they have genuine plans to  marry  but
                for these proceedings.


            68.  I  have  therefore  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  the
                Appellant is enjoying a significant family and private life
                with her common-law husband who is  exercising  freedom  of
                movement rights under  the  EEA  (Immigration)  Regulations
                2006 [sic].


            69. I find that the United Kingdom would be placed in breach of
                its international obligations under Article 8 of  the  ECHR
                and although it is not before me, under the EEA regulations
                in any event.



            Error of law


         8. The First-tier Tribunal judge has given no reasons for  finding
            that the decision to refuse Ms [G]'s  Article  8  human  rights
            claim  was  disproportionate.  He  has  applied  the  incorrect
            standard of proof. The appeal was an appeal against a  decision
            to refuse a human rights claim, it was not an appeal against  a
            decision made under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
            Regulations 2016.


         9. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  has  failed  to  undertake  the
            necessary balancing exercise  required  in  order  to  reach  a
            finding  on  whether  a  decision   is   disproportionate.   In
            particular the judge has failed  to  consider  the  Immigration
            Rules and ss117A -D  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
            2002.

        10. The First-tier Tribunal judge fails to  address  whether  there
            are any obstacles to Ms [G] continuing her  family  life  other
            than in the  UK  or  whether  and  to  what  extent  there  are
            obstacles to her and her Greek husband living elsewhere.

        11. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  law  in
            reaching his decision such that the decision is set aside to be
            remade.

            Remaking the decision.

        12. The First-tier Tribunal judge was able to make a  finding  that
            the couple were living together; such finding  stands.  I  have
            considered and taken into account the bundle of evidence  filed
            by Ms [G] before the First-tier Tribunal.  No  application  has
            been made to file further evidence.


        13. On the basis of the evidence before me there is no substance in
            her claim to remain in the UK on the basis  of  her  Article  8
            human rights claim. She does not speak English, has been in the
            UK for a relatively short period of time,  her  status  at  the
            time of the application was precarious, no  reasons  have  been
            given why the relationship could not continue in Greece,  where
            they had lived prior to coming to the UK. There was no evidence
            before me that there were special circumstances or  that  there
            would be particular hardship for either party if she were to be
            removed from the UK. There was no significant evidence that she
            could not return to Armenia, given that her  asylum  claim  has
            failed, and no significant evidence that  it  would  be  unduly
            harsh for her partner to travel there with her  or  that  there
            would be significant obstacles to  his  relocation  there.  She
            gave no evidence why she had not claimed asylum in  Greece  and
            the credibility of her evidence is called into question by  her
            failure to claim in a country where  she  had  lived  for  many
            months without difficulty.

        14.  Although  she  has  established  family  life,  it   is   well
            established that individuals cannot simply choose which country
            they wish to live in, absent other reasons. The public interest
            does not lie in permitting Ms [G] to remain in  the  UK  -  she
            does not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
            there   are   no   identified   compelling   or   compassionate
            circumstances such as would merit an alternative finding.

        Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in so far as  the  appeal  against
    the decision to refuse her human rights (Article 8) claim is concerned.

    I set aside the decision on article  8;  the  decision  dismissing  her
    asylum, Article 3 and humanitarian protection claims remains.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing the  appeal  by  Ms
    [G] against the decision of the SSHD refusing her article 8 claim.




                                    Date 6th June 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
