
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12860/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                             |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     z a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Kesar and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  Appellant's  appeal
    following my error of law decision promulgated on 5 June 2018  (annexed
    below).

 2. In summary, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal erred in a  number
    of respects.  The judge reached findings that were  not  based  on  the
    evidence before him and failed to deal adequately with relevant  expert
    evidence.  The decision  was  therefore  set  aside.   In  so  doing  I
    expressly preserved a number of credibility findings favourable to  the
    Appellant.  These include:

           i. that the Appellant had been coerced into  a  forced  marriage
              whilst in France in 2011;

          ii. that she escaped from that situation;

         iii. as a result,  threats  had  been  made  against  her,  albeit
              indirectly, because her family was angry that she had  failed
              to conform with their wishes;

          iv. that if the Appellant returned to Mauritius her parents would
              in due course be able to locate her there  wherever  she  may
              reside.

 3. In terms of the relevant issues for the resumed  hearing,  I  indicated
    that the core matter was whether or not the Mauritian authorities could
    provide sufficient protection to the Appellant in relation to a risk of
    harm to her by her family and/or being  forced  into  another  marriage
    against her will (although the second risk has not in fact featured  in
    the resumed hearing).  In addition, the question of whether or not  the
    Appellant falls within a particular social group for  the  purposes  of
    the Refugee Convention remained a live issue.




The evidence now before me

 4.  I now have the following items of evidence before me:

                i.  the  Respondent's  bundle  under  cover  sheet  dated  7
                   December 2016;

               ii. the Appellant's consolidated bundle indexed and paginated
                   1-206 (now marked AB);

              iii. an addendum report by Dr Laura Jeffery of the  University
                   of Edinburgh dated 29 August 2018;

               iv. the United States State Department Human Rights Report on
                   Mauritius 2017;

                v. the report from  the  United  Nations  Committee  on  the
                   Elimination  of  Discrimination  Against  Women  (CEDAW),
                   dated 20 June 2018.

 5. In addition to the evidential materials, I also  have  a  copy  of  the
    Appellant's original skeleton argument from the First-tier hearing,  an
    extract from the Upper Tribunal decision in TK (Tamils  -  LP  updated)
    Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 (paragraphs 66-68) and the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Atkinson [2004] EWCA Civ 846.

 6. The Appellant attended the hearing but in  the  circumstances  was  not
    called to give oral evidence.  Ms Foot expressed  the  view  that  such
    evidence was not necessary and Mr Jarvis indicated that  he  would  not
    have had any questions for her in any event.  Dr Jeffery also  attended
    the hearing and she did give oral evidence, a full  note  of  which  is
    contained in the Record of Proceedings.  I summarise it here.

 7. In examination-in-chief she formally relied upon the  contents  of  her
    three expert reports dated 18 September 2015, 9 February  2016  and  29
    August 2018.  She was then asked additional questions by Ms  Foot.   Dr
    Jeffery explained that Muslim women in Mauritius constituted a minority
    of a multi-ethnic society.  The police in that country were  dominating
    by Hindu men.  The past actions of the Appellant's parents  provided  a
    clear indication as to what their intentions had been and would  be  in
    the future as regards marriage.

 8. With reference to paragraph 3.1 of her latest report Dr Jeffery told me
    that domestic violence could occur even where a victim was  not  living
    together with the perpetrators.  She was then  referred  to  the  CEDAW
    report.  Dr Jeffery accepted that the Mauritian government was aware of
    the issues of domestic violence against women but suggested that  there
    was very slow progress in respect of relevant changes.  There was,  she
    told me, a contrast between legislative measures and the  situation  on
    the ground: enforcement measures were not to the same as  the  aims  of
    the government as expressed through policy and laws.

 9. Dr Jeffery's view was that the package of measures which may  exist  in
    respect of victims  of  domestic  violence  were  based  upon  existing
    households.  In other words, they were for the  benefit  of  women  who
    were already living in a  family  unit  and  had  experienced  domestic
    violence within that unit.  This was why the shelters  referred  to  in
    the CEDAW report provided for temporary accommodation  only,  the  idea
    being that with support the victim could go back into the  family  home
    once it had become a safer environment.

10. Dr Jeffery explained that the Appellant's case was different from  this
    scenario as she would not be going  back  into  any  family  unit,  and
    indeed had to avoid if at all possible.  If the Appellant  were  found,
    Dr Jeffery indicated that this would effectively be too  late  for  the
    Appellant.  With reference to paragraph 47 of the CEDAW report and  the
    remit of the shelters named therein,  Dr  Jeffery  drew  a  distinction
    between the responsive assistance provided by  these  organisations  on
    the one hand and the type of protective  measures  that  the  Appellant
    would require.

11. Dr Jeffery was then cross-examined at length by  Mr  Jarvis.   She  was
    asked to comment on a number of matters arising from the  CEDAW  report
    and her own most recent report.  Dr Jeffery accepted that  CEDAW  would
    comment negatively on problems in a reporting state if  appropriate  to
    do so.  She acknowledged that when preparing her latest report she  had
    not been aware  of  the  2018  CEDAW  report  because  her  preparatory
    research predated the CEDAW  report's  publication.   She  acknowledged
    that she  did  not  have  any  particular  knowledge  of  two  shelters
    mentioned at paragraph 47 of the CEDAW report and she acknowledged that
    CEDAW was not complaining of a lack of  shelters  for  the  victims  of
    domestic violence in their current report.  Dr Jeffery  reiterated  her
    opinion that the shelters being referred to in the CEDAW  report  would
    not provide preventative protection  to  somebody  in  the  Appellant's
    situation.

12. She described two different scenarios: a situation  in  which  somebody
    already living in a  family  unit  experienced  specific  instances  of
    domestic violence, something that she would describe as an acute  case.
    In contrast the Appellant was somebody who was outside of a family unit
    and would continue to be so on return and thereafter.   This  was  what
    she described as a chronic situation.  The shelters would deal with the
    former  but  not  the  latter.   Dr  Jeffery  explained   that   on   a
    societal/cultural basis the intentions of the Mauritian authorities  in
    a generalised sense would be to  try  and  keep  families  together  to
    support and  re-education.   This  fitted  in  with  her  view  of  the
    temporary nature of accommodation provided by shelters, the idea  being
    that the victim would be reintegrated into the family unit once  again.
    There was no evidence in the CEDAW  report  to  show  how  a  cycle  of
    domestic violence could be broken.  Dr Jeffery stated  that  there  was
    very little evidence in  the  CEDAW  report  in  respect  of  what  was
    actually done by the authorities  or  the  organisations  in  terms  of
    alleviating domestic violence problems.

13. With reference to paragraph 4.3 of her own  latest  report  Dr  Jeffery
    stated that the 2005 source was as far as she knows the  last  research
    on domestic violence in Mauritius.  It was suggested by Mr Jarvis  that
    the Appellant, having  gone  through  the  appellate  process  in  this
    country, would be  much  better  informed  about  her  rights  and  the
    possibilities  of  support  upon  return  to  Mauritius.   Dr   Jeffery
    responded by saying that even  people  living  in  Mauritius  would  be
    exposed to problems and would themselves be very informed. Even if  the
    Appellant did have more knowledge as a result  of  what  she  has  gone
    through in this country she would still be located by  her  family  and
    there was still a risk to her safety.   Dr  Jeffery  accepted  that  in
    theory the Appellant could go straight to the police  upon  return  and
    ask for help.  However she doubted whether the police would be able  to
    provide effective assistance.

14. There was no re-examination.




Submissions for the Respondent

15. In respect of the existence of a Convention reason, Mr Jarvis submitted
    that the evidence did not disclose  the  Appellant's  membership  of  a
    particular social  group  in  Mauritius.   There  was  no  evidence  of
    systematic discrimination and such like.

16. On the core issue  of  state  protection,  Mr  Jarvis  referred  me  to
    Atkinson, in particular paragraphs 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and  39.   He
    suggested that these passages contained an accurate summary of the  law
    in relation to sufficiency of protection.

17. In terms of the evidence Mr Jarvis placed significant emphasis upon the
    CEDAW report.  It showed,  submitted  Mr  Jarvis,  a  very  progressive
    picture of the authorities having taken steps to  address  problems  in
    that country.  Effective measures had been taken in respect of law  and
    practice  and  in  relation  to  the  training  and  education  of  the
    population and those in positions of authority.  CEDAW were critical of
    a reporting state where appropriate, but it was notable  that  no  such
    criticisms were made against the  Mauritian  authorities  in  the  2018
    Report.  CEDAW, a body  with  particular  expertise  on  the  issue  of
    violence against women,  were  indicating  in  their  report  that  the
    Mauritian authorities did have  in  place  actual  measures  to  combat
    violence whether by addressing its causes or dealing with perpetrators.
     There was clearly a  willingness  and  ability  on  the  part  of  the
    authorities to offer sufficient protection.

18. I was referred to paragraphs 37, 38 and 43 of the  report.   Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that protective provisions  were  not  restricted  simply  to
    those living under the same roof as an abuser.  CEDAW had not made  any
    criticism of the Mauritian authorities in  respect  of  an  absence  of
    provision for domestic violence victims who were living outside of  the
    family home.

19. With respect to paragraph 47 there was a lack of specific evidence from
    Dr Jeffery in respect of what at least two of  the  shelters  mentioned
    there actually did for victims.  Mr Jarvis took issue with Dr Jeffery's
    description of the acute/chronic distinction.  If  CEDAW  thought  that
    the efforts of the Mauritian governments to help  victims  of  domestic
    violence were inadequate they would have said so in their report.

20. With reference to the extract from TK, Mr Jarvis submitted that some of
    Dr Jeffery's opinions were not backed up by  any  evidential  base  and
    this went to reduce the weight which I should attach to  these  aspects
    of her evidence.  I was referred to the second table in paragraph 49 of
    the  CEDAW  report  as  regards  the  prosecution  and  punishment   of
    perpetrators of domestic violence.   Mr  Jarvis  suggested  that  these
    figures clearly showed  the  Mauritian  authorities  were  making  real
    efforts and that these were having concrete results.

21. I was referred then to paragraphs 62, 65, 118 and 132-134 of the  CEDAW
    report.  Going back to Dr Jeffery's evidence, Mr Jarvis suggested  that
    the Appellant could indeed engage with the police on return,  that  the
    police force was functioning and able to provide protection,  and  that
    there was no evidence to show that the police would decline to assist a
    Muslim woman.

22. In respect of the latest United  States  State  Department  report,  Mr
    Jarvis suggested that I should prefer the  CEDAW  report  as  that  was
    focused on the situation of women and domestic violence and that  CEDAW
    was an expert source.  The US State Department Report was by its nature
    much more  generalised.   Finally,  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant could apply for funds under the  Voluntary  Assisted  Returns
    package and could potentially be given up to �1,500.  This  would  help
    her in respect of her re-establishment in the Mauritius.




Submissions for the Appellant

23. Ms Foot submitted that the evidence did not show that there would be  a
    sufficiency of  protection  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's case.  The CEDAW report was focused on victims of  domestic
    violence whereas the Appellant's case was different and  more  unusual.
    The Appellant was a victim of a forced marriage and  was  not  somebody
    who had been or would again be living  within  a  family  unit.   Legal
    provisions and potential protective measures relating to people  living
    under the same  roof  as  an  abuser  would  there  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant.  I was asked also  to  give  careful  consideration  to  the
    difference between theoretical  protective  measures  and  those  of  a
    practical nature.  I was also asked to  consider  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence contained in her witness statement with reference to pages  97
    and 109-110 of the Appellant's bundle.  Her case was to be seen in  the
    context of her coming from a Muslim family and having  disregarded  and
    acted against her parents' wishes in respect of the forced marriage.

24. In addition paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules  was  relevant  (Mr
    Jarvis accepted that the fact that the forced marriage had occurred  in
    France and not Mauritius did not preclude this event being relevant  as
    an indicator of future risk).  In respect of the forced marriage  issue
    I was referred  to  page  142  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.   Ms  Foot
    emphasised that the CEDAW report was  not  concerned  with  victims  of
    forced marriages.  The shelters and the various models described in the
    CEDAW Report did not cover the Appellant's circumstances.

25. There could be no question that the Appellant would enter into any form
    of negotiations with her family in order to be  reintegrated  into  the
    unit and the Appellant would require longer term  protection  from  the
    risk from her family.  In respect of protection  from  the  police,  Ms
    Foot emphasised  the  evidence  on  corruption  in  Mauritius.   I  was
    referred to pages 142-145 of the Appellant's bundle  (previous  reports
    from Dr Jeffery).  In respect of the CEDAW report, the matters set  out
    in paragraphs 43 and  44  simply  did  not  apply  to  the  Appellant's
    situation.  The United States Department  Report  was  relevant  as  it
    showed  an  ongoing  pattern  of  problems,  particularly  relating  to
    enforcement measures.

26. Finally, Ms Foot  suggested  that  the  Appellant  did  fall  within  a
    particular social group namely "Muslim women from  Mauritius  who  were
    victims of forced marriage".  The evidence indicated negative attitudes
    towards that particular class of persons.  Ms Foot did  make  it  clear
    that she was not pursuing this point particularly strongly,  noting  as
    she did that even if  no  reason  existed  the  Appellant  could  still
    benefit from protection under Article 3 ECHR or humanitarian protection
    under the Qualification Directive.




My Findings of Fact

27. I can set out the relevant findings  of  fact  in  this  appeal  fairly
    briefly in light of what was preserved from the First-tier Tribunal and
    the way in which the case has been argued  before  me  at  the  resumed
    hearing.  I find as follows.

28. The Appellant comes from a Muslim family.  In 2011 in  France  she  was
    forced into a  marriage  with  a  man.   She  managed  to  escape  that
    situation and flee back to the United  Kingdom.   Whilst  she  was  not
    thereafter directly threatened by her family or the "husband", indirect
    threats were issued against her through a friend of hers,  Ms  G.   The
    nature and contents of those threats were clear: the Appellant's family
    sought to do her actual harm if they were so able.  Applying the  lower
    standard of proof, the effect of paragraph 339K of the Rules,  and  the
    absence of any evidence whatsoever indicating a change of  attitude  on
    the particular of the family, I find that the malign intent towards the
    Appellant persists to date, and that this would be re-invigorated  were
    her presence in Mauritius to become known.

29. I find that if the Appellant were to return to Mauritius and attempt to
    lead anything approaching a normal or reasonable existence, her  family
    would in fact locate her wherever she might choose to  reside  in  that
    country.  This follows from the First-tier Tribunal's preserved finding
    and the unchallenged view of Dr Jeffery at paragraph 5.2 of her  latest
    report.

30. I find that the Appellant is healthy and fairly well educated.




Conclusions

31. I start with the issue of the Convention reason. I  conclude  that  the
    Appellant does not fall within a particular social group, whether  that
    is described as, "women and/or Muslim women in Mauritius" (paragraph  8
    of Ms Foot's skeleton argument) or "Muslim  women  from  Mauritius  who
    were victims of forced marriage" (as per the oral submissions).  In  my
    view the evidence before me  fails  to  disclose  an  institutionalised
    pattern of discrimination against  women  and/or  Muslim  women  and/or
    female victims of forced marriage. There are clearly  problems  in  the
    country relating to effectiveness and some societal attitudes, but  the
    overall picture does not fulfil the well-known legal definitions.

32. In light of my conclusion, above, the Appellant it is  not  a  refugee.
    That is not of course the end of her protection claim.

33. I conclude that, subject to what I say below  on  the  issue  of  state
    protection, the Appellant would be at real risk of serious harm at  the
    hands of her family were she to return to Mauritius.  I  say  this  for
    the following reasons.

34. First, the threats to harm her in the past  were  genuine  and  I  have
    found that there is nothing  to  suggest  that  the  family's  ill-will
    towards the Appellant has reduced by any material extent.

35. Second, the forced marriage in 2011 constituted, in  my  view,  serious
    harm (it had not been suggested by the Respondent that this act  should
    be considered as anything other than that).  In my view paragraph  339K
    of the Rules does have an application in this  case  and  represents  a
    good indicator of future risk.

36. Third, the risk of harm to the Appellant on  return  would  consist  of
    actual physical violence against her by  the  family  or  alternatively
    coercion into another forced marriage.  Either of  these  possibilities
    would be sufficient for her to succeed in her appeal,  subject  to  the
    issue of protection.

37. Fourth there is no question of internal relocation in this case,  given
    my finding that the Appellant's family members could find her  wherever
    she may go in Mauritius.

38. I turn then to the core issue of state protection, the absence of which
    must be proved by the Appellant.  By way of legal direction,  I  regard
    the passages in Atkinson cited earlier as representing a  comprehensive
    summary of the relevant legal landscape on this issue.  In particular I
    direct myself to what is set out in paragraphs 15, 18, 19,  20,  21  of
    the Court of Appeal's judgment.  Essentially, the test is  not  one  of
    absolute protection against any and all risks. Rather, it is a question
    of whether the Mauritian authorities are  willing  and  able  to  offer
    reasonable provision of protection in the particular  circumstances  of
    the Appellant's case.

39. Mr Jarvis' arguments against the Appellant's  case  have  been  focused
    almost entirely on the contents of the CEDAW report. I have given  very
    careful consideration to all of the  passages  to  which  I  have  been
    referred. There is a degree of merit in a number of the points made  on
    behalf of the Respondent, and this has not been an easy case to decide.
    However, taking the evidence as a whole,  I  have  concluded  that  the
    CEDAW report does not provide  a  sufficiently  strong  answer  to  the
    Appellant's claim that there would not  be  sufficient  protection  for
    her. This core conclusion is based upon the following matters.

40. First, it is course correct that CEDAW is a specialised committee,  and
    I bear in mind its expertise. Sections of the report do deal with  more
    general  legislative  and  institutional  frameworks  relating  to  the
    position of women in Mauritius. I would accept  that  the  country  has
    seen progress in terms of its overall approach to  gender-based  issues
    insofar as the  overarching  legal  and  institutional  frameworks  are
    concerned.

41.  Second, almost all of the particular passages relied  upon  relate  to
    the issue of domestic violence against women.  There  is  reference  to
    measures taken to try and educate the  population  (presumably  men  in
    particular) about this issue. Insofar as the Respondent relies on  this
    to show existence of  sufficient  protection,  I  fail  to  see  it  as
    application on the facts of this case. Here, the Appellant's family are
    not interested in being "educated" or engaging with  mediation  of  any
    sort. The Appellant has, in their eyes, wronged them, and this has,  on
    my findings, given rise to the real risk of retribution against her.

42. I accept that training  has  been  given  to  the  police  relating  to
    domestic violence issues. This would be relevant to the recognition  of
    and ability to potentially deal with victims. On a general level,  this
    point assists the Respondent's case.

43. I note the existence of a Protection from  Domestic  Violence  Act.  As
    stated in paragraph 43, this legislation appears to  afford  protection
    "to the spouse of, as well as other persons living under the same  roof
    as, a violent person." Although  there  was  some  discussion  in  oral
    argument about the "living under the same roof" point, a more important
    factor in this case is that the risk to the  Appellant,  at  least  the
    main risk, emanates from her family rather than the  "husband".  In  my
    view, this is an example of the mismatch between the evidence relied on
    by Mr Jarvis and the reality of the Appellant's  actual  (and  unusual)
    case. Notwithstanding any inferences that Mr Jarvis might be asking  me
    to draw, I do not consider that the particular Act  would  represent  a
    legislative  protective  measure  for  this  particular  Appellant   in
    relation to the risk from her family.

44. In respect of paragraph 47  of  the  report,  I  recognise  that  three
    shelters are referred to, and I would  accept  that  they  do  in  fact
    exist. It is  clear  that  these  shelters  are  in  place  to  provide
    "temporary  accommodation  to  women  who  are  victims   of   domestic
    violence". In respect of this evidence, there is real force in  what  I
    find to be the strong expert evidence from Dr Jeffery. She drew what  I
    consider to be and appropriate distinction between on the  one  hand  a
    victim of domestic violence who had been living in the household of her
    spouse and was seeking emergency shelter (the "acute" scenario), and on
    the other a person such who was already out of the marital/family  home
    without any prospect of returning there (the "chronic"  scenario).  The
    Appellant falls into the latter category. It is difficult  to  see  how
    the Appellant would be able to obtain meaningful  assistance/protection
    through the shelters:  it  is  not  a  question  of  seeking  temporary
    accommodation, as she would never  be  returning  to  the  family  home
    (indeed, would  be  seeking  to  avoid  it  at  all  costs)  but  would
    nonetheless still be at risk of being located elsewhere  in  Mauritius;
    in addition, she would not be a person  seeking  to  leave  an  abusive
    household, as she is a person who had already fled.

45. I  appreciate  Mr  Jarvis'  request  that  I  draw  an  inference  that
    assistance from the shelters would be available  to  a  person  in  the
    Appellant's situation. Taking the evidence as a whole, and applying the
    lower standard of proof, I am not prepared to draw such an inference.

46. Third, Mr Jarvis has made the point that if the  Mauritian  authorities
    deserved to  be  criticised  about  their  treatment  of  women  and/or
    inadequate provision for the victims of domestic violence, CEDAW  would
    have noted such criticisms in its report. In principle, I  would  agree
    with that submission. The difficulty here is that the Appellant's  case
    is unusual in nature: in one sense she may  be  considered  to  be  the
    victim of domestic violence; on the other hand, the better  description
    in my view is that she is a victim of a forced marriage and a person at
    risk from her own family by virtue of her "temerity" (in fact, bravery)
    in escaping that situation. The CEDAW report does not, at least as  far
    as I can see, specifically deal with victims of  forced  marriages.  It
    may be that this is not considered  to  be  a  significant  problem  in
    Mauritius (although other country information suggests that the numbers
    involved are  by  no  means  negligible),  or  it  may  mean  that  the
    government itself did not report to the committee  on  this  particular
    issue. In any event, I do not regard the absence of specific  criticism
    in relation to people in the Appellant's  particular  circumstances  as
    being a significant matter in this appeal.

47. Paragraph 49 of the CEDAW report provides  statistics  in  relation  to
    prosecutions and  sentences  of  those  accused  of  domestic  violence
    between the years 2011 and 2017. There is clearly an  increase  in  the
    numbers of persons prosecuted during this period,  and  more  of  those
    prosecuted have been sent to prison. This is  an  indicator  of  better
    reactive measures taken in respect of domestic violence in general.  It
    is a factor that weighs against the present assertion of the absence of
    sufficient protection.

48. The other specific passages in the CEDAW the report  relied  on  by  Mr
    Jarvis  a  rather  more  generalised  in  nature,  and  relate  to  the
    participation  of  women  in  government,  employment  prospects,   and
    suchlike. They do not have a significant bearing on the core  issue  of
    state protection.

49. I turn now to the evidence from Dr Jeffery. In general terms  I  attach
    very significant weight to her expert evidence, both in respect of  the
    reports and her testimony. I appreciate  Mr  Jarvis'  the  point  about
    certain unsourced opinions expressed and the extent to which the weight
    attributable to these should be reduced.  However,  with  respect,  any
    such opinions have been very few in number, and Dr Jeffery has not only
    provided three written reports, but has stepped forward  to  give  oral
    evidence on two occasions now. Her evidence has been thoroughly tested.
    In my view, the thrust of what she has said on a  consistent  basis  as
    deserving  of  significant  weight.  This  applies  not  only  to   her
    commentary on the  CEDAW  report  and  in  particular  the  distinction
    between the domestic violence issues dealt  with  therein  on  the  one
    hand, and the Appellant's actual circumstances on the other,  but  also
    in respect of the willingness and/or ability of  the  police  to  offer
    appropriate protection to the  Appellant.  Having  considered  relevant
    country information, Dr Jeffery has been of the view that the Mauritian
    police are not always effective and that it  was  "unlikely"  that  the
    Appellant would receive assistance or  protection  from  the  state  on
    return (first report at 145 Appellant's bundle). In the latest  report,
    she reiterates her oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    effect that there is a concern about rising rates of domestic  violence
    and ineffectiveness on the part of the police.

50. In respect of the oral evidence before me,  Dr  Jeffery  was  perfectly
    candid in acknowledging that she had not seen the latest  CEDAW  report
    when compiling her own latest  report.  I  accept  her  explanation  as
    entirely credible. Notwithstanding that omission, in my view she  dealt
    with the points arising from the CEDAW report in a straightforward  and
    cogent manner. As I have mentioned previously, her description  of  the
    acute/chronic scenarios is an appropriate one in the  context  of  this
    appeal. She fairly acknowledged that the Appellant could in  theory  go
    directly to the police on return and ask for help, although it was  her
    view that effective protection from this quarter would be  unlikely  in
    all the circumstances.

51. I conclude that the latest United States State  Department  report  for
    2017  provides  material  support  for  the  Appellant's  case  on  the
    protection issue. There is evidence of  corruption.  It  is  said  that
    domestic violence remains a "major problem". It is said that, "domestic
    violence activists stated that police did not effectively  enforce  the
    law... Police were not always effective in protecting domestic violence
    survivors to whom the authorities had granted court protection orders."
    I acknowledge that the report does not all point in one direction only,
    and that there are certain legislative and  institutional  measures  in
    place for the benefit  of  women  and  victims  of  domestic  violence.
    However, the overall picture is consistent with  what  Dr  Jeffery  has
    said and is relevant to the reality of the situation on the ground,  as
    it were. I place material weight on the report.  It  is  not  really  a
    question of preferring this report to that of CEDAW. As I have set  out
    earlier, the latter it is in some relevant respects not on  point  with
    the circumstances of the Appellant's case. However, it does  have  some
    bearing on the relevant issues. Ultimately, as a matter of weighing all
    of the evidence up, as I have endeavoured to do.

52. Mr Jarvis' point about the Appellant having access to  funds  from  the
    United Kingdom authorities is not of any real relevance to the question
    of state protection: this would go more to her ability to  re-establish
    herself in Mauritius.

53. Finally, although there has been no  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's
    family hold any position of  particular  influence  in  Mauritius,  the
    expert evidence and country information does not indicate that this  is
    of significance one way or the other. I view this point in the  context
    of the country being geographically small and that the  Appellant  will
    be found upon her return.

54. Bringing all of the above together, and applying the lower standard  of
    proof and  applicable  legal  direction  on  the  issue  of  sufficient
    protection in the context of the Appellant's particular  (and  somewhat
    unusual) circumstances,  I  conclude  that  there  would  not  be  such
    protection in this case.

55. I have reached this conclusion  by  a  fairly  narrow  margin,  but  in
    essence it comes down the following core factors: the actual nature  of
    the Appellant's case (she is not, strictly speaking, a  "usual"  victim
    of domestic violence, but the subject of  a  forced  marriage  who  has
    escaped  this  plight);  my  analysis  of  the  CEDAW  report  and  the
    submissions from Mr Jarvis  based  thereon;  my  views  on  the  expert
    evidence from Dr Jeffery; the content of the other country information,
    specifically the United States State Department report.

56. I do not consider that that domestic  violence  measures  in  place  in
    Mauritius (namely  the  Act  and  the  shelters)  represent  meaningful
    factors in the context of the Appellant's  specific  circumstances.  In
    respect of  the  police,  whilst  this  is  probably  the  Respondent's
    strongest point, the ability of the Appellant's family to find her, the
    type of  threat  posed  (actual  physical  harm),  the  application  of
    paragraph 339K of the Rules, the evidence  on  police  ineffectiveness,
    and the fact that any attempted protection would only ever be  reactive
    in nature, all combine to tip the scales  in  the  Appellant's  favour.
    This is so notwithstanding the clear  legal  position  that  protection
    need not be guaranteed, absolute, or complete.  In  this  case,  whilst
    there may be a willingness on the particular of  the  authorities,  the
    ability will not, I conclude, be sufficient to meet the risk.

57. The Appellant is therefore a person whose removal  to  Mauritius  would
    expose her to treatment contrary to Article 3 and serious harm.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by determining that the Respondent's refusal  of  her
protection claim would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  in  relation
to persons eligible to a grant  of  humanitarian  protection  and  would  be
unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  with  specific
reference to Article 3 ECHR.

The Appellant's appeal is therefore allowed.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 25 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 25 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                               [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12860/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     Z A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors (Dover)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cooper (the judge), promulgated on 12 May 2017, in which
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  That appeal had
    been against the Respondent's decision of 23 November 2015, refusing
    the Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

 2. This appeal has a somewhat convoluted procedural history and I will
    summarise it here for the sake of completeness.  Initially the
    Respondent had certified the refusal of the protection and human rights
    claims as being clearly unfounded.  The certificate was challenged by
    way of judicial review and it was eventually quashed.  Absent the
    certification, the original decision of 23 November 2015 remained in
    place.  The judge dismissed the subsequent appeal on 12 May 2017.  Both
    the First-tier and Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.

 3. A Cart judicial review claim was pursued by the Appellant, and by a
    decision dated 17 November 2017 Mrs Justice Laing DBE ordered that the
    application for permission to apply for judicial review be listed for
    oral hearing.  In so doing she made a number of observations as to the
    merits of the Appellant's challenge.  It appears as though permission
    was eventually granted, although I do not have any papers relating to
    this particular aspect of proceedings.  However, by a consent order
    sealed on 14 February 2018 the parties consented to the Upper
    Tribunal's refusal to grant permission being quashed.  Following this
    Vice President Ockelton granted permission by a decision dated 13 March
    2018.  In this way the appeal came before me.

 4. The Appellant's protection claim was essentially as follows.  She is a
    national of Mauritius and had claimed to have been subjected to a
    forced marriage by her parents.  She managed to escape from this
    situation and had resided in the United Kingdom for a number of years
    whilst her parents lived in her home country.  Threats against the
    Appellant were allegedly made through a friend.  The Appellant stated a
    fear of reprisals from her family and/or being forced into another
    marriage against her will.



The judge's decision

 5. The judge accepted that the Appellant had been subjected to a forced
    marriage in 2011.  The judge accepted that the Appellant had a
    subjective fear of returning to Mauritius.  He found that the Appellant
    would be able to go to Mauritius and live away from her parents.
    However, he also accepted that, given the size of Mauritius, her family
    would be able to locate her elsewhere on the island.

 6. The judge goes on to, at least implicitly, accept that three threats
    against the Appellant were made via a friend, Ms G, in 2011, 2014 and
    2015.  The judge notes the absence of any direct threats made to the
    Appellant and took the view that her parents would have been able to
    make some form of direct contact with her because of the "close-knit
    nature of Mauritian society", which led him to believe that the parents
    would have had friends or family living in the United Kingdom.  The
    absence of any direct threats was indicative of a reduced level of risk
    to the Appellant from her parents.

 7. At paragraphs 58, 60, 63 and 64, the judge deals with the important
    issue of state protection.  He concludes that sufficient state
    protection would be available to the Appellant.  It is worth setting
    out paragraph 58 in full:

"I acknowledge that Dr Jeffrey's report refers to a degree of corruption
existing in the Mauritian police, and a reluctance on their part to become
involved in cases of alleged domestic violence.  However I accept the
Respondent's contention that that does not amount to a systemic problem,
such that the Appellant could not expect to receive protection to the
Horvath standard, should she need it."

Dr Jeffrey was an unchallenged expert on the situation in Mauritius and had
provided two written reports and attended the hearing to give oral
evidence.

 8. Having dealt with the protection issue, the judge concluded that there
    was little evidence of honour killings in Mauritius and that in all
    circumstances the Appellant's claims failed.



The grounds of appeal

 9. The grounds of challenge appear in a number of locations in the papers
    before me.  This is partly because of the judicial review claim.  In
    any event, there is no substantive difference between them and they can
    be summarised as follows.  First, the judge failed to deal with the
    issue of whether the Appellant would be at risk of a further forced
    marriage in Mauritius.  Second, that the judge was wrong to have relied
    so heavily on the absence of direct violence and threats made against
    the Appellant when assessing the issue of risk on return.  Third, the
    judge's conclusion that the Appellant's parents would have had contacts
    in this country had no evidential base and failed to have regard to
    other relevant evidence from the Appellant.  Fourth, the judge applied
    too narrow an interpretation of the concept of domestic violence.
    Fifth, the judge failed to deal adequately with the expert evidence,
    particularly in relation to the protection issue.  Sixth, the judge was
    wrong to have concluded that the Appellant was not a member of a
    particular social group in Mauritius, namely women or Muslim women in
    that country.

10. I have already mentioned that permission was ultimately granted by the
    Vice President following the grant of permission in the judicial review
    claim and the consent order.



The hearing before me

11. At the hearing itself Mr Melvin provided Ms Foot and myself with a Rule
    24 response.  I took time to read this document before proceeding.  The
    Appellant's solicitors have helpfully provided a consolidated bundle
    containing all relevant materials relating to the procedural history of
    this appeal, as set out previously.

12. Ms Foot relied on her grounds.  On the important issue of protection
    she submitted that there was a real tension between what the judge said
    in paragraph 58 and what he said in paragraph 63.  It was unnecessary
    for the Appellant to show that her parents had any influence with the
    authorities.  The expert evidence, both written and oral, had simply
    not been adequately dealt with regard to paragraphs 58, 61 and 63.

13. Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that the judge
    had adequately dealt with the protection issue.  Even if there was
    error in respect of paragraph 56 this was immaterial to the outcome of
    the case as a whole.



Decision on error of law

14. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I find that the judge has
    materially erred in law.  I conclude that I should set his decision
    aside with reference to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

15. In my view, the judge has erred in respect of his assessment of the
    extent of any risk to the Appellant following her escape from the
    forced marriage.  It is clear enough to me that he accepted the
    evidence from Ms G about what I would describe as, serious threats
    against the Appellant made through this individual (see paragraphs 52 -
    54).  The problem arises from paragraph 56.  Although the judge
    acknowledges the Appellant's evidence that she had changed both her
    address and telephone number, he then speculated that her parents would
    somehow have been able to make contact with her through friends or
    family living in the United Kingdom.  There was no evidential basis for
    this finding.  The fact that Mauritian society might in general terms
    be regarded as "close-knit" did not provide a sufficient platform even
    for an inference to be drawn that the parents would have had friends
    and/or family in the United Kingdom such that contact with the
    Appellant could easily have been made.  There was certainly not a
    sufficient evidential basis on which to reject the Appellant's evidence
    that no such contact had been made as being not reasonably likely.  The
    judge's error here is relevant because he clearly takes the absence of
    direct threats made in this country as being indicative to the level of
    any risk posed to the Appellant on return to Mauritius (see paragraph
    57).

16. I turn to the core issue of state protection.  I have looked at Dr
    Jeffrey's evidence for myself.  This came in the form of a detailed
    report, an addendum, and fairly lengthy oral evidence (which is
    helpfully set out in a typed Record of Proceedings, which I have read
    with care).  The clear thrust of the expert evidence was that a person
    in the Appellant's situation, that being a Muslim woman who had been
    subjected to a forced marriage and returning to Mauritius alone, would
    be "unlikely" to receive sufficient state protection.  Reference is
    made to corruption within the police, a failure to tackle domestic
    violence, deficiencies in the legal framework, inadequacy of police
    responses and the situation of Muslims, a minority group in Mauritius.

17. It is of note that the expert evidence went unchallenged before the
    judge, and indeed I see from the Record of Proceedings that the
    Presenting Officer in their submissions simply relied on the reasons
    for refusal letter and had nothing more to add.  In light of this there
    was, on any view, a significant body of expert evidence weighing in the
    Appellant's favour on this important issue.

18. In my view, the judge has not adequately dealt with this evidence, nor
    has he provided adequate reasons as to why, if this evidence had been
    properly considered, he was rejecting it and preferring the
    "Respondent's contention" as stated in paragraph 58.  As far as I can
    see, the Respondent's case was contained wholly within the reasons for
    refusal letter.  Having examined the relevant section of that letter,
    it is clear that no reference is made to Dr Jeffrey's first report
    (which was before the Respondent and is cited earlier on in the letter
    but not the subject of actual consideration at that point).  The
    information relied upon by the Respondent was in fact specifically
    criticised by Dr Jeffrey.

19. In addition, much of what is said in the relevant section is really
    rather generalised in nature.  Faced with the evidence before him, it
    was incumbent upon the judge to deal with the totality of the expert
    evidence in sufficient detail so as to disclose why he was either
    placing no weight upon it or was otherwise preferring what the
    Respondent said to the unchallenged expert evidence.  This had not
    occurred and it constitutes a material error of law.  This error
    essentially infects what is said by the judge in relation to the
    protection issue at paragraph 60, 63 and 64.

20. I also conclude that the judge did fail to deal with the contention
    stated by the Appellant that she might be forced into another marriage
    by her parents.



Disposal

21. Having discussed the issue of disposal with both representatives, I
    have decided that this appeal should be retained in the Upper Tribunal
    and adjourned for a resumed hearing before me in due course.  A number
    of positive credibility findings had been made by the judge.  There is
    no reason to disturb these.  Specifically, it has been found that the
    Appellant is a victim of a forced marriage, that she escaped from this,
    that indirect threats against her had been made over the course of
    time, and that if she returned to Mauritius her parents would in due
    course be able to locate her.

22. At the resumed hearing the core issues will be that of risk and state
    protection.  I appreciate that the judge found that there was no
    particular social group in this case but it seems sensible to me to
    revisit this matter as well although it is not of crucial importance,
    given that the Appellant could potentially succeed on
    humanitarian/Article 3 grounds in any event.

23. In order to progress this matter and ensure a full and fair resumed
    hearing I set out relevant directions below.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing before me in due course.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 29 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Directions to the Parties

The essential live issues in this appeal are that of risk on return, both
in relation to retribution by the Appellant's family and/or a second forced
marriage, and whether there would be sufficient state protection against
any such risk;

The issue of whether the Appellant is a member of a particular social group
in Mauritius is also live;

The Upper Tribunal would be greatly assisted by live evidence from Dr
Jeffrey.  She has provided such evidence to the First-tier Tribunal in the
past, but it would be important to hear from her again at the resumed
hearing in view of the remaining live issues and the importance of this
case;

Any further documentary evidence relevant to the live issues (including
supplementary statements and/or reports) must be served on the other party
and filed with the Upper Tribunal no later than 21 working days before the
resumed hearing;

If it is not possible for Dr Jeffrey to attend the resumed hearing and give
oral evidence, the Appellant's solicitors must inform the Respondent and
Upper Tribunal of this as soon as practicable.  If this is the case an
application can be made for a direction from the Upper Tribunal that the
typed Record of Proceedings from the First-tier hearing be sent out to the
parties in order that Dr Jeffrey's oral evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal can be considered.
