
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/12534/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 November 2017                         |On 21 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                   MS A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 30 April 1983.  The
    respondent refused her  claim  for  asylum  and  for  leave  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 18  July  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier
    Tribunal found that the appellant would not be at risk  of  persecution
    on return to India and dismissed the appeal on paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights grounds.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and on 15 August  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan refused to grant permission to appeal.   The  appellant  renewed
    her application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  on
    12 September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted permission  to
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. I do not need to set out in any detail the grounds of  appeal  save  to
    indicate that the principal ground of appeal was  that  the  judge  had
    failed  to  consider  credibility  of  the  appellant  taking  all  the
    evidence, including  the  medical  evidence,  in  the  round  prior  to
    reaching findings on the appellant's credibility.  The reason I do  not
    need to set out the grounds in any  detail  is  that  the  Home  Office
    accepts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider all the evidence prior to  reaching  credibility  findings  in
    line with the case of  Mibanga  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

Discussion

 6. Having considered the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in detail  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law.  The  error  is  a
    material error of law as clearly  the  judge  has  reached  credibility
    findings prior to consideration of the expert medical report.  This was
    not simply a question that the  Tribunal  has  set  out  issues  in  an
    ordered fashion.  The findings are set out by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at paragraph 53 where the judge found that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine refugee in need of protection.  It is only at paragraph 56 that
    the judge appears to consider the medical evidence and at paragraph  59
    states:

         "... For the reasons which I have comprehensively  set  out  within
         the body of this decision, I  reject  the  appellant's  account  as
         credible or plausible.  The question of fact-finding is  within  my
         domain as is credibility.  Whilst I do not criticise Dr Thomas, the
         information relayed to her as a matter of fact,  I  have  rejected.
         Therefore, the findings made by the doctor are based on information
         which has no foundation."

    This makes it clear that the judge  had  concluded  her  assessment  of
    credibility prior to considering the evidence of the judge.

 7. There was no appeal against the findings  of  the  judge  on  paragraph
    276ADE or Article 8 outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Wilford
    accepted that no appeal had been  made  against  the  findings  on  the
    Immigration Rules or Article 8.  Therefore this part of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision stands and all those findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  . I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

 9. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.



10. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard de-
    novo on the asylum claim at the First-tier Tribunal  at Harmondsworth
    hearing centre before any judge  other than Judge Kainth  pursuant to
    section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed
    at the next available date. The findings in relation to Article 8 and
    paragraph 276ADE stand.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 21 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw









