
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/12332/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 January 2021               |On 17 March 2021                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                JB (albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patyna  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Kilby  Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision which was sent to the parties on 11 August  2021,  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal.   I  need
    not summarise the basis upon which I decided that  the  FtT  had  erred
    materially in law since that decision  is  appended  to  this  one.   I
    retained the appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  for  the  decision  on  the
    appeal to be remade on the basis of the findings of fact  made  by  the
    FtT.


 2. The appellant's account of the reasons that she claimed asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom was accepted in its entirety and 'without hesitation' by
    the FtT.  I take the following summary of that account largely from the
    first appendix to Ms Patyna's excellent skeleton argument and from  the
    respondent's decision of 3 December 2019.

Background

 3. The appellant was born on 4 May 1995 and is therefore 26 years old. She
    comes from a rural, conservative background in  Western  Albania.   Her
    home village is Terbuf, near Lushnje.  Her father is a shopkeeper,  her
    mother a housewife.  She lived away from  home  whilst  she  studied  a
    degree in law in Tirana between 2012 and 2015.  In the last year of her
    studies, she met a man who gave his name as Albert at a coffee shop  in
    Tirana.   A  relationship  developed.   In  the  summer  of  2015,  the
    appellant learned that her family planned for her to marry another man.
     The marriage was due to take place at the New Year.

 4. The appellant left Tirana to live with her parents again in July  2015.
    She would return regularly to Tirana for exams, however, and would meet
    Albert when she was there.  Albert also came to  Terbuf  to  meet  her,
    although they would meet  at  her  grandparents'  house  without  their
    knowledge.

 5. In December 2015, the appellant and Albert decided to  run  away.   Her
    family had  found  out  about  the  relationship  and  her  father  had
    threatened her on the telephone, stating that she had brought dishonour
    to the family and that he would kill her.   The  appellant  and  Albert
    went to Turin where they stayed initially with Albert's  friends.   The
    appellant and Albert subsequently moved out and rented a flat together.
     One day, one of Albert's friends (Ilir) told the appellant that Albert
    had been arrested for selling drugs and that money was required  for  a
    defence lawyer.  The appellant was told by Ilir's girlfriend Elena that
    she needed to raise 20,000 euros for Albert and that she should do this
    by working as a prostitute.  The appellant had no means to pay the rent
    on the flat and she had no option but to move  back  to  Ilir's  house.
    She was locked in a room and starved until she  agreed  to  work  as  a
    prostitute.  She was also raped by Ilir at this time.

 6. The appellant worked as a prostitute in  Turin.   She  was  kept  at  a
    different location, under guard, for around a month.  She  saw  between
    four and ten clients a night.  She tried to escape on one occasion  but
    she was apprehended and beaten.  After a month, the appellant was  told
    that Albert had been released from custody and that he had  managed  to
    get to the UK.  She spoke to Albert, who promised her that  her  ordeal
    was over and that he had travelled onwards to the UK.  She thought  she
    was to be reunited with him.  The appellant was  then  taken  to  Spain
    using false  identity  documents  arranged  by  her  traffickers.   She
    attempted to travel from Spain to Italy using these documents but their
    falsity was detected twice and she was arrested.  Ilir was waiting  for
    her when she was released on each occasion.  After 15  days  in  Spain,
    she travelled back to Italy with Ilir, where they stayed for  a  couple
    of days before travelling by boat to Albania, where she had  been  told
    she would meet Albert.  On arrival at  a  house  on  the  outskirts  of
    Tirana, however, she discovered that she was to work  as  a  prostitute
    again.   She was there for a month, working in a similar  situation  to
    that which she had encountered in Turin.  Her door was  locked.   Meals
    and clients were provided to her by the guards, who also  took  payment
    for the services  she  provided.   She  was  sometimes  tipped  by  the
    customers and she would try to hide the money in the room  so  that  it
    would not be discovered.  There were other girls working  in  the  same
    house.  The appellant was told at this time by Ilir that she  had  been
    duped by Albert, who had returned to Albania after their stay in  Turin
    and had been complicit in her trafficking.   Ilir  told  the  appellant
    that they were planning to sell her to somebody from England.


 7. The appellant escaped from the house on  the  outskirts  of  Tirana  by
    drinking shampoo and falling unwell.  Her captors took her to hospital,
    whereupon she sought the assistance of a nurse.  The  nurse  distracted
    the guard who had taken the appellant to  hospital  and  she  made  her
    escape, using what money she had managed to save from her tips  to  pay
    for transport.  The only place she could think  of  going  was  to  the
    family home.  Her father was working in the shop and  her  brother  was
    also out when she arrived.  She  explained  her  circumstances  to  her
    mother, who said that she could not help because the appellant's father
    was so angry with her.  She contacted a childhood friend who  was  able
    to arrange an agent to bring her to the UK.  She paid  the  agent  with
    the remaining money she had saved from the tips.  She arrived in the UK
    on 9 April 2016 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter.


 8. The appellant believes that her traffickers are very  powerful  and  on
    good terms with policeman.  She believes that she would be at risk from
    her traffickers on return to Tirana and she is also frightened  of  her
    father.


 9. The appellant gave this  account  to  the  respondent  in  a  screening
    interview on 4 May 2016 and a substantive interview on  21  June  2016.
    Her solicitors made further  representations  on  24  June  2016.   The
    appellant was referred to the  Competent  Authority  via  the  National
    Referral Mechanism.  On  13  December  2018,  the  Competent  Authority
    decided on conclusive grounds  that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  The respondent declined to grant any leave as a result of
    that conclusion and, on 9 April 2019, she refused the appellant's claim
    for asylum and certified that it was clearly unfounded under section 94
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act.   An  application  for
    judicial review was issued on the appellant's behalf, as  a  result  of
    which  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider   her   decision.    The
    reconsidered decision, which was issued on  3  December  2019,  is  the
    subject of this appeal.


10. The respondent accepted that the  appellant  had  been  held  with  the
    intention of forcing her into prostitution: [30].   She  also  accepted
    that she was at risk from her family: [36].  For detailed  reasons  she
    gave at [40]-[57],  she  considered  that  the  appellant  could  avail
    herself of a sufficiency of protection on return to Albania.   And  for
    reasons she gave at [58]-[69], she concluded that the  appellant  could
    safely and reasonably relocate within Albania so as to avoid  any  risk
    in her home area.


11. In the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Pears proceeded on the basis that the
    appellant's account was entirely  true  but  dismissed  the  appeal  in
    reliance on the sufficiency of domestic protection and the availability
    of internal relocation.  I found these conclusions to  be  vitiated  by
    legal error for the reasons given in my first decision.


12. Since the proceedings in the FtT, the appellant has given  birth  to  a
    child.  She is no longer in a relationship with the father.  Mr  Jarvis
    was content to accept that the birth of the appellant's child was not a
    new matter for the purposes of s85 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002  insofar  as  this  was  relevant  to  the  claim  for
    international protection.  He made clear that this concession  did  not
    extend to any human rights claim which Ms Patyna chose  to  advance  in
    the alternative.


13. I heard no oral evidence from the appellant or any witnesses.  She  was
    (remotely) present throughout the hearing, however, and her English was
    good enough for me to explain to her at the end of the hearing that  my
    decision was reserved.

14. Having confirmed with the advocates that I should have two bundles from
    the applicant, they agreed that I should hear from Mr  Jarvis  for  the
    respondent first.

Submissions

15. Mr Jarvis adopted the lengthy refusal letter  and  indicated  that  the
    facts were not in dispute.  There  was,  as  he  put  it,  a  'concrete
    factual matrix' established by what had gone  before.   The  respondent
    was  sympathetic  to  the  appellant's  experiences  but  the  ultimate
    question was whether  she  was  a  person  deserving  of  international
    protection at the date of hearing.  He accepted that it was clear  from
    the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note entitled  Albania:
    Trafficking of women for sexual exploitation, version 9,  published  in
    June 2020, that the point had  not  come  where  the  respondent  could
    submit that TD & AD (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92  (IAC)  should
    no longer be followed but it was nevertheless clear that the  situation
    for victims  of  trafficking  ("VOT")  was  consistently  improving  in
    Albania.

16. Mr Jarvis submitted that the first question was whether  the  appellant
    could remain safe from her trafficker.  He acknowledged the appellant's
    opinion that her traffickers were well connected but he submitted  that
    this was unduly speculative.  There was no real evidence to  show  that
    the appellant's return would get back to the traffickers so  that  they
    would take action against the appellant, whether by way of  retribution
    of re-trafficking.

17. The second question, Mr Jarvis submitted, was what  would  happen  upon
    the appellant's return to a place of safety in Albania.   She  and  her
    child would be accommodated in a shelter at first,  and  there  was  an
    entire section in the CPIN dealing with the adequacy of these shelters.



18. Mr Jarvis invited me  to  consider  the  CPIN  as  a  whole,  since  it
    underpinned the respondent's stance, but he offered some references  by
    way of highlights.  There were a number  of  shelters,  who  offered  a
    confidential service.   There  had  been  significant  reforms  in  the
    judiciary.  There was a formal network of shelters  under  the  'NCATS'
    framework.  Mental health care was provided and it was clear that there
    was a significant package of support, including  monitoring  after  the
    individual had left the shelter.

19. Mr Jarvis acknowledged the importance  of  the  'post-shelter'  period,
    noting with reference to the CPIN that individuals received  assistance
    in  this  period  which  was  'graded'  to  their   particular   needs.
    Responding to my question, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  reality  in  a
    case such as the appellant's was that  she  would  seek  to  settle  in
    Tirana after living in  a  shelter  and  that  an  individual,  nuanced
    support plan would  be  provided  to  ensure  that  she  could  live  a
    relatively normal life by local standards.  The appellant might also be
    entitled to some resettlement support  from  the  UK  authorities  upon
    return, which would provide further assistance.


20. For the appellant, Ms Patyna relied on her skeleton  argument  and  she
    too made reference to the CPIN.   She  noted  that  the  shelters  were
    limited in number and  that  there  were  still  funding  issues.   The
    respondent continued to accept that the country guidance  in  TD  &  AD
    applied.  Even without an illegitimate child, the appellant fell within
    the category of those who would be at risk on return.  Her difficulties
    would be compounded - and significantly so -  by  the  presence  of  an
    illegitimate child.   The  circumstances  were  comparable,  Ms  Patyna
    submitted, to those of one of the appellants in TD &  AD  whose  appeal
    was allowed on the basis of her  vulnerability  in  the  'post-shelter'
    period.  It was necessary to bear paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in  mind.   The  appellant's  past  ill-treatment  was  certainly
    probative of what would befall her on return, but she was, if anything,
    all the more vulnerable now because she had been  'broken  in'  by  her
    traffickers.  The appellant had  never  worked  in  Albania.   She  had
    received no training in the UK.  She was plainly at risk of  being  re-
    trafficked. The respondent maintained in the CPIN  that  re-trafficking
    was decreasing but the research in the Fact-Finding Mission report  was
    not accurately summarised  in  the  CPIN.   Re-trafficking  remained  a
    reality, as it had been in TD & AD.  The critical difficulties were the
    appellant's lack of safety in Tirana and her inability  to  survive  in
    the post-shelter period, particularly as it  was  acknowledged  in  the
    CPIN that the benefits were insufficient to live on.


21. Mr Jarvis asked to respond on one point in Ms Patyna's submissions.   I
    permitted him to do so.  He took me back to the FFM and  the  CPIN  and
    maintained that the latter was an accurate reflection  of  the  former.
    In her further response, Ms  Patyna  maintained  her  submissions  that
    there was an inaccuracy.


22. I reserved my decision.

Analysis

23. In TD & AD (Trafficked Women) Albania CG  [2016]  UKUT  92  (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal preserved much of the guidance which had been given  six
    years previously in AM & BM (Trafficked Women) Albania CG  [2010]  UKUT
    80 (IAC).  The amended guidance it issued was summarised by  the  Upper
    Tribunal as follows:


    a) It is not possible to set out a typical profile of trafficked  women
       from Albania: trafficked women come from all areas  of  the  country
       and from varied social backgrounds.


    b) Much of Albanian society is governed by  a  strict  code  of  honour
       which  not  only  means  that  trafficked  women  would  have   very
       considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home  areas  on
       return but also will affect their ability  to  relocate  internally.
       Those  who  have  children   outside   marriage   are   particularly
       vulnerable. In extreme cases the close relatives of  the  trafficked
       woman may refuse to have the trafficked woman's  child  return  with
       her and could force her to abandon the child.

    c) Some women are  lured  to  leave  Albania  with  false  promises  of
       relationships or work. Others may seek out traffickers in  order  to
       facilitate their departure from Albania and their  establishment  in
       prostitution abroad. Although such women cannot be said to have left
       Albania against their will, where they have fallen under the control
       of traffickers for the purpose of exploitation there is likely to be
       considerable  violence  within  the  relationships  and  a  lack  of
       freedom: such women are victims of trafficking.

    d) In the past few years the Albanian government has  made  significant
       efforts to  improve  its  response  to  trafficking.  This  includes
       widening the scope of legislation, publishing the Standard Operating
       Procedures, implementing an effective National  Referral  Mechanism,
       appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking  Co-ordinator,  and   providing
       training to law enforcement officials. There is in general a Horvath-
       standard sufficiency of protection, but it will not be effective  in
       every case. When considering whether or not there is  a  sufficiency
       of  protection  for  a  victim   of   trafficking   her   particular
       circumstances must be considered.

    e) There is now in place a reception and  reintegration  programme  for
       victims of trafficking. Returning victims of trafficking are able to
       stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases' may  be  able  to
       stay there for up to 2  years.  During  this  initial  period  after
       return victims of trafficking are supported  and  protected.  Unless
       the individual has particular vulnerabilities such  as  physical  or
       mental health issues, this option cannot generally  be  said  to  be
       unreasonable; whether it is must be determined on  a  case  by  case
       basis.

    f) Once asked to leave the shelter a victim of trafficking can live  on
       her own. In doing so she will face significant challenges including,
       but not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,  financial  hardship  and
       uncertainty, a sense of physical insecurity and the subjective  fear
       of being found either by their families or former traffickers.  Some
       women will have the capacity to negotiate these  challenges  without
       undue hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
       characteristics, such as mental illness or  psychological  scarring,
       for  whom  living  alone  in  these  circumstances  would   not   be
       reasonable. Whether a particular appellant falls into that  category
       will call for a careful assessment of all the circumstances.

    g) Re-trafficking is  a  reality.  Whether  that  risk  exists  for  an
       individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that led to the
       initial trafficking, and on her  personal  circumstances,  including
       her background, age, and her willingness and ability  to  seek  help
       from the authorities. For a proportion of  victims  of  trafficking,
       their situations may mean that they are especially vulnerable to re-
       trafficking, or being forced into other exploitative situations.

    h) Trafficked women from Albania may well be members  of  a  particular
       social group on that account alone. Whether  they  are  at  risk  of
       persecution on account of such membership and whether they  will  be
       able to access sufficiency of protection from the  authorities  will
       depend upon their individual circumstances including but not limited
       to the following:


         1) The social status and economic standing of her family
         2) The level of education of  the  victim  of  trafficking  or  her
            family
         3) The victim of trafficking's state of  health,  particularly  her
            mental health
         4)  The presence of an illegitimate child
         5) The area of origin
         6) Age
         7) What support network will be available.

24. It is accepted at 2.3.7 of the June 2020 CPIN that there are  not  very
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to justify not taking  into
    account and following the decision in TD  &  AD.   That  was  also  the
    stance adopted by Mr Jarvis before me, although I was invited  by  both
    advocates to consider the CPIN in order to evaluate  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Albania through the lens of the most  up-to-date
    background material.  Whilst there is  additional  background  material
    before  me,  it  was  the  CPIN  upon  which  the   advocates   focused
    exclusively, and I  have  considered  the  report  carefully,  and  its
    entirety, given its central importance in this case.


25. As the oral submissions progressed, it became clear  that  there  is  a
    great deal of common ground  between  the  parties.   It  is  obviously
    accepted on all sides that the appellant's account has been accepted in
    its entirety.  That is the case regarding the account she presented  to
    the FtT but also as regards the account she  has  given  more  recently
    regarding the illegitimate birth of her  child  and  her  status  as  a
    single parent.  Mr Jarvis did not seek to challenge what she said about
    these matters in her most recent statement.

26. There is also a measure of agreement  between  the  parties  about  the
    appellant's circumstances upon return to Albania.  Ms  Patyna  did  not
    attempt to suggest that there was any chance of the  appellant  falling
    through the initial safety net provided by the Albanian government  for
    VOTs.  She was  correct  not  to  make  any  such  submission.   It  is
    appreciably clear from section  8.2  of  the  CPIN  that  the  National
    Referral Mechanism in Albania is  a  good  one,  and  that  a  thorough
    analysis will be undertaken of a returnee to decide whether  she  is  a
    VOT.  In circumstances in which it has been accepted by  the  Competent
    Authority in the UK that the appellant is a VOT, it seems inconceivable
    that the authorities in Albania would reach a different conclusion.

27. Nor did Ms Patyna attempt to suggest that the appellant  would  receive
    inadequate protection (in the fullest sense of that word) in the  short
    and medium term after she had been identified as a VOT.  The CPIN shows
    that the Albanian authorities identify three 'phases of assistance' for
    a VOT:  emergency  services;  rehabilitation  services;  and  long-term
    monitoring during social inclusion: 2.4.10 and 9.6.  During  the  first
    two phases, a VOT is able to stay  in  a  shelter  run  either  by  the
    government or by an NGO.  These shelters  'offer  people  a  protective
    place where they can be provided with support but  they  do  not  offer
    paradise or replace what they have lost': 9.4.4.

28. The progress in shelter  provision  which  was  charted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TD & AD has  seemingly  continued.   There  is  a  National
    Coalition  of   Ant-Trafficking   Shelters   ("NCATS")   within   which
    professional staff are independently observed to provide a good quality
    of care: 9.4.1.  Given the lack of  disagreement  between  the  parties
    about this 'phase of assistance' I do not propose to set out in extenso
    the services provided by the shelters.  It is clear that  they  provide
    good healthcare, physical and mental, and that there is assistance with
    legal problems.  There is also education, particularly of a  vocational
    nature, which is provided in an effort to ensure that trafficked  women
    are eventually able to make their own way.

29. Importantly in a case such  as  this,  the  shelters  also  provide  an
    appropriate level of protection against any  extant  risk  which  there
    might be to the individual VOT.   The  National  Reception  Centre  for
    Victims of Trafficking has a constant police presence and  is  used  to
    accommodate those who are in a particularly dangerous situation:  9.7.1
    and 9.12.3.  I note from 6.3.5 that the Vatra Centre in Vlora  is  said
    to be guarded around the clock.  Those considered to be at lesser  risk
    may be placed in one of the NGO shelters but even those shelters have a
    private security presence: 9.12.4.  There can be no doubt, in light  of
    this material, that the appellant and her child will be  provided  with
    adequate protection in the short to medium term on  return  to  Albania
    and that they will be able to live a relatively normal  life  by  local
    standards in a shelter.


30. The focus of the advocates submissions - as is so  often  the  case  in
    appeals such as this - was on the appellant's predicament after she  is
    asked to leave the shelter.  There was no  suggestion  on  Mr  Jarvis's
    part that the protection of the shelter would be  'open-ended'  and  it
    was accepted, as it was in TD & AD that there will come  a  point  when
    the appellant and her child are expected to make  their  own  way.   It
    seems likely - in light of 2.4.3 and 9.7.2  of  the  CPIN  -  that  the
    appellant will be able to stay in a shelter for a maximum of two years,
    although there is supposedly no time limit.  It was  not  suggested  by
    the Secretary of State that the appellant will be placed  into  witness
    protection at that point.  In light of the acknowledgement at 6.3.8  of
    the report  that  the  system  is  not  used  effectively,  it  is  not
    surprising that there was no such submission.

31. Mr Jarvis accepted that the appellant would need to  settle  in  Tirana
    when she left the shelter.  That was a proper  stance,  given  what  is
    said at section 10.8 of the report about the  difficulties  encountered
    by women living alone outside the capital.  Mr Jarvis  emphasised  that
    the  appellant  will  have  received  a  good  deal  of  rehabilitative
    treatment and support by the time she attempts to make her own  way  in
    Tirana.  He also asked me to attach considerable  significance  to  the
    individual  reintegration  plan  which  would  be  drawn  up  for   the
    appellant; the monitoring which would be put in place; and the  package
    of other support on  which  she  could  rely  during  this  period,  as
    described in section 10 of the CPIN.  The gravamen of the submission is
    that the appellant would not be required entirely to fend  for  herself
    and could count on the Albanian state to provide for her and her  child
    insofar as that support was required.

32. There is, however, an  anterior  question  which  must  necessarily  be
    confronted.  Ms Patyna's first submission, as summarised at 6(i) of her
    concise skeleton, is that the appellant would continue to  be  at  risk
    from her traffickers at the point that she emerges from the  protection
    of the shelters.  She invokes paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules,
    by which the fact that the appellant was subjected  to  persecution  in
    the past is probative of the risk to her  in  the  future.   Mr  Jarvis
    submitted  that  there  was  no  such  risk  and  that  it  was  merely
    speculative to assert otherwise.

33. I do not agree with the respondent's submissions  in  this  regard.   I
    have set out the appellant's account in some detail  because  parts  of
    that account shed significant light on  the  power  and  reach  of  the
    appellant's traffickers. This was evidently not a case of  a  'one  man
    band' trafficker who himself lured the appellant to  Italy  with  false
    promises.  Whilst the early parts of  the  narrative  might  give  that
    impression, the later parts show clearly that Albert and Ilir were part
    of something much larger and more sinister.  I note in particular their
    connections in Italy, Spain and Algeria and their ability to  move  the
    appellant from one country  to  another  with  ease.   The  appellant's
    account - accepted in full as it has been - also reveals that they  had
    a number of properties at their disposal, in  at  least  two  of  which
    there were multiple women who were working in the  sex  trade,  guarded
    around the clock by men who  were  responsible  for  feeding  them  and
    enforcing discipline when they broke the rules, as  the  appellant  did
    when she attempted to escape.  The appellant  was  also  provided  with
    false  documentation  as  and  when  required.   The  organisation   is
    reasonably likely to be of the kind described at 3.3 of the CPIN,  with
    links to organised crime.  I note that it  is  said  at  3.3.1  of  the
    report that such gangs are known to 'sell victims as  commodities'  and
    that this is exactly what the appellant was told was to be her fate.


34. Drawing on what has happened before,  as  paragraph  339K  requires,  I
    consider there to be three reasons why Albert's gang would  harbour  an
    extant animus towards the appellant.  Firstly, she  managed  to  escape
    and to highlight a weakness in their defences which could be  exploited
    by other women under their control and it  is  reasonably  likely  that
    they would wish to make an example of her for her  actions.   Secondly,
    the appellant's departure deprived them of a source of income,  whether
    from her ongoing work for them in the sex trade or from her  'sale'  to
    another  party  who  is  involved  in  this  appalling  trade.   It  is
    reasonably likely that they would wish to recoup the money lost in  one
    or both respects.  Thirdly, the appellant knew Albert for some time and
    is likely to be able to provide  the  police  in  Albania  with  useful
    information about him and his activities.  Albert, Ilir and  the  other
    members of the gang would  therefore  have  a  very  real  interest  in
    ensuring that such information was not shared with the police.

35. Mr Jarvis submits that  the  any  such  risk  would  be  negligible  or
    speculative in the post-shelter period but it is  necessary  to  recall
    further matters, both from the appellant's account and from the country
    guidance.  Firstly, it is accepted on  all  sides  that  the  appellant
    would have to attempt to make her  way  in  Tirana  after  leaving  the
    shelter.  Secondly,  it  was  on  the  outskirts  of  Tirana  that  the
    appellant was held by Albert's gang on return  from  Italy  and  Spain.
    Indeed, it was in Tirana that the appellant first met Albert.   He  and
    his gang clearly have connections in the capital.

36. The population of Tirana is just under half a million people: 12.2.3 of
    the CPIN refers.  In a UK context, it might be correct to suggest  that
    one could live fairly anonymously in a city of that size and  that  the
    prospects of being traced by a criminal gang with connections  in  that
    very city would be negligible.  The  context  in  Albania  is  entirely
    different, however, as is clear from  AM  &  BM.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    emphasised at [165] of that decision that Albania is a small country in
    which "there would be an attempt by those with whom  the  victims  came
    into contact, either officially, starting with  the  border  police  or
    when they attempted to find work  or  merely  acquaintances  whom  they
    would meet, to place them within their family context and to  endeavour
    to find mutual acquaintances."

37. Given the nature of Albanian culture as described in that paragraph  of
    AM & BM, and given the reach and power of Albert's  gang,  I  think  it
    likely (and not merely reasonably likely) that they would learn of  her
    attempt to forge her own way in Tirana after leaving  the  shelter  and
    that they would seek to do her harm, whether by way of  retribution  of
    re-trafficking.  Asked by me to respond explicitly to  this  suggestion
    in Ms Patyna's skeleton, Mr Jarvis's submission  was  simply  that  the
    risk was too speculative.  He  did  not  attempt  to  submit  that  the
    background evidence or the  country  guidance  established  that  there
    would be a sufficiency of protection for this particular  appellant  in
    the event that I found that particular risk to exist.  Despite what was
    said in TD & AD about the general sufficiency of  protection  which  is
    available to victims of trafficking in Albania, I find  this  to  be  a
    clear case in which it is unlikely that the additional  protection  she
    will require upon leaving the shelter would be  forthcoming.   Applying
    the approach in Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605; [2004] 1 WLR  1207,
    therefore I consider that the appellant will be at risk  after  leaving
    the shelter and that her appeal falls to be allowed on the  basis  that
    she will not be safe in Tirana at that point in time.


38. That primary conclusion renders it unnecessary to consider whether  the
    appellant will be able to  live  a  relatively  normal  life  by  local
    standards on relocation to Tirana, that being the question posed by  AH
    (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] 1 AC 678.  In  considering  whether  the
    appellant's life after leaving the shelter would meet that standard,  I
    bear in mind the  cogent  submissions  made  by  Mr  Jarvis  about  the
    tailored support which would  be  offered  to  the  appellant  and  the
    likelihood that she would, by that  stage,  have  received  significant
    assistance in the shelter.

39. Against that, however, I must weigh the  following.   Firstly,  despite
    the provision of various forms of financial assistance to VOTs  in  the
    post-shelter phase,  paragraph  10.3.6  of  the  CPIN  shows  that  the
    financial support is insufficient to meet their needs.  It is  reported
    in that paragraph, in fact, that VOTs  receive  approximately  �20  per
    month 'following lengthy bureaucratic  processes'.   Even  taking  into
    account the other  support  which  might  be  available,  as  described
    elsewhere in section 10 of the report in  particular,  the  reality  is
    that this is wholly inadequate to meet the basic needs of the appellant
    and her child.  That statement is hardly surprising when it is noted at
    12.3.1 that the average gross income per  capita  in  Albania  is  just
    under �10,000 per annum. I note from 10.3.5, in  any  event,  that  the
    stigma attaching to VOTs is such  that  they  are  often  reluctant  to
    collect these benefits lest they are  identified  as  such.   The  real
    question, therefore, is whether this particular appellant would be able
    to navigate for herself the challenge of surviving in Tirana, given her
    own background  and  the  rehabilitative  work  which  she  would  have
    completed during her time in the shelter.


40. In answering that question, I turn  to  the  seven  factors  which  are
    helpfully set out at the end of the judicial headnote in TD & AD.   The
    appellant's social and economic standing is modest, originating as  she
    does from a rural and  conservative  family  in  Western  Albania.   As
    already noted, her father is a shopkeeper and her mother  a  housewife.
    Her family is essentially irrelevant in considering whether she will be
    able to manage in Tirana, however, given that they have  been  accepted
    to have severed all links with her and issued threats against her.

41. The appellant's level  of  education  is  good,  although  it  is  also
    relevant to note (as did Ms Patyna) that she has no history  of  lawful
    employment, and certainly no background of employment in the  field  of
    her degree, which is in law.  In view of her lack  of  any  experience,
    let alone relevant experience, it is unlikely that she would be able to
    obtain work in that field. Given the  support  and  training  which  is
    given in the shelter, she might be  able  to  obtain  some  work  in  a
    different field.  I note the many references to vocational training  in
    sections 9 and 10 of the report.   The  rate  of  unemployment  in  the
    country remains high however (12.9.1 refers) and, despite  the  obvious
    effort and investment on the part of the Albanian authorities, what  is
    absent from the report is any quantitative indication of the number  of
    VOTs who have been able, to live independently after a  period  in  the
    shelter.  Instead, at 10.1.2, I see an acceptance  from  civil  society
    representatives that monitoring of VOTs who have left  the  shelter  is
    inadequate and, at 10.4.1, further information was provided to the Home
    Office Fact Finding Mission that it was difficult to ensure that  women
    could become independent 'especially when there are children involved'.


42. The presence of an illegitimate child and the appellant suffering  from
    mental health problems will  further  compound  her  difficulties  upon
    return.  That is as clear from the CPIN as it is from  TD  &  AD.   The
    optimistic tone struck by the Director of the NRCVHT (that prejudice is
    now 'a very manageable issue') does not chime  with  the  remainder  of
    section 10.7 or with the statement which I have  already  mentioned  at
    10.3.5, about VOTs being unwilling to  collect  benefits  for  fear  of
    being stigmatised as such.  On balance, I consider the situation to  be
    as it was when TD & AD was  decided  and  proceed  on  the  basis  that
    Albania remains a deeply patriarchal society in which the appellant  is
    likely to be stigmatised as a VOT and further stigmatised  due  to  the
    presence of an illegitimate child.  That stigma is likely to be less in
    Tirana than elsewhere but will still present a formidable  obstacle  to
    her relocation to Tirana in  the  critical  post-shelter  period.   The
    appellant's mental health problems are very much a  secondary  concern.
    To express myself in that way is not  to  downplay  for  a  moment  the
    ordeal which she has suffered.  It is simply to recognise, as Ms Patyna
    does in her skeleton, that the evidence currently goes no further  than
    establishing that the appellant suffers from  mental  health  problems,
    including anxiety, which have been considered serious enough for her to
    be prescribed medication and to be referred to an  appointment  with  a
    psychological therapist.


43. Considering the final factors in TD & AD, the  appellant  will  not  be
    assisted by her rural origins.  Although she has experience  of  living
    in the student village in Tirana whilst she undertook her  degree,  she
    has no experience of supporting  herself  there.   In  any  event,  the
    circumstances in which she lived as a student and those  in  which  she
    would return to Tirana are incomparable.  That is as a result of living
    with the stigma of being a  VOT,  having  an  illegitimate  child,  and
    trying to support herself by finding paid work amidst  the  stigma  she
    would experience.  The appellant's age (26) is not such as to place her
    in the most at risk group (between  18-25)  for  re-trafficking  but  I
    doubt whether the upper age limit represents a bright line after  which
    traffickers lose interest and, as Ms Patyna observed,  those  who  have
    been 'broken in' are often thought by traffickers to represent  a  more
    attractive target.  Then there is the question of the  support  network
    which would be available to  the  appellant.   I  have  considered  the
    support which would be available from the state and from NGOs  at  some
    length. Due to the problems  which  the  appellant  has  with  her  own
    family, she would receive no support from them.  And I have no evidence
    to support Mr Jarvis's submission that the appellant might receive some
    support from the UK by way of a resettlement grant, whether  under  the
    AAVR scheme or otherwise.


44. Ms Patyna submitted that the appellant's appeal was similar to that  of
    the second appellant in TD & AD and  that  it  should  be  allowed  for
    reasons similar to those given at [171]-[172] of  that  decision.   The
    circumstances are not precisely similar, and I note in particular  that
    the mental health problems of that appellant  were  significantly  more
    acute than the instant appellant's. Having  considered  the  background
    evidence, the factors  in  TD  &  AD  and  the  appellant's  particular
    circumstances in detail, however, I do come to the conclusion that this
    appellant would be unable to cope after leaving a shelter.  Despite the
    support which would be provided within the shelter and upon leaving it,
    the challenges which would  be  faced  by  this  young  woman  with  an
    illegitimate child are too significant.  In my judgment, she would  not
    be able to live a relatively normal life by Albanian standards and  her
    appeal  must  be  allowed  on  the  alternative  basis  that   internal
    relocation would be unduly harsh.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed on international protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               01 April 2021
