
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12387/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 May 2019                                 |On 13 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal
       against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Callow
       dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent, dated 17
       October 2018, refusing his protection claim.


    2. The appellant is a Kurdish Alevi citizen of Turkey.  He  arrived  in
       the UK on 21 August 2017 and claimed asylum the same day. He gave an
       account to the respondent of having been involved with the HDP since
       2015. He became a  member  in  July  2016.  He  used  to  distribute
       leaflets and encourage people to join protests. On 6  November  2016
       he was arrested during a protest and detained for two days.  He  was
       released due to lack of evidence. He was detained a second  time  on
       25 July 2017 as he left the HDP office in Istanbul. On this occasion
       he was threatened with death and accused of being a  member  of  the
       PKK. He was ordered to become an informer.  However,  the  appellant
       left Turkey.


    3. The  respondent  rejected  the  claim.  It  was  accepted  that  the
       appellant was a low-level  supporter  of  the  HDP  as  he  claimed.
       However, his account of being detained and  beaten  by  the  Turkish
       authorities was rejected despite  medical  evidence  being  produced
       confirming he had injuries.

    4. The appellant appealed on protection  grounds  and  his  appeal  was
       heard by Judge Callow on 22  November  2018  at  Taylor  House.  The
       judge's findings begin at paragraph 29 of his decision. He  reasoned
       that the core of the appellant's claim, whereby he agreed to  become
       an informer in the absence of any incriminating evidence against him
       and in circumstances where no charges had been  preferred,  did  not
       make sense. If the authorities believed he  supported  the  PKK,  he
       would not have been a person whom they would trust.

    5. The judge inferred the appellant was not  of  any  interest  to  the
       authorities. He noted  the  appellant's  account  of  his  political
       activities for the HDP was insubstantial and in circumstances  where
       his knowledge of the PKK was limited. He  considered  there  was  no
       suggestion that those activities were illegal  or  clandestine.  The
       demonstrations which the appellant participated in were  mass  group
       activities organised by others. The appellant, as a low-level member
       of the HDP, would hardly have been a useful  source  of  information
       for the authorities. He held no office in the party.

    6. The judge noted by way of background that the HDP is represented  in
       the Turkish parliament and therefore the appellant's  evidence  that
       it was an offence to be a member defied belief.

    7. The judge noted that the appellant's  scars  had  been  assessed  as
       consistent with his account of  ill-treatment.  However,  the  judge
       reasoned, had the appellant been tortured to the extent he  claimed,
       it could reasonably be expected that he would have  sustained  long-
       lasting injuries. In any  event,  these  injuries  could  have  been
       caused by means other than assault by the authorities.

    8. In conclusion, the judge accepted the appellant was a member of  the
       HDP but not that the events which the  appellant  says  led  him  to
       leave Turkey had been established. He concluded  the  appellant  had
       fabricated his claim.

    9. Four grounds  were  advanced  in  support  of  the  application  for
       permission to appeal against Judge Callow's decision and  permission
       to appeal has been granted to argue all of them.

   10. No rule 24 response has been filed by the respondent.

   11. I heard submissions from the representatives  as  to  whether  Judge
       Callow made an error of law in her decision.

   12.  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  submissions  broadly  followed  her  grounds
       seeking permission to appeal.

   13. Firstly, she argued the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons
       for some  of  his  findings.  In  particular,  she  highlighted  the
       statement in paragraph 33 of the decision  where  the  judge  stated
       that the appellant  had  been  generally  unreliable  as  a  witness
       without at that point providing any reasons. Ms Panagiotopoulou also
       highlighted paragraph 34 in which judge considered  the  appellant's
       injuries would have been more long-lasting. The  grounds  point  out
       that the medical report of  Dr  Hajioff  described  the  appellant's
       scars in detail and considered they were consistent with the account
       of the appellant's ill-treatment.

   14. Secondly, Ms Panagiotopoulou argued  the  judge's  approach  to  the
       background evidence was erroneous. The judge's conclusion that a low-
       level member of  the  HDP  would  not  have  attracted  the  adverse
       attention of the authorities was inconsistent  with  the  background
       evidence which showed that, despite the HDP being a legal party with
       67  seats  in  Parliament,  members   and   supporters   have   been
       disproportionately targeted by the authorities due to the  perceived
       link between the HDP and the PKK.  There  was  evidence  before  the
       judge showing that thousands of HDP militants  and  supporters  were
       currently in custody.

   15. Thirdly, Ms Panagiotopoulou argued the judge had  made  inconsistent
       findings. The judge had apparently accepted that the appellant was a
       member of the HDP, had  distributed  leaflets  and  participated  in
       demonstrations and that he had been arrested and  injured.  However,
       in paragraph 36, the judge concluded the  appellant  had  fabricated
       his claim of political activity and adverse attention.

   16. Fourthly and finally, Ms Panagiotopoulou argued the judge had placed
       undue weight on  peripheral  matters  and  the  lack  of  supporting
       evidence from his parents and sisters.

   17. In reply, Ms Everett acknowledged she had a concern about  paragraph
       33 of the decision because she could not find any reference  in  the
       evidence to the appellant claiming that it was an offence  to  be  a
       member of the HDP. She also agreed that it was unclear  which  parts
       of the appellant's political activities the judge was  referring  to
       in paragraph 36. She agreed with Ms Panagiotopoulou that the judge's
       conclusions about risk on return were speculative to the extent they
       did not recognise that what was important was the perception of  the
       authorities, not  the  appellant's  actual  knowledge  of  political
       parties and his usefulness as an  informer.  In  terms,  Ms  Everett
       agreed with Ms Panagiotopoulou  that  the  decision  should  be  set
       aside.

   18. I do not agree with all the grounds.  For  example,  the  judge  was
       entitled to apply the principle in TK (Burundi) and draw an  adverse
       inference from the absence of evidence which it could reasonably  be
       expected would be provided and which it would not  be  difficult  to
       obtain. I also consider he showed sufficient  familiarity  with  the
       background evidence because he referred to it at paragraphs  12,  20
       and 30. His findings and conclusions were not outside the  range  of
       outcomes which would be consistent with that evidence.

   19. However, I find the judge did fall into material error as  a  result
       of his finding in paragraph 36 that,  "the  appellant's  account  of
       political activity and of adverse interest in him by the authorities
       is not credible. I  find  that  the  appellant  has  fabricated  his
       claim". Whilst this is clearly an attempt by the judge to  summarise
       his main conclusions, the problem with it is that it  is  not  clear
       from the rest of the decision which parts of the appellant's account
       of his political activity he did not accept.

   20. The judge accepted at paragraph 35 that the appellant was  a  member
       of the HDP, whereas the respondent only accepted that he was a  low-
       level supporter. The distinction between member and supporter  might
       have been an inadvertent slip of the pen which would not amount to a
       material error. However, the reader does not know  what  it  is  the
       judge did  not  accept  about  the  claim.  The  discussion  of  the
       appellant's activities in paragraph 32 is  in  the  context  of  the
       assessment of the report of Dr Hajioff. There are no  clear  adverse
       findings and at least some parts of the claim  to  have  distributed
       leaflets and participated in  demonstrations  appear  to  have  been
       accepted. The judge  was  provided  with  some  photographs  of  the
       appellant engaging in political activities.

   21. Clearly, it is necessary to make clear findings as to the extent  of
       the appellant's activities in order  to  be  able  to  make  a  safe
       assessment of the risk on return. I consider the judge's failure  to
       do so led to material error rendering the decision unsafe.

   22. I am also troubled by paragraph 33, where  the  judge  states,  "...
       given the appellant's general unreliability as a witness and because
       he left Turkey with an ID card, there is no good reason  to  suggest
       that he did so illegally. His assertion, in circumstances where  his
       party has representation in parliament that it was an offence to  be
       a member of the HDP, defies belief."

   23. The representatives were both unaware of any record of the appellant
       claiming that membership of the  HDP  was  an  offence.  I  was  not
       invited to read the judge's handwritten notes of the evidence in his
       record of the proceedings given Ms Panagiotopoulou  had  represented
       the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.

   24. If the appellant had made that claim in defiance of the obvious fact
       that the HDP is not proscribed, it could  conceivably  have  been  a
       relevant factor in  the  judge's  credibility  assessment.  However,
       absent other clear reasons, it is not possible to understand why the
       judge found  the  appellant's  evidence  was  generally  unreliable.
       Further explanation is required.

   25. The appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The outcome of the appeal  on  its
       merits remains unresolved. Clear findings of fact must  be  made  on
       key aspects of the claim in order for  the  risk  on  return  to  be
       assessed safely. There are no preserved findings.

   26. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Direction  of  15
       September 2012, I make an order under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo on protection issues.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction which I continue.



Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
