


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12260/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 29 May 2019                            |On: 03 June 2019                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     fc
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Blackwood, instructed by Morgan Pearse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This case involves a cross-appeal, with both parties  appealing  the  First-
tier Tribunal's decision of 6 February 2019.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 10  February  1960.  Following
various visits in 2009, July 2014, April 2016, December  2016  and  November
2017, the appellant entered the UK on 29 March 2018 and  claimed  asylum  on
16 April 2018. Her claim was refused  on  9  October  2018  and  her  appeal
against that decision was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  on  20  November
2018.

The appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. In  1997  she  moved  to
Tirana with her husband and two young sons. Her husband  purchased  a  piece
of land but the sale had been fraudulent as the seller was not the  rightful
owner. He came to an agreement with the rightful owner and they made a  home
on the land. One night a masked man came to their house  and  threatened  to
kill them. Four days later the same man returned  with  two  others  and  he
fired 72 bullets at them, leading to her husband's death  in  hospital  four
days later. The appellant was herself shot twice in the leg.  Once  she  was
discharged from hospital the appellant took her two children  and  moved  to
her husband's family home. Six months after her husband's murder  three  men
were arrested and all were  convicted.  The  appellant  testified  at  their
trial and identified one of them, AL, as having  been  the  masked  intruder
who had later killed her husband. One of the  men  was  sentenced  to  three
years' imprisonment and another to  six  months.  AL  was  sentenced  to  23
years. Two of his relatives came to  speak  to  the  appellant  and  to  her
brother asking to settle  the  matter  by  withdrawing  her  claim  but  she
refused. AL was released from prison in 2016. In December 2016 a  stone  was
thrown through the window of their third floor apartment. Three  days  later
her neighbour told her that two men had asked her which  apartment  belonged
to her and a week later, on 30 November 2016, two men banged on her door  at
half past midnight and shouted at her to open the door,  but  she  did  not.
She reported the matter to the police and  went  to  the  town  council  who
dealt with reconciliations but they said they were unable  to  help.  On  26
February 2018 an attempt was made to kidnap her when she was  waiting  at  a
bus stop but a young man helped her and took her to the police  station  and
then to her home. Her brother told her that this was the last time that  she
could bring such problems to his home and her neighbour told  her  that  she
could not stay there. She left Albania and came  to  the  UK.  She  believed
that a blood feud had been declared against her as a result of her  refusing
to withdraw her testimony against the three men.

The respondent accepted, from the documents produced by the appellant,  that
her husband had been murdered by the  three  men  but  did  not  accept  her
account of threats and harassment from the men and did not accept  that  she
was the victim of a blood feud. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was at risk on return to Albania either  on  account  of  a  blood
feud or as a lone female. It was considered in  any  event  that  there  was
sufficiency of protection available to the  appellant  and  that  she  could
internally relocate to another part of Albania. It  was  not  accepted  that
the appellant's removal to Albania would breach her human rights.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Clarke.  The  judge  commented  that  the  murder  of   the
appellant's husband was particularly brutal and noted that  the  murder  had
happened in front of the appellant's children and  that  the  appellant  had
been shot twice in  the  legs.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
produced a number of documents as proof of her claim and accepted  that  she
was a key eye witness in the trial of the three men and helped secure  their
convictions. The judge referred to records of reports made by the  appellant
to the police, in respect of the  incidents  on  30  November  2018  and  26
February 2018 and a document entitled "certificate" from the Mufti of  Diber
dated 25 November 2016 confirming  the  appellant's  husband's  murder.  The
judge accepted that the  documents  were  consistent  with  the  appellant's
claim and accepted that the appellant had been harassed  by  AL.  The  judge
noted the reference to a blood feud in the letter from the  Mufti  of  Diber
as well as in a  letter  dated  30  November  2017  from  the  Head  of  the
Administration Unit of Peshkopi and noted that a letter  dated  23  November
2017 from the Head of the Administration Unit of  Maqellare  confirmed  that
they could not offer the appellant protection. However,  with  reference  to
the country guidance in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  348,  the
judge did not accept that the  appellant's  situation  constituted  a  blood
feud but that it was a matter of  a  criminal  gang  who  had  murdered  her
husband and who now harassed her and that  she  was  a  victim  of  criminal
behaviour. The judge did not accept that the appellant was  a  member  of  a
particular social group as a victim of a blood feud or as a lone female  and
did not accept that she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
Convention  reason.  Neither  did  the  judge  accept  that  the   appellant
qualified for humanitarian protection or that Articles 2 and 3  applied,  as
he concluded that there was a sufficiency of  protection  available  to  her
from the Albanian authorities.

With regard to Article 8, however, the judge  found  that  there  were  very
significant obstacles to the appellant reintegrating into  life  in  Albania
for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules,  based
upon the trauma of her past experiences, her  mental  health  problems,  her
fear of AL and his criminal associates and the  harassment  she  experienced
from them. The judge found  that  accordingly  the  appellant's  removal  to
Albania amounted to a  disproportionate  interference  with  her  Article  8
rights and he allowed the appeal on that basis. He dismissed the  appeal  on
asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 grounds.

Both parties sought permission to appeal against  the  respective  decisions
of the judge. With regard to the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds, the respondent relied, in his grounds, upon the  case  of
Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 and asserted  that
the  judge's  findings  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   were   insufficiently
reasoned. As for the decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum,  humanitarian
protection and Articles 2 and 3 grounds, the  appellant's  grounds  asserted
that the judge had erred in his identification of a particular social  group
(PSG); that the judge had made a material misdirection  of  law  in  finding
that the appellant was the victim of criminal  behaviour  and  not  a  blood
feud and that his analysis of the EH blood  feuds  factors  was  incomplete;
and that the judge had erred in finding that the Albanian state  was  unable
and/or unwilling to protect the appellant.

Permission was granted to the respondent  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
also by the Upper Tribunal to the appellant on the last two grounds.


Appeal hearing and submissions

Mr Blackwood submitted that the judge had erred in law in his  consideration
of the factors in EH and that the documentary evidence referring to a  blood
feud should have been  properly  addressed  as  supporting  the  appellant's
case.  Mr  Blackwood  referred  to  the  Home  Office  Country  Policy   and
Information Note (CPIN) on "Albania: Blood feuds" version 3.0 dated  October
2018 which in turn referred, at paragraph 3.4.4, to the  conclusion  in  the
Cedoca report 2017, in regard to the difficulties in defining a blood  feud.
As for the second ground of appeal, Mr Blackwood submitted  that  the  judge
had erred in his consideration of sufficiency of protection. He referred  to
Horvath v. Secretary of State For The Home  Department  [2000]  UKHL  37  in
that regard and submitted that the presumption of innocence arising  in  the
case of Osman  v.  United  Kingdom  -  23452/94  [1998]  ECHR  101  was  not
applicable in the appellant's case as her husband's killer was not  presumed
innocent. There  was  ample  evidence  that  the  killer  was  ruthless  and
determined. The Albanian state had a  duty  to  protect  the  appellant  but
failed to take steps to protect her after she  reported  the  harassment  to
them. The judge, in finding that there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection,
relied upon the actions  of  the  police  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
husband's murder, but did not  address  the  appellant's  fear  of  her  own
murder. Mr Blackwood submitted that the judge's decision on the  appellant's
asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  Article  2  and   3   claims   ought
accordingly to be set aside and re-made.

Mr Lindsay relied upon the CPIN in submitting that the judge was correct  in
reaching the conclusion that he did as to the existence of a blood feud.  He
referred to paragraphs 3.3.1  and  3.3.2  of  the  CPIN  in  regard  to  the
evolution of blood feuds and the fact that  they  were  declining  and  were
often just criminal acts. He submitted  that  the  letters  upon  which  the
appellant relied were reflected by those parts of  the  CPIN  and  supported
the judge's finding that this was a  matter  of  criminals  trying  to  seek
revenge rather than a blood feud.  As for  the  second  ground,  Mr  Lindsay
submitted that the  judge  reached  a  sustainable  decision  and  that  the
appellant was simply seeking to re-argue the matter.

In regard to the respondent's grounds of appeal in relation  to  Article  8,
Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had provided insufficient  reasoning  as
to why the factors mentioned at [104] and [105] of his decision amounted  to
very significant obstacles to integration  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi), and  that  those  factors  were  not  rationally  capable  of
meeting the terms of Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  Kamara
[2016] EWCA Civ 813.

Mr Blackwood submitted that the respondent's  submissions  did  not  reflect
the grounds of appeal which were based upon Shizad. The  judge  undertook  a
broad evaluative judgment and the findings made were  open  to  him  on  the
evidence. The judge set out the obstacles to integration which included  the
effect of the trauma of witnessing her husband's murder with  her  children.
The GP's  letter  confirmed  her  mental  health  issues  arising  from  the
incident. The judge was entitled to allow the appeal on Article  8  grounds.
Mr Blackwood responded to Mr Lindsay's submissions on the interpretation  of
a blood feud and sufficiency of protection, relying  on  the  references  in
the Cedoca report to the Albanian authorities  being  insufficiently  active
in prevention of crimes and addressing blood feuds.

Consideration and findings

I do not find the grounds of challenge to be made out for either  party.  It
seems to me that the grounds, as put to me at the hearing, amount to  little
more than disagreements with the judge's decision.

Mr Blackwood's submission in regard to the findings on the  existence  of  a
blood feud was that the judge failed to explain why the letters produced  by
the appellant, which specifically referred  to  the  existence  of  a  blood
feud, were not accepted as supporting the case that  a  blood  feud  existed
and why the appellant's case  was  not  accepted  as  meeting  the  relevant
factors in EH in that regard. The letters referred to  are  as  follows.  At
page 46 to 48 of the appellant's appeal bundle,  a  "Certificate"  dated  25
November 2016 from the Mufti of Diber on behalf of the Muslim  Community  of
Albania confirming in the last paragraph: "Situated in this drama, Madam  FC
and her sons are endangered by blood feud phenomenon as this  phenomenon  is
a widespread drama in Albania." At pages 49  to  52,  a  "Record"  dated  30
November  2016  from  the  Dibra  District  Prosecutor's   Office   of   the
appellant's report to the police of the incident  on  29  November  2016  in
which she refers to her family being in a blood feud. At pages 54 to 55,  an
"Attestation"  dated  30  November   2016   from   the   Chairman   of   the
Administrative  Unit  of  Peshkopi  stating  that  "Mrs  FC   is   seriously
endangered by the phenomenon of blood feud" and that "we cannot  defend  the
life of this respected citizen". At pages 56 to 57, an  "Attestation"  dated
2 December 2016 from the Mayor of the Municipality  of  Diber  referring  to
the "conflict between the parties" continuing.

The judge referred to these documents at [81], when considering whether  the
harassment against the appellant amounted to  a  blood  feud.  At  [82]  the
judge went on to consider the factors set  out  in  EH  at  paragraph  74(f)
which are to be applied in determining whether a blood feud  exists  and  at
[86] he considered the factors in paragraph 74(g)  of  EH.  Having  assessed
all the evidence, the judge then provided reasons for  concluding  that  the
circumstances did not amount to a blood  feud.  Whilst  the  judge  did  not
specifically respond to the references in the various official letters to  a
blood feud, it is undeniably the case that he had regard  to  those  letters
in making his findings. It is to be noted that [9] of EH  states  that  such
documents "may" assist in establishing the existence of a  blood  feud  and,
furthermore, I find myself in agreement with Mr Lindsay  that  the  relevant
issue is not so much whether the authorities consider it appropriate to  use
such a term but whether  the  term  of  "blood  feud"  is  correct  in  this
jurisdiction. I also agree with Mr Lindsay that the paragraphs in  the  CPIN
to which he  referred  support  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  appellant's
circumstances,  in  particular   at   paragraph   3.3.1   and   3.3.2,   and
specifically:

    3.3.1:
    "... Alfred Ko�obashi stated that blood feud still occurs "when someone
    innocent, a third party has to pay the price for the  damage  a  family
    member has done, but he added that since the  1990s  it  is  not  about
    honour anymore. 80% is criminal and not related  to  customary  law  or
    medieval common law. It's about mafia-style killings. It's murder cases
    for other reasons than blood feud, just  like  they  happen  elsewhere.
    It's normal killings or vendetta killings."


    Elsa Ballauri from the Albanian Human Rights Group (AHRG) also referred
    to the transformation of blood feud: ...She also declared: "It's more a
    justification nowadays because they are committing crimes and they say:
    'I did it for blood feud'. But for me, none  of  the  cases  after  the
    1990s is a real blood feud case.""

     3.3.2:
    'The General Director from the Albanian State Police also  stated  that
    revenge cases, that most often are the consequence of criminal problems
    and individual conflicts  or  disputes,  can  happen  to  everyone  and
    everywhere and are very often wrongly labelled as blood feud... '"

In the circumstances I find no error of law in  the  judge's  assessment  of
whether a blood feud existed and in his  conclusion  that  the  events  were
related to criminal activity and amounted  to  a  criminal  vendetta  rather
than a blood feud. Accordingly I uphold his decision in that regard.

Turning to the question of sufficiency of protection,  I  accept  the  point
being made by Mr Blackwood, namely that the issue was not that the  Albanian
authorities had demonstrated  a  willingness  to  take  action  against  the
appellant's husband's killers, but whether they were  willing  and  able  to
take preventative measures to prevent the appellant's murder.  Mr  Blackwood
relied upon the letters from the Albanian  authorities  in  submitting  that
they were not able to take such measures, that  the  police  had  not  taken
action against AL and his associates when they harassed  the  appellant  and
that the judge ought  to  have  concluded  as  such  on  the  evidence.  The
appellant's grounds at [34] challenge in particular the judge's  finding  at
[85] of his decision in relation to a document entitled  "Decision  for  the
Non-Initiation of the Criminal Proceeding" from  the  Judicial  Attorney  of
Diber at page 63 and 64 of the appellant's appeal bundle. However the  judge
plainly gave detailed and careful consideration to the matter and  had  full
regard to the implications of the decision in that document, as well as  the
other documentary evidence, in light of the guidance in Horvath. At [93]  to
[95] the  judge  considered  the  matter  further  in  the  context  of  the
background country information,  noting  the  limitations  of  the  Albanian
police force but providing cogent reasons for concluding  nevertheless  that
the police would prosecute AL and his associates if there was evidence  that
they had been involved in harassing the appellant. Plainly  the  documentary
evidence showed that the police investigated the appellant's allegations  of
harassment and for the reasons  properly  given  the  judge  was  unarguably
entitled to conclude that there was a sufficiency  of  protection  available
to the appellant to the Horvath standard. I agree with Mr Lindsay  that  the
challenge to the  judge's  decision  in  this  regard  is  no  more  than  a
disagreement with  his  properly  made  findings  and  again  I  uphold  his
decision.

Turning next  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  judge's
decision to allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  I  agree  with  Mr
Blackwood that, whilst the challenge was said to  be  on  the  basis  of  an
insufficiency of reasoning, the submission made by Mr Lindsay  strayed  into
the realms of rationality. In any event I find no merit  in  either  grounds
of challenge. At [104] of his decision the judge  had  full  regard  to  the
relevant caselaw in considering the question of very  significant  obstacles
to integration into life in Albania and followed the guidance in  Kamara  in
conducting a "broad  evaluative  judgment".  At  [104]  and  [105]  he  gave
detailed reasons as to why he reached the conclusions that  he  did.  Whilst
the respondent may not agree that those reasons are sufficient to amount  to
very significant obstacles to integration, there is no  dispute  as  to  the
facts behind those reasons and the various matters considered by the  judge,
including the appellant's mental health, were  supported  by  the  evidence.
There was no insufficiency of  reasoning  and  neither  was  there  anything
irrational about the judge's conclusions, which were clearly and  unarguably
based upon the evidence before him. There are accordingly  no  grounds  upon
which to conclude that the judge made any error of law in concluding  as  he
did. I therefore uphold the judge's decision in that respect.

DECISION

Accordingly, both appeals are dismissed. The making of the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of  law,  such  that
the decision has to be set aside. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on   asylum,   humanitarian
protection and Articles 2 and 3 grounds and to allow the appeal  on  Article
8 grounds therefore stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 30 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
