
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12166/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2021                              |On 23 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MM
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holt
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan who was born in 1985, appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing  his  claim  for  international  protection.  The   First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 25 September 2020, dismissed the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal  the  representatives  for
    both parties acknowledged that the judge had erred in law. I  told  the
    representatives that I intended to set aside the decision. I shall  now
    briefly give my reasons.

 3. Neither the appellant not his representative attended the face to  face
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on 16 September 2020. The solicitors
    were contacted on the day by the court staff and  responded  that  they
    had not received a notice of hearing. The judge gives  reasons  at  [3]
    for rejecting that claim. He also observed [4] that the  appellant  had
    not been served with notice of hearing. At [5-6], he gave  his  reasons
    for proceeding with the hearing. Those reasons address  only  the  fact
    that the solicitors had not sought an adjournment and  noted  that  the
    'pressure on court time [is] possibility higher than ever.'  The  judge
    has not considered whether refraining from adjourning the  hearing  was
    fair or unfair to the appellant. The assumption appears to be that  the
    solicitors could or should have notified the appellant of the  date  of
    the hearing but the judge makes no clear finding to that effect.  Given
    that the solicitors claimed not to know of the  hearing  and  that  the
    judge was aware that the appellant had not separately been served  with
    notice  of  hearing,  the  judge's  failure  to  consider  whether   by
    proceeding he was treating the appellant fairly amounts to an error  of
    law. I do not say that the judge could  not  have  proceeded  with  the
    hearing fairly in the circumstances; the problem is  that  he  did  not
    even address the question of fairness to the appellant before  deciding
    to go ahead.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. There will need to be a
    hearing de novo which is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to
    which this appeal is returned for it to remake the decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo (Not  Judge  Ficklin;  Manchester  Hearing  Centre;  First-tier
    Tribunal to  decide  if  face  to  face  or  remote;  1.5  hours;  Urdu
    interpreter; no agreed date so list on first available date).



         Signed                              Date 17 March 2021


        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
