
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12309/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th April 2018                            |On 8th May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    ajsa

                                                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adeyayo, Solicitor of A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Durm, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on [ ] 1975, claims to be  an  undocumented  Bidoon
    from Kuwait.  His claim for asylum and humanitarian protection made  on
    29th February 2016 was refused by the respondent in a detailed decision
    of 14th November 2017.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker on 2nd January 2018.  In a
    decision promulgated on 10th January 2018 the appeal was dismissed.

3.   Challenge has been made  to  that  decision  on  a  number  of  grounds
    including the fact that  the  incorrect  standard  of  proof  had  been
    applied.  Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier on 27th February 2018.  Thus it is  that  the  matter  comes
    before me to determine the issues.

4.   In the course of the decision the Judge looked at a number  of  factors
    in coming to the conclusion that the appellant had not  discharged  the
    burden upon him to  show  that  he  was  an  undocumented  Bidoon.  The
    conclusion of the Judge was that the appellant had failed to  establish
    that he was not an Iraqi citizen.

5.   The starting point  for  that  consideration  was  that  the  appellant
    produced an Iraqi passport to the US Embassy in Baghdad on 5  May  2013
    in order to try and obtain a visa.   Fingerprints  were  taken  at  the
    time.

6.    Although  the  appellant  in  his  interview  refers   to   only   one
    application, it became clear  from  the  statement  of  MJ  dated  14th
    November 2017 that two separate applications had  been  made,  both  in
    Baghdad, one on 5th May 2013 and the other on 17th June 2013.  Thus the
    Judge concluded that the applicant was not being  truthful  as  to  the
    time that he had spent in Iraq.  Although the applicant contended  that
    the passport which he used was false, the Judge concludes that  it  was
    not on the basis that the US authorities  would  be  more  likely  than
    others to identify forgeries, particularly upon repeat presentations.

7.   The appellant stated that in January  2015  he  and  his  brother  took
    their father to hospital.  The doctors  refused  to  treat  him  as  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  The appellant was angry and that resulted in  his
    being arrested, taken to the  police  station  and  tortured.   He  was
    released on the promise that he would be an informant, but nevertheless
    then sought to leave Kuwait coming to the United Kingdom via France.

8.   He confirmed that in coming to the United  Kingdom  he  used  an  Iraqi
    passport and documents and also an agent.  It was the view of the Judge
    that the financial outlay of that trip, albeit said to  be  paid  by  a
    landowning farmer, did not meet the profile of an undocumented  Bidoon.



9.   The fact that he was a Bidoon was supported by two  witnesses  claiming
    to have known the appellant in Kuwait.  They had met the  appellant  by
    chance in the United Kingdom.  It was the finding  of  the  Judge  that
    neither seemed to  know  very  much  about  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and, for the reasons set out in the decision, the Judge  gave
    little weight to their evidence.

10.   The  Judge  considered  also  a  letter  from  the  Kuwaiti  Community
    Association dated 12th December  2017,  but  gave  reasons  why  little
    evidential weight was attached to that evidence.

11.  The Judge acknowledged that the appellant had given details  concerning
    the Bidoon community  in  his  interview  but  concluded,  as  had  the
    respondent in  the  decision,  that  such  information  was  obtainable
    elsewhere and was not of itself indicative that the appellant was  what
    he claims to be.  It was also noted that the appellant failed to  claim
    asylum in France, this being a matter further undermining the claim.

12.  Challenges to all those matters are made  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Reliance  is  placed   upon   the   country   guidance   case   of   NM
    (documented/undocumented Bidoon: risk)  Kuwait  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00356
    (IAC).  It is contended that the  Judge  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    essential issue in the matter  as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  It was submitted that the conclusions made by the
    Judge were unreasoned and unbalanced and hence deeply flawed.

13.  I find, however, that the reasons were  given  by  the  Judge  for  the
    conclusions arrived at were not so  outside  the  reasonable  range  of
    responses as to render the same irrational or unfair.

14.  There are perhaps three matters which seem to me to be important to  be
    borne in mind in this appeal.   The  first,  and  indeed  the  specific
    reason why permission to appeal was granted was the contention that  at
    paragraph 11 the Judge states the standard of proof is on  the  balance
    of probabilities rather than of the lower standard.   At  paragraph  42
    however the correct burden and standard is applied.

15.  It is apparent from reading paragraphs 10 and  11  in  particular  that
    this is an unfortunate example of "cut and paste" in which passages are
    set out either as precedents or taken from other sources.  Paragraph 10
    is referring to "appellants" and returning them  to  Gambia,  which  is
    clearly not this case, and paragraph 11  continues  to  refer  to  "the
    appellants". Thus  it  is  entirely  clear  that,  in  the  context  of
    paragraphs 10 and 11,  they  are  not  specifically  referring  to  the
    appellant and that clearly must be a matter of concern as  to  standard
    of proof and the anxious scrutiny to detail given in this case.

16.  It is clear however that when the Judge considers  the  nature  of  the
    claim as presented by the appellant, the focus of the decision is  very
    much upon the appellant and what he and others have to say. There is no
    deviation to other matters. It is not apparent from the reading of  the
    decision as a whole that the higher standard of proof has been  adopted
    .There was nothing to show that the findings of  fact  could  not  have
    been made upon the lower standards applicable to asylum and  protection
    cases.

17.  The second matter of concern is the  suggestion  that  the  remarks  at
    paragraph 40 by the Judge do not reflect accurately  the  case  of  NM.
    The Judge commented:-

         "The relevant part of this Country Guidance  is  that  most  Bidoon
         carry security cards and therefore are documented.  The  appellants
         evidence that he and his family did not register between  1996  and
         2000 I do not accept."

      The Judge's comments seem to be reflective of item 4 in the head  note
    of the case:-

         "It must be assumed that Bidoon who did not register  between  1996
         and 2000, and hence  did  not  obtain  security  cards,  are  as  a
         consequence undocumented Bidoon, though this must be  seen  in  the
         context of the evidence that most Bidoon carry security cards."

18.   As  Mr  Adeyayo  indicated,  the  process  of  registration   required
    permission from the committee,  which  deals  with  applications  on  a
    completely discretionary basis.  Mr Adeyayo relies upon the evidence of
    a Mr S as set out, particularly in paragraph 47 of the decision  in  NM
    in which it is estimated that no more than  20%  Bidoon  were  able  to
    fulfil the restrictive conditions laid down by the law.

19.  Reading the judgment in NM it is not entirely clear how the comment  of
    the expert fully ties in  with  the  conclusions  as  set  out  by  the
    Tribunal that most Bidoon are documented  Bidoon.   However,  there  is
    merit in the contention that  paragraph  40  of  the  determination  is
    largely unreasoned.

20.  In the context to the overall findings it is perhaps to  be  considered
    an unnecessary finding to have made, in  the  context  of  the  overall
    findings which were made, namely that the appellant has failed to  show
    that he was not an Iraqi citizen using a genuine Iraqi passport.

21.  The third concern is the suggestion that the Judge did not engage  with
    the evidence that was submitted concerning the attempts made on  behalf
    of the appellant in writing and upon his visit to the Iraqi Embassy  to
    clarify his status. It is submitted that  the  appellant  was  keen  to
    invite the Iraqi Embassy to confirm whether he was an Iraqi national or
    not.  No reply was received to the letter of  20th  December  2017  and
    when the appellant presented himself at the Embassy he was not  allowed
    to enter it.  It was said that it was important for the Judge  to  bear
    in mind  such  matters  in  fairness  to  the  appellant  as  being  an
    opportunity which he sought to take to clarify his identity.   However,
    as he claims not to be an Iraqi it is difficult to understand  how  the
    Iraqi Embassy could be expected to find anything in  their  records  to
    assist the appellant is his current identity, when it seemed  that  the
    passport had been used in  another  name.    In  the  absence  of  full
    details of dates and places of birth and family  matters  it  would  be
    difficult for any Embassy to confirm or deny citizenship. None of these
    were supplied in the Solicitor's letter.

22.  Mr Adeyayo seeks to persuade me that  the  three  matters  highlighted,
    together with the other challenges are such as to render  the  decision
    both unfair and unreliable.

23.  At the outset of the appeal there  may  perhaps  be  considered  to  be
    three issues that fell for consideration, the first  being  whether  or
    not the appellant was an Iraqi citizen  or  a  Kuwaiti  citizen.   Such
    would depend upon whether the passport used was one as issued to him or
    not.

     If not then consideration would then need to be  given  as  to  whether
    the appellant was a citizen of Kuwait.

     If so, whether he was a documented or undocumented Bidoon.

24.  The Judge focused upon the first issue and concluded, as I so find  for
    sustainable reasons, that the appellant was a citizen  of  Iraq  having
    used a passport in  that  capacity,  or  alternatively  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden that he was not.  Such  seems  to  me  to  be  the
    proper and preliminary focus of the enquiry. Clearly in coming  to  the
    conclusion the Judge had to focus upon the positive  evidence  that  he
    was a Bidoon and that I find the Judge did. It was open to the Judge to
    find the same unreliable.

25.  Given the conclusions of the Judge upon the issue of Iraqi  nationality
    it is perhaps arguable that it was unnecessary to go any further in the
    analysis.

26.  In all the circumstances I do not find there to be a material error  of
    law.

27.  Consequently the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand, namely that  the
    asylum appeal is dismissed as is that of humanitarian protection.   The
    appeal in respect of human rights is also dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 3 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
