
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12269/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 2nd May 2019   On 5th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR H S G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Abdullah, Hazelhurst Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The background

   1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq, born in 1980. He made a
      claim for protection on 7 November 2017 on the basis he would be at
      risk if returned because of imputed political opinion. The claim was
      refused on 12 October 2018.

   2. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin at Manchester
      on 20 November 2018.In a decision promulgated on 24 January 2019 it
      was dismissed. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible.
      There were multiple aspects to the claim and a summary of the judge's
      decision on these is set out at paragraph 337. The judge rejected his
      claim that he had provided security for the Americans. The judge also
      rejected his claim that he was shot at by Al Qaeda in 2008 or that he
      received threats from the Mujahidine Al-Dawla.His claim of having
      worked for a security firm in 2014 was rejected. His claim to have
      been detained and injured by Hasd Al-Shabi in 2015 or that they had
      raided his house and killed his sister and brother was rejected. The
      judge finally rejected his claim to have been raped. In summary, his
      entire claim was rejected in all aspects.

   3. At paragraph 314 the judge turned to the feasibility of his return.
      The appellant had claimed that his passport had been misplaced in
      Iraq. The judge saw no reason why he could not contact his wife for
      assistance. He had produced his CSID and INC, albeit the respondent
      believed the former was a forgery. The judge did not accept this and
      concluded there was no reason why he could not be returned to Iraq
      either on his own passport or a laissez passer.

   4. It was accepted he was from Tuz Khermatu which is in Salah Al- Din
      Province. This is one of the contested areas identified in AA (Iraq) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944. At
      paragraph 346 Judge Devlin judge referred to the situation on the
      ground having moved on since AA but felt it prudent to follow the
      country guidance that any civilian there faced a 15 C risk. On the
      basis the appellant could not return there the judge turned to
      consider internal relocation, principally to Erbil in the IKR where he
      had lived before.

   5. The judge referred to medical evidence that whilst he was in no
      imminent risk he may require surgery in the future on his heart valve.
      There was no argument that travel was unsafe or that the necessary
      care was not available in Erbil. However, at paragraph 350 the judge
      accepted that his cardiac condition was such that he may not be able
      to access employment. However he has siblings and aunts and an uncle
      who could support him. In the past he had owned a trailer and employed
      people. The judge was not satisfied he would face destitution and
      concluded it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate.

The Upper Tribunal

   6. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge failed
      to give adequate consideration to the appellant's circumstances when
      considering relocation. The grounds contained the judge failed to make
      a comprehensive assessment of the situation the appellant would face.

   7. Both parties were in agreement that the appellant in terms of
      documentation is returnable. He had produced a CSI D which he
      indicated was genuine. The respondent questioned this in relation to
      section 8 issues. However the judge found it was a valid document. The
      proposal would be for the appellant to return to Erbil via Baghdad.
      Both representatives indicated the actual mechanics of entry to Erbil
      are not in dispute.

   8. The question is whether the judge properly considered the
      reasonableness of this relocation. The appellant has a wife and 3
      young children living in the contested area. They are aged 6, 4 and
      almost 2. Mr Abdullah submitted the judge did not deal with how they
      would manage or even if they could gain entry.

   9. The appellant had given evidence about family members in Iraq. He said
      he had an uncle and brothers. He said that the judge had found the
      appellant would not be able to access employment because of his
      health. I was referred to AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq
      CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)and the submission was that the appellant
      would be unable to support himself. He said there were no details
      about the circumstances of his family members in Iraq and whether they
      can support him.

  10. At paragraph 350 the judge had referred to the appellant owning a
      trailer from which he received a regular income. Mr Abdullah explained
      that the appellant had bought a lorry and engaged a driver and rented
      the vehicle out and in this way obtained an income. However, he said
      the appellant's case was that he had sold everything in order to
      finance his journey to the United Kingdom and suggested the appellant
      circumstances were now considerably different.

  11. Mr Bates in response pointed out that at paragraph 348 the judge had
      recorded that the appellant had lived in Erbil before with his wife
      and their children and so this was someone who had familiar with the
      area. In the past he had sufficient connections to support himself and
      his family. He pointed out that the burden of proof is upon the
      appellant to show it was unduly harsh for him to relocate.
      Consequently, it was for the appellant to explain what had happened to
      his trailer and why he could not re-establish himself. He was aware
      this was an issue from the refusal letter.

  12. I was referred to paragraph 54 which summarises the submissions in the
      First-tier Tribunal by Mr Abdullah on his behalf. The submission was
      directed towards his underlying claim and was to the effect he had no
      need to tell lies and but for the threats he had a comfortable life in
      Iraq. It states that he had owned a lorry and had US$60,000 and his
      wife and children where there. Mr Bates pointed out that it was for
      the appellant to demonstrate at the First-tier Tribunal that that is
      not the position and that his family members were not in a position to
      support him.

  13. He submitted that Mr Abdullah was now seeking to reargue aspects of
      the appeal and raising issues which had not been put before the judge.
      The judge did not find that the appellant and his family would face
      destitution.AAH referred to the cost of renting Erbil as averaging
      around $350 per month. The appellant had not shown that his family
      members in Iraq were unable to send him remittances.

  14. By way of reply, Mr Abdullah referred me to question 244 of the
      appellant's interview where he said he could not relocate because his
      brother had a bad reputation because of association with Daesh. He
      refers to having spent 'that big amount of money'. He submitted this
      supported the appellant's account all his funds were liquidated to pay
      for his journey to the United Kingdom. He then referred me to the
      appellant's health condition and the details set out in AAH on the
      prospects for those without support.

Consideration

  15. It is clear from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin that
      the appellant's appeal has been given the most anxious scrutiny. The
      issue in the Upper Tribunal is much narrower and relates to whether
      the judge erred in concluding the appellant could relocate to the IKR.

  16. In considering the points made on his behalf it has to be borne in
      mind that the burden of proof is upon the appellant. Furthermore, on
      numerous occasions the appellant has lied. At paragraph 275 the judge
      referred to the appellant's mendacity. He had been fingerprinted in
      Finland in December 2008 and was granted asylum there the following
      year. Despite his claimed fear following events in Iraq he returned on
      numerous occasions. He did not volunteer information about the grant
      of protection in Finland. When revealed, his complaint was against the
      cold climate and the fact his attempts at bringing his wife and
      children there had been unsuccessful.

  17. The submission made on his behalf in the first-tier Tribunal recorded
      at paragraph 54 related to his claims about various events in Iraq.
      Essentially the submission was that he had a good life there; was
      earning substantial amounts of money employed by the Americans; had
      been able to buy a lorry and engage a driver. He had been granted
      refugee status in Finland. Therefore he had no reason to lie. The
      judge however found he did lie. Now there has been a volte face when
      the appellant faces the prospect of return, with him being portrayed
      as impecunious and unemployable.

  18. The comments made by the judge about return at paragraph 340 onwards
      are not to be read in a vacuum. The judge was aware of the country
      guidance cases on return to the IKR.The judge was aware of the
      appellant's immigration history and had been provided with appeal
      bundles. The appellant heard evidence from the appellant. The judge
      commented on individual aspects of the reasons for refusal.

  19. At paragraph 24 the judge recorded that the appellant trained as a
      mechanic. He was able to find employment as such in Finland. At
      paragraph 34 it was recorded the appellant did not work between 2011
      and 2004. The account was that he employed a driver to drive a trailer
      or lorry and he was able to live on this income.

  20. The account was that after being granted refugee status in Finland he
      returned to Iraq where he married. One and a half months later he
      returned to Finland and tried to bring his wife over. When this was
      refused he returned to Iraq and his wife became pregnant with their
      1st child. The appellant's account was that they had lived in Erbil.
      At paragraph 36 judge records two further children being born and that
      the appellant travelled to Finland 3 times, staying for a month or two
      before returning to Iraq. Again, he sought to bring his wife and
      children to Finland and was unsuccessful. Paragraph 38 records that
      the appellant had not told the Finnish authorities about his return to
      Iraq.

  21. At paragraph 40 the appellant had claimed he could not remain in Erbil
      without a reference because his brother was suspected of joining Isis.
      Consequently, he claimed he then moved back to his home area. However,
      the judge had rejected this claim about his brother and a reference
      (para 343).

  22. At paragraph 82 the judge recorded the appellant's claimed to be
      proficient in Arabic, Turkish and English. These claims were made in
      the context of his claim that he was of use to the Americans and
      should be treated with some scepticism. Nevertheless, that was the
      case he was making and this in turn reflects on his ability to
      relocate and establish himself. At paragraph 86 the judge recorded the
      appellant stating he was employed in a garage in Iraq for 16 years.
      The judge rejected his claim that he was illiterate but at paragraph
      88 recorded that even if this were so, he was a very intelligent
      individual.

  23. At paragraph 349 the judge referred to the GPs letter relaying a
      cardiologists report. In the following paragraph the judge said
      because of his medical condition he may not be able to access
      employment. It is noteworthy the judge did not say he could not obtain
      employment but use the phrase `may not be able'. The inference from
      the appellant's medical condition is that he may not be fit for heavy
      physical work. However, this does not exclude all forms of employment.
      In the past, on the appellant's account, he was able to subcontract
      his trailer. He could use similar skills on return. The judge
      emphasised the family support that would be available and concluded he
      would not face destitution.

  24. AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) has
      been referred to. There was no issue in the appeal about the
      practicality of return. The appellant is Kurdish. The IKR is violence
      free. The appellant has had the advantage of living in Erbil before.
      The transition may be eased by a returns package. The appellant has
      been absent from his wife and children for some time. On relocation to
      Erbil he could seek to establish himself and then invite them to join.

  25. In summary, I do not find any material error of law established in the
      judge's decision on the points raised.


Decision

No material error has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Devlin. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Date: 3 June 2019

