
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/12186/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On August 24, 2017                         |On September 1, 2017           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR S E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hyder (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is  an  Afghan  national.   The  appellant  entered  this
    country on March 16, 2005. He applied for asylum on March 17, 2005  but
    enquiries revealed he had already claimed asylum in Austria on November
    19, 2004. He was therefore removed to  Austria  to  pursue  his  asylum
    claim but he failed to  do  so  and  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely around May 2005 and he claims  to  have  been  here  ever
    since. On October 12, 2011 his solicitors wrote seeking leave to remain
    and on February 3, 2012 he made  a  formal  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds. This was refused on September 14, 2012.



 3. The appellant then submitted written submissions on  October  28,  2013
    and these were  accepted  as  an  asylum  claim  and  he  was  formally
    interviewed on June 3, 2016.

 4. The respondent refused his asylum claim on October 20, 2016.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  November  2,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJS  White
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on December 7, 2016 and in a  decision
    promulgated on January 31, 2017 the Judge refused  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed this decision on February 14,  2017.  Permission
    to appeal was initially refused by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Robertson on May 17, 2017 but when those grounds were  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Plimmer on July 4, 2017.

 7. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated July 18, 2017  in  which
    she opposed all grounds of appeal.

 8. The matter came before me on the above date.

    Submissions

 9. Mr Hyder adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge had
    erred in a number of errors. He submitted:

      a) The main issue was whether the  appellant's  uncle  was  a  Taliban
         commander. Whilst it was regrettable that the  previous  solicitors
         had not submitted the brother's immigration decision the Judge  had
         heard oral evidence from  the  brother  and  despite  acknowledging
         there was a link he failed to give  any  weight  to  the  brother's
         evidence. The appellant should have been given the benefit  of  the
         doubt and the Judge erred by failing to do so.

      b) The Judge found the appellant's credibility was undermined  by  his
         failure to give a consistent account about where  he  was  detained
         and the sequence of where he was detained. The appellant had stated
         in in his substantive interview that he was initially  detained  in
         Jalalabad and then Kabul and by  making  the  findings  he  did  he
         erred.

      c) The  absence  of  scars  from  his  body  or  medical  evidence  of
         psychological trauma should not have been held against him.

      d) The  Judge  erred  by  finding  the  appellant  was  released  from
         detention by the authorities whereas the appellant  clearly  stated
         that he escaped by bribing a guard.

      e) The alleged inconsistency in his  witness  statement  and  evidence
         about the appellant's escape was not an  inconsistency.  The  Judge
         erred by finding as much.

      f) The Judge doubted the appellant's  credibility  by  saying  he  was
         inconsistent about his uncle's  whereabouts  but  the  Judge  erred
         because the appellant referred in his statement to the fact he  did
         not know where his uncle was. There was therefore no inconsistency.



10. Mr Whitwell adopted the Rule 24 and submitted:

      a) The appellant and his solicitors failed to  produce  the  decision.
         The Judge cannot be blamed for the appellant's failure  to  produce
         evidence. The fact such evidence may be available now does not mean
         the Judge erred. The burden was on the appellant to prove his  case
         to the lower standard of proof and the Judge found,  with  reasons,
         the appellant had not met the standard of proof.

      b) The Judge gave reasons  why  he  found  the  appellant  was  not  a
         credible witness. He did not pursue his asylum claim in Austria, he
         delayed his claim on this country after he  returned  and  he  lied
         about claiming in Austria.

      c) The Judge was criticised about referring to inconsistencies but the
         Judge had regard to an earlier statement made in 2013 and this  was
         open to him.

      d) The Judge found he used an alias as a kickboxer to avoid detection.



      e) There was no error in law.

11. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    FINDINGS

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer.  She
    found the grounds arguable and today  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

13. Whilst a number of grounds were argued  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
    concentrated on the first ground which was contained in  paragraph  3.1
    of the grounds of appeal.

14. The appellant claimed his uncle was a  general  in  the  former  Afghan
    government and was then  recruited  to  work  as  a  commander  in  the
    Taliban. After the government collapsed his uncle and brother (who also
    worked  with  his  uncle)  went  missing.  The  appellant  claimed  the
    authorities came to his home looking for them and when  his  uncle  did
    return after nine months he was arrested and detained.  His  uncle  was
    released after paying a bribe and he took the appellant to  his  cousin
    because he was not  safe.  The  Judge  recorded  this  account  in  his
    decision. At the hearing the appellant's brother attended  the  hearing
    and it was accepted that the brother had been granted asylum. The Judge
    recorded at paragraph [16] of his decision that no details of his claim
    were produced and despite taking evidence from the  appellant  and  his
    brother the Judge concluded that he  did  not  know  what  the  brother
    actually claimed or what was accepted by the Judge  and  the  fact  the
    brother had been accepted as a refugee was of  limited  assistance.  At
    paragraph [30] of the decision the Judge found he was not satisfied his
    uncle was a commander in the Taliban.

15. Mr Hyder submits that the Judge should have  given  the  appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt and in  giving  permission  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer stated-

         "Whilst it is regrettable that the appellant's solicitors  did  not
         take steps  to  provide  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  comprehensive
         decision dated 20 October 2003 allowing the  appellant's  brother's
         asylum appeal, given the clear links between the appellant's  claim
         and his brother's First-tier claim it  is  arguable  that  fairness
         required the First-tier Tribunal to make further enquiry  into  the
         brother's claim, over and above that which is set out...."

16. The appellant was fully represented in the First-tier Tribunal-as he is
    today  albeit  he  has  changed  his  representatives.  Malik  &  Malik
    Solicitors previously represented  him  and  one  of  their  solicitors
    presented the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Judge. At  no  stage
    did the appellant or his representative ask for an adjournment or  even
    ask the respondent for the brother's  previous  decision.  Even  if  an
    application had been made to adjourn the case the Judge would have  had
    to apply the guidance  contained  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). Was there gross  procedural  unfairness  or  a
    complete denial of natural justice?  In  this  case  he  had  both  the
    appellant and his brother giving oral evidence before him.

17. By not seeking the brother's decision the Judge did not err in law. The
    Judge had to deal with the case on the  evidence  before  him  and  for
    reasons he subsequently gave he refused the appellant's appeal. He gave
    reasons why he did not accept the claim about the  uncle  and  although
    that finding may ultimately be contrary to what was  contained  in  the
    brother's decision that does not mean the Judge erred on  the  evidence
    placed before him. It was not a Robinson obvious point to ask  for  the
    brother's decision because if it was it is something  that  would  have
    been raised by the parties at the hearing. The fact  the  decision  was
    not available over three years after the claim was initially  made  was
    not something the Judge needed to investigate further. There would have
    been a Case Management Hearing before the substantive  hearing  and  in
    the circumstances I find no merit in the first ground of appeal.

18. The second ground is in paragraph 3.2 of  the  grounds  of  appeal.  Mr
    Hyder  submitted  the  Judge  erred  by  finding  the   appellant   was
    inconsistent with the sequence and places of  detention.  In  paragraph
    [9] of his witness statement and Q21 of interview  he  claimed  he  had
    been initially detained in Jalalabad and then taken to Kabul but it  is
    argued that the Judge erred in paragraph [19] in how he approached  the
    appellant's detention.

19. In his decision the Judge stated-

         "it is slightly  of  more  concern  that  he  should  have  claimed
         initially that he was detained in Kabul and  subsequently  that  he
         was detained first in Jalalabad; it is much less easy to see how he
         could be confused or mistaken about that."

20. In his statement dated October 28, 2013 the appellant described how  he
    and his family went to live in Kabul and  it  was  there  that  he  was
    arrested and detained. He did not mention anything about Jalalabad.

21. The grounds of appeal  (paragraph  3.2)  overlook  the  fact  that  the
    appellant made no reference at all to any detention  in  Jalalabad  and
    whilst the appellant may have later affirmed where he was detained  the
    Judge was entitled to make the finding  he  did  because  there  was  a
    difference between his first statement  and  his  subsequent  evidence.
    This ground does not demonstrate an error in law.

22. The third ground related to the Judge's  approach  to  the  absence  of
    injuries or any medical problems. There was no medical evidence and the
    Judge considered the appellant's claim of what happened to him  and  in
    the absence of any medical evidence the Judge was entitled to reach the
    findings he did bearing in mind he  was  sceptical  about  the  account
    being given.

23. The fourth ground concerned how the appellant came to be  released.  In
    paragraph [20] the Judge stated "it might also be  expected  that  they
    would not at any stage have released the appellant." Both in  paragraph
    [9] of his statement and Q21 of his interview the appellant claimed  he
    was released after a bribe was paid. The Judge  wrongly  suggests  that
    the appellant was  released  and  if  this  was  the  only  reason  the
    appellant's claim was rejected then it could amount to an error in law.
    However, in the absence of other factors  it  does  not  amount  to  an
    error.

24. The fifth ground concerned  the  Judge's  findings  about  the  uncle's
    death. The Judge referred to an  inconsistency  in  his  evidence.  The
    appellant claimed in his statement that he had lost  contact  with  his
    uncle before he left Afghanistan and in his interview he stated he  had
    had no contact since 2004. However, when interviewed he explained  that
    he knew his paternal uncle had been killed and that he  had  been  told
    this on the night he was brought to Kabul by the authorities.

25. The point the Judge was making was that if the appellant knew  when  he
    was taken to Kabul that his uncle had been killed then why did  he  not
    mention this in his 2003 statement. The Judge's finding on  this  issue
    was open to him.

26. The second challenge made on this issue was the Judge's approach to how
    many people's names were given. Mr Hyder's challenge is effectively  to
    one line  of  the  Judge's  findings  but  his  findings  must  not  be
    considered in isolation. His explanation for rejecting the  appellant's
    account was fully reasoned in paragraph [22]  of  his  decision.  Those
    findings were fully open to the Judge.

27. The final ground pursued at the hearing was that  raised  in  paragraph
    [3.7] of the grounds of appeal. This issue  is  a  re-argument  of  the
    period of detention and where his  uncle  was.  The  issues  raised  in
    paragraph [3.7] take  the  matter  no  further.  The  Judge  repeatedly
    identified inconsistencies in the evidence and the decision  taken  was
    open to him.

28. Accordingly, based on the above I find there was no error in law.

    DECISION

29. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     28.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     28.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





