
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12867/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 28 February 2019                    |On 14 March 2019              |
|Prepared on March 2019                       |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                  SAJAD [B]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 24 January 1997. He appeals
      against a decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Buckwell
      sitting at Taylor  House  on  6  December  2018  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision   of   the
      Respondent dated 19 October 2018. That  decision  was  to  refuse  the
      Appellant's  application  for   international   protection   and   the
      Appellant's human rights claim under Article 8.


   2. The Appellant left Iran in March 2015 travelling to  Turkey  where  he
      remained for 15 days. He then travelled through Bulgaria,  Serbia  and
      Hungary where he was fingerprinted, and an asylum claim was logged  on
      8 May 2015. He then travelled through Austria, Italy and France before
      arriving in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 16 June  2015.  On  18
      June 2015 he sought a grant of immigration leave by way of  protection
      based upon his claim to be a genuine asylum  seeker,  the  refusal  of
      which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant states that he is a Sunni Muslim  of  Baluch  ethnicity.
      His father was killed by the authorities for smuggling illegal  goods,
      but the Appellant told the Respondent in interview  that  he  had  not
      encountered problems due to any activities of  his  late  father.  The
      authorities had wanted the Appellant to do national service and he had
      taken money from the authorities agreeing to  go  to  Syria  to  fight
      against ISIS. In  further  representations  it  was  stated  that  the
      Appellant had persuaded his local mosque to pay him to fight in  Syria
      against ISIS. The funds received by the Appellant had been used by him
      to pay the debts of his late father.  When  the  Appellant  failed  to
      present himself for national service duties a letter arrived requiring
      that he present himself to the authorities, the SEPAH.  The  Appellant
      had not been in when they called for  him  at  the  family  home.  The
      Appellant left his home area to travel to the capital, Teheran,  in  a
      taxi where he remained for one week before leaving the country.

   4. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant would  have  received
      any advance payment for serving his period of  military  service.  The
      credibility of the Appellant's claim was undermined, according to  the
      Respondent, by operation of section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 because he had passed through  a
      number of safe countries before arriving in the United Kingdom without
      claiming asylum on the way. The Appellant stated that he had not  been
      able to claim earlier because he was under the control of an agent.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The Judge set out his findings and reasons at  [77]  to  [93]  of  the
      determination. He  found  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  to  be
      critical. In return for taking funds a guarantor had  to  be  provided
      but the Appellant had not attempted to make contact with his guarantor
      since leaving Iran. There was no evidence beyond the  Appellant's  own
      account to support the claim of offering funds to teenagers. The Judge
      noted at [80] that his attention had not been drawn to any element  of
      the documentation which referred to contracts  being  offered  to  any
      individuals in Iran with respect to the  form  of  service  which  the
      Appellant stated applied to him.  Although  corroboration  was  not  a
      requirement the lack of evidence  did  not  assist  the  Appellant  in
      establishing the veracity of his account. The Appellant's account  was
      not  plausible  even  to  the  lower  standard,   the   Judge   asking
      rhetorically  "why  would  any  such  contract  have  been   offered?"
      Individuals were liable in Iran to  undertake  a  period  of  national
      service unless they were in education. The Appellant  would  not  have
      been liable for national service until his 18th birthday on 24 January
      2015.


   6. The Judge did not accept the documents supplied to  the  Appellant  by
      his mother from Iran. The documentation referred to the  liability  of
      the Appellant in terms of national service, but he would not have been
      liable for that until January 2015. Yet the documentation appeared  to
      predate the Appellant's 18th birthday. The Appellant  was  clearly  an
      economic migrant. He may well have had family members who  were  in  a
      position to fund his travels over a relatively lengthy period but that
      did not establish his claim. The Appellant said he was  taken  to  the
      United Kingdom because it was  a  safe  country,  but  he  had  passed
      through a number of safe countries on the  way  and  it  was  somewhat
      bizarre, in the Judge's view, that an agent would continue to move the
      Appellant  to  another  country  and  incur  further  costs  when  the
      Appellant could have claimed at an earlier point.

   7. The Judge held that the Appellant had left Iran when he did because he
      was liable  for  military  service.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  the
      Appellant's account of a complex journey  involving  different  agents
      but rather considered that the Appellant's family  had  paid  for  the
      Appellant to be  brought  to  the  United  Kingdom  perhaps  to  avoid
      military service but in any event to enable him to have an opportunity
      to find economic betterment. He also dismissed the asylum  appeal  and
      also dismissed the Article 8 appeal  but  there  has  been  no  onward
      appeal against that latter part of the determination.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Appellant appealed against the  decision  to  dismiss  his  asylum
      appeal arguing that the Judge's reasons for  finding  the  Appellant's
      documents not to be genuine were unsustainable. The reference  in  the
      English translation to "military service" could not be seen  as  being
      inconsistent with the Appellant's claim that a specific agreement  was
      made to carry out military service in return for  payment.  The  Judge
      was wrong  to  conclude  that  there  was  no  objective  evidence  of
      individuals under the age of 18 being put into military  service.  The
      Respondent's COI referred to recruitment of children as young  as  15.
      It appeared that the corroborative evidence was rejected  because  the
      Tribunal had already rejected the  Appellant's  account  for  want  of
      plausibility. The documents were consistent with the Appellant's  core
      claim to have agreed with SEPAH to perform military service  in  Syria
      in return for payment and that SEPAH  had  taken  action  against  the
      Appellant when he failed to report as agreed. Had the  documents  been
      properly considered it was arguable that  the  Appellant's  claim  was
      reasonably likely to have been accepted as credible.


   9. The second argument made in the  grounds  related  to  the  Tribunal's
      approach to credibility in general.  There  was  evidence  that  Sunni
      Muslims of Baluchi ethnicity had been  sent  to  fight  in  Syria  and
      individuals would be enticed by payment to do so. There was nothing in
      the objective evidence which was  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's
      account.  The  Judge  had  not  sought  to  rely   on   any   internal
      discrepancies or other issues with the  Appellant's  various  accounts
      given over the course of three separate substantive asylum interviews.
      The lack of  corroboration  alone  was  considered  by  the  Judge  to
      outweigh any such consistency. The Judge  had  failed  to  assess  the
      Appellant's claim fairly and applied too high a standard of proof.

  10. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison on 1  February  2019.
      In granting permission to appeal she found it arguable that the  Judge
      had  misdirected  himself  in  his  treatment  of  the   corroborative
      documentary evidence submitted by the Appellant. This could have  made
      a material difference to the outcome.

  11. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  26
      February 2019. The letter commented on [50] of  the  determination  in
      which the Judge had recorded the Appellant's evidence about  the  date
      on which the Appellant had signed up for military service in 2014. The
      Appellant had said that it had not been for military service as  such,
      but he had signed up that year. This was inconsistent with  an  answer
      the Appellant had given an interview that he did not know when he  had
      signed up. It was clear  that  the  Judge  had  assessed  all  of  the
      evidence before finding that the Appellant was an economic migrant and
      not  a  refugee  as  claimed.  The  Tribunal   had   directed   itself
      appropriately.

The Hearing Before Me

  12. In consequence of the grant of permission to appeal  the  matter  came
      before me to determine in the first place where there was  a  material
      error of law in the determination such as to cause it to be set  aside
      and the appeal reheard. If there was not, then  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal would stand.


  13. For  the  Appellant,  counsel  argued  that  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant had been rejected by the Judge because  he  thought  it  was
      implausible that a 17-year-old would have been offered a contract  for
      military service by  means  of  a  financial  inducement.  There  were
      documents to support the Appellant's account  which  the  Judge  dealt
      with at [82]. In the Appellant's bundle there had been a  letter  from
      SEPAH referring to  national  service.  The  Judge  had  rejected  the
      documents because they predated the Appellant's 18th birthday. It  was
      not right to find that there was no evidence of individuals  under  18
      being recruited.

  14. Counsel argued that the 2nd ground was stronger than the first ground,
      it was that the Judge had approached  the  issue  of  credibility  the
      wrong way around. He found the documents not genuine because  children
      were not supposed to be  called  for  military  service.  It  was  not
      permissible to reach a conclusion on credibility  ignoring  supporting
      evidence. The Appellant had not had his account fairly determined.  He
      was given money and then he ran away. The Judge rejected  the  account
      because he had already rejected that someone of  the  Appellant's  age
      would be called up for  service.  Military  service  whether  paid  or
      unpaid was still military service.

  15. In reply the Presenting Officer relied on the rule  24  response.  The
      Judge  considered  the  fact  that  there  was  no  letter  from   the
      Appellant's mother as to how the documents had arrived in  the  United
      Kingdom. There was no evidence from the Appellant's guarantor in Iran.
      The Judge had looked at the oral evidence in which the  Appellant  had
      said he was not called up for military service.  There  was  no  valid
      evidence before the Judge, what there  was  a  newspaper  article  but
      nothing specifically that someone prior to their 18th  birthday  would
      be in receipt of funds  to  fight  in  Syria.  The  Appellant  had  no
      military experience and there was no evidence  that  minors  would  be
      offered money to fight in Syria. There was no expert evidence provided
      to indicate that the documents relied upon were genuine. The Judge was
      entitled to reach the conclusions he did. There was no material  error
      of law in the determination as the Judge had  considered  all  of  the
      evidence.

  16.  In  conclusion  counsel  stated  that  there  had  been  no  internal
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account.  There  was  evidence  of
      people under 18 volunteering for military service. The  Appellant  was
      not under a duty to enlist.

Findings

  17. This is a reasons-based challenge to a determination. I remind  myself
      that the Judge had the benefit  of  seeing  the  Appellant  give  oral
      testimony before arriving at his conclusions in this matter. The Judge
      did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness. Much of the  case
      turned on whether it was plausible that someone under the  age  of  18
      would be offered money to fight in Syria. The Appellant's argument  is
      that there was such evidence but that still left the question  whether
      it applied to this Appellant and whether he had been  given  money  to
      fight in Syria.


  18. The Appellant relied on a number of documents  to  support  his  claim
      which he said he had obtained from his mother in Iran. The  Judge  was
      evidently  concerned  about  how  the  documents  had  come  into  the
      Appellant's  possession  noting  that  there  was  nothing  from   the
      Appellant's mother to confirm that she had forwarded the documents  or
      indeed how she had them in her possession  in  the  first  place.  The
      burden of proof of establishing  that  these  were  genuine  documents
      rested upon the Appellant. Simply producing such documents was not  of
      itself sufficient for them to be accepted as genuine.

  19. The central argument made by the Appellant is that the Judge first  of
      all rejected the Appellant's credibility and then as  an  afterthought
      rejected the documents the Appellant relied upon to  substantiate  his
      claim. What is apparent from  the  determination  is  that  the  Judge
      reviewed the documents carefully at [82] of the determination  in  the
      context of his overall findings. The  documentation  referred  to  the
      liability of the Appellant in terms of national service. He would  not
      have been liable for that until 24th of  January  2015  and  within  a
      period of up to one month thereafter yet  the  documentation  predated
      the 18th birthday of the Appellant. The Judge's  conclusion  was  that
      there was no documentation to confirm that individuals under  the  age
      of 18 years would have been put into military service. Contrary to the
      submission made in the grounds, the Judge's problems with the dates on
      the documentation are easy to establish. The  documents  predated  the
      Appellant's 18th birthday but if the  Appellant  was  not  liable  for
      military service prior to that date the documents could not have  been
      genuine. The Appellant himself indicated  in  oral  testimony  to  the
      Judge that, contrary to the rest of his  case,  it  was  not  military
      service that he was being called up to do. In those  circumstances  it
      was not surprising that the Judge viewed the documents with suspicion.


  20.  The  Appellant  could  have  called  supporting  evidence  from   his
      guarantor, Ali Jangi, who he said was needed before the money would be
      advanced by the authorities. It is not a requirement of an application
      for asylum that there be supporting evidence but  if  such  supporting
      evidence could be reasonably obtained and yet it is not, it is open in
      those circumstances  for  a  Judge  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
      finding, see TK Burundi. In this case the Judge evidently rejected the
      Appellant's claim to be in fear of the guarantor and held against  the
      Appellant that there was nothing by way of  supporting  evidence  from
      either the Appellant's mother  who  had  sent  the  documents  or  the
      guarantor who presumably would be liable to repay the funds  that  the
      Appellant said he had received.  The  Appellant  had  acknowledged  in
      evidence that  the  guarantor  could  have  verified  the  Appellant's
      account. It was a matter for the  Judge  to  decide  and  it  did  not
      demonstrate any material error of law on his part that he held against
      the Appellant that such evidence from either prospective  witness  was
      not available.

  21. What the Appellant had to answer was the rhetorical question posed  at
      [80] of  the  determination:  why  would  any  such  contract  as  the
      Appellant described have been offered to him in the first  place?  The
      Appellant had to show that he  was  an  exception  to  the  rule  that
      national service did not begin until a person's 18th birthday. He  was
      unable to show that for the reasons given by the Judge. It  cannot  be
      said that the Judge's reasoning was irrational,  irrationality  is  in
      any event a very high hurdle for an unsuccessful party to cross.  That
      Sunni Muslims of the same ethnicity as the Appellant have been sent to
      fight in Syria did not  advance  the  Appellant's  case.  Nor  did  it
      particularly assist the Appellant that individuals could be enticed by
      payment to fight in Syria. The enticement referred to in  the  grounds
      was  that  Afghan  refugees  were  promised  high  wages  and  Iranian
      citizenship once they completed their service but  that  would  hardly
      have been an enticement for the Appellant since  he  already  had  his
      citizenship.

  22. There were other difficulties with  the  Appellant's  credibility  for
      example the fact that  the  Appellant  delayed  claiming  asylum  even
      though he had passed through several safe  countries  where  he  could
      easily have claimed. If the objective was to take the Appellant  to  a
      safe country, then it made no sense to keep moving the Appellant  from
      one safe country to another. The intention, the  Judge  surmised,  was
      all  along  to  bring  the  Appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
      Appellant's lack of credibility in relation to his reason for arriving
      in the United Kingdom thus further undermined the credibility  of  the
      overall claim.

  23. It cannot be said that the Judge was looking at matters in  isolation.
      Of necessity he had to set out his conclusions in some form  of  order
      but there was nothing to  suggest  that  in  doing  so  he  failed  to
      consider all of the evidence before  arriving  at  his  conclusion.  I
      reject the argument that the Judge  fell  into  some  form  of  Mbangi
      error. Overall the grounds amount to no more than a disagreement  with
      the conclusions reached by  the  Judge  in  this  case.  They  do  not
      demonstrate any material error of  law  in  the  determination  and  I
      dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal. Although an anonymity order was
      made at first instance, the appeal  having  been  dismissed  does  not
      reveal any public policy reason why it should be continued.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Signed this 12 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 12 March 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
