
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12619/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 BRA (IRAQ)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Chelvan, Counsel instructed via Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Phull sitting at Birmingham on 14 January 2019)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse to grant his  protection  claim
    in which he maintained that he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    or serious harm at the hands of Turkmen and  the  Popular  Mobilisation
    Force ("PMF") in his  former  home  area  of  Tuz  Khurmatu,  and  that
    internal relocation to the KRG (aka "the IKR") was not a viable  option
    as he had left his CSID behind, and he could not make contact with  his
    family to help him obtain a CSID.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity, whose date  of
    birth is 21 November 1991.  As summarised in the RFRL,  his  claim  was
    that he had lived in Tuz Khurmatu with his parents.  They had supported
    themselves as a family  through  farming.   On  5  October  2017  three
    Turkmen trespassed on their land and began cultivating it for their own
    needs.  His father filed a complaint with the Asayish Security  Service
    and on 7 October 2017 the three Turkmen were arrested.

 3. On 16 October 2017 fighting broke out between Kurdish Peshmerga  forces
    and the PMF. Following the attack, the  Kurdish  authorities  lost  all
    power and the PMF gained total control of Tuz Khurmatu.  On 23  October
    2017, when the appellant was at the house  of  his  uncle,  his  mother
    telephoned to inform him that a combined force of PMF and  Turkmen  had
    come to the family home and had kidnapped his father as the  result  of
    the land dispute.  She also said that they were asking questions as  to
    his whereabouts and she warned him  not  to  return  home.   His  uncle
    advised him that the best thing for him to do was to go abroad, and his
    uncle had arranged for an agent to take him out of Iraq.

 4. In the RFRL, the Department accepted that on 16 October 2017 there  was
    a clash in Tuz Khurmatu between Iraqi Government forces,  supported  by
    the PMF, and Kurdish Peshmurga forces (aka "the  PUK").   A  number  of
    civilians were killed in an indiscriminate attack,  while  hundreds  of
    properties were looted, set on fire and  destroyed.   However,  he  had
    failed to demonstrate that he was personally involved in a land dispute
    and his claim that there was an adverse interest in him on  that  basis
    was considered to be inconsistent and not  credible.   Accordingly,  it
    was not accepted that he had been targeted by Turkmen and the PMF  over
    a land dispute.

 5. On the issue of risk on return, it was accepted that he  had  lived  in
    Tuz Khurmatu which was part of Saladin (aka "Salah Al-Din")  Governate.
    As this was a contested area, it was accepted that it was not  feasible
    that he could return to Tuz Khurmatu.  But there was no  Article  15(c)
    risk for an ordinary civilian in Baghdad city, and  so  relocation  was
    available to him.

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant said
    that he could not relocate to either Baghdad or the KRG.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Phull.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, who said that the agent  had
    taken his passport and he had left his CSID in Iraq.  He  had  not  had
    any contact with his family since he left, despite  making  efforts  to
    call them.  He could not return to Baghdad without a passport,  and  as
    he had no documents, relocation to the KRG was not an option.

 8. In his closing submissions on behalf of the Department, the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that it was implausible that the  appellant  had  not
    had contact with his family since he left.  He had family in  Iraq  and
    he could turn to them for help in obtaining a CISD.   He could then fly
    directly from the UK to Erbil.  Internal relocation  was  available  to
    him.

 9. In reply, the appellant's representative submitted that  the  appellant
    had tried to call his family without success and had looked to the  Red
    Cross for help in tracing them.  He had no means to obtain  a  CSID  or
    passport.  The Iraq  Embassy  in  the  UK  could  not  help  him.   The
    appellant had no documents and so he could not return to either Baghdad
    or the KRG. So his appeal should be allowed.

10. In her subsequent decision, the Judge found that the appellant had  not
    made out his case that his father had been kidnapped, or that there was
    an adverse interest in him because of a land dispute.  He had also  not
    made out that he would attract the adverse attention of the Turkmen and
    the PMF on return to Iraq.

11. At paragraph [24], the Judge held that the  appellant  originated  from
    Tuz Khurmatu in the Sulaymaniyah region of the IKR:

         "The refusal says the appellant would be returned to Erbil  in  IKR
         because he originates from Sulaymaniyah, a non-contested  area  and
         where the PUK are in control (CPIN August 2017)."

12. At paragraph [25], the Judge did not accept that he was not in  contact
    with his family, because she found it inconceivable that he  would  not
    have contacted them to tell them that he had arrived safely in the  UK.
    She found that the appellant's CSID document was at  the  home  of  his
    parents.  She continued:

         "I find he could contact his mother or maternal uncle, to request a
         copy of his CSID document/passport to be sent to him.  I find, even
         if he cannot return to IKR directly, as  held  in  "AAH"  he  could
         return to the IKR via Baghdad once he is in possession  of  a  copy
         CSID document/passport."

13. At paragraph [26], the Judge held that the appellant  could  return  to
    Erbil or Sulaymaniyah, where as an ordinary civilian he  would  receive
    the same level of protection as the rest of  the  population.   He  had
    family that could support him.  He could rely on his CSID  card,  which
    he had left with his family at home, to access  basic  needs.   He  had
    skills, which he could rely upon to find work.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. In the application for permission to appeal, the writer said  that  the
    Judge had made a major factual error at paragraph [24].   Tuz  Khurmatu
    was outside the IKR, and it was a contested area.  The writer  went  on
    to refer to the case law of AAH, which at paragraph [19] stated that if
    a Kurd found employment in the IKR, he could remain  for  longer.   But
    AAH had also held, at paragraph [10], that, "P cannot  work  without  a
    CSID". The appellant had always maintained that he could  not  get  his
    CSID. So how could he be expected to work? The Judge had thus erred  in
    law in finding that the appellant could relocate to the IKR.



The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

15. On 16 April 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.  Whilst  much  of  the  application  for  permission  seemingly
         represents a disagreement with the findings made by the  judge,  it
         is certainly arguable that she erred as contended at [5] onwards of
         the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  appellant  was  accepted  by   the
         respondent to be from Tuz Khurmatu in  the  Salah-Ad-Din  province,
         which was accepted at [54] of the refusal letter to be part of  the
         contested  areas.   The  Judge  arguably  erred  at  [24]  onwards,
         therefore, when she  treated  the  appellant  as  originating  from
         Sulaymaniyah in the IKR.  If there was an error in that regard,  it
         is certainly arguable that it had infected the  Judge's  conclusion
         about the viability of the appellant returning to the IKR, at [26].

         3.   Whether any such error is ultimately material is a matter  for
         the Upper Tribunal, particularly in light of the findings  at  [25]
         and [26] that the appellant's CSID card is at the family  home  and
         could be sent by his mother."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether a material error  of  law
    was made out, Dr Chelvan, who did not appear below, submitted that  the
    Judge had materially erred in law, because her  findings  at  [25]  and
    [26] with respect to the CSID were  unsustainable  and/or  procedurally
    unfair, having  regard  to  the  case  that  was  put  forward  by  the
    Department in the RFRL.

17. Ms Holmes accepted that the Judge had made "a big mistake" in  locating
    Tuz Khurmatu within the IKR.  However, she submitted that her error was
    immaterial, as her findings at [25] and [26] were both sustainable  and
    procedurally fair.

Discussion

18. It is not in dispute that the Judge made a mistake of fact in paragraph
    [24] of her decision.  Tuz Khurmatu is not in the province or governate
    of Sulaymaniyah. More importantly, it also not inside the IKR.

19. It is also common ground that the Judge's error is not material if  her
    findings at paragraphs [25] and [26] hold good.  If he is equipped with
    a CSID, the appellant can travel via Baghdad to the IKR, in  the  event
    that he cannot fly directly from the UK to Erbil.  Similarly, if he  is
    equipped with a CSID in the IKR, the appellant can live and work in the
    IKR, whether or not he has family to support him in the IKR.  There  is
    no Article 15(c) risk in the IKR.

20. Dr Chelvan challenges the findings made in paragraphs [25] and [26]  on
    the ground that they diverge from the case put forward in the RFRL.

21. Paragraphs 66 to 90 of the RFRL are devoted to the topic of  the  CSID.
    The section concludes with the following  assertion  at  paragraph  90:
    "Therefore, if it were feasible for you to return  to  Baghdad,  it  is
    considered that you are able to apply for a  CSID  in  Baghdad  without
    returning to Salah-ad-din and that you have the support of your  family
    in order to do that."

22. Dr Chelvan submits  that  the  Department  thereby  conceded  that  the
    appellant needed to return to Baghdad in order to apply for a  CSID  in
    Baghdad; and hence they also conceded  that  the  appellant  could  not
    obtain a CSID by the alternative route of getting his  mother  to  send
    him the CSID he had left behind.

23. However, I do not consider that the RRFL can reasonably be construed as
    containing  the  concession  of  fact  contended  for  by  Dr  Chelvan.
    Firstly, the summary of the appellant's claim  in  the  RFRL  was  very
    brief  and  it  did  not  include  the  appellant's  evidence  in   his
    substantive asylum interview that he had left his CSID at home.  As the
    RFRL neither accepted nor rejected this piece of  evidence,  I  do  not
    consider that the discussion at paragraphs 66 to 90  of  the  RFRL  can
    reasonably be treated as being predicated upon an acceptance  that  the
    appellant was unable to obtain the CSID he had left behind in Iraq.

24. Moreover, as I demonstrate below, I consider that the RFRL clearly  put
    in issue the appellant's case (a) that he was not in contact  with  his
    family and (b) that he was not able to obtain a CSID  via  his  family.
    Accordingly, at the hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  burden
    remained on the appellant to prove these matters.

25. At paragraph 83, it was asserted that the  appellant  had  provided  no
    evidence that he had made a genuine attempt to obtain evidence  of  his
    identity or status documentation, "such  as  by  contacting  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in London via friends or relatives in Iraq (my emphasis)."

26. At paragraph 88, the following was stated: "It is  therefore  concluded
    that you would not be required to return to Tuz Khurmatu  in  order  to
    obtain a CSID." The appellant was indeed not required to return to  Tuz
    Khurmatu in order to obtain a CSID, as one of  the  ways  in  which  he
    could obtain a CSID was for his mother to send it to him.

27. At paragraph 89, the following was stated:

         "It is also noted that a material  fact  of  your  claim  has  been
         rejected, therefore your credibility has not  been  established  to
         assume that the claims that you  have  made  about  your  level  of
         contact with your family members in  Iraq,  or  lack  thereof,  are
         accurate. By your own accretion (sic) you have your parents and  an
         uncle in Iraq who you claim supported [you]  in  facilitating  your
         exit from the country.  You have provided no reason why your family
         would be unwilling to assist you again."

28. The discussion begins at paragraph 66 of the RFRL  with  a  recognition
    that the overarching requirement imposed on the  decision-maker  is  to
    decide whether 'P'  has  a  CSID,  or  will  be  able  to  obtain  one,
    reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.

29.  The  scenario  which  is  being  addressed  in  paragraph  90  is  the
    alternative one in which return to Iraq is feasible,  but  P  does  not
    have a CSID, and cannot obtain it from the Civil Status Affairs  Office
    of P's home governate "or from his family direct." So the  question  in
    such circumstances is whether P can obtain a CSID reasonably soon after
    his arrival in Iraq ("Scenario B").  In expressing the  view  that  the
    appellant could obtain a replacement CSID in Baghdad,  reasonably  soon
    after his arrival in Baghdad, the Department was not conceding that the
    appellant did not have a CSID at home which he could  obtain  from  his
    family direct ("Scenario A").

30. On a fair reading of the RFRL, both Scenarios A and B were in play. Put
    another way, Scenario A was not expressly excluded.  Moreover,  insofar
    as it is material, there is nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant's
    legal representatives were taken by surprise by the case put forward by
    the Presenting Officer, as summarised in [8] above.

31. Having found the appellant not credible in his core claim  and  in  his
    explanation as to the trigger for his departure from Tuz  Khurmatu,  it
    was clearly open to the Judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible in his account of not being able  to  make  contact  with  the
    family whom he had left behind in Tuz Khurmatu, and who  had  paid  for
    his journey to the UK.  The findings made by the  Judge  at  paragraphs
    [25] and [26] are sustainable  ones,  and  they  are  not  vitiated  by
    procedural unfairness.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

