
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12970/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 14 May 2019                         |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [N]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7 July 1989. He  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Coutts  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 11 December 2018 in which the  Judge  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  29
    October 2018. That decision was to refuse the  Appellant's  application
    for international protection. The Appellant entered the United  Kingdom
    on 18 April 2011 with leave as a student valid until 23 May 2012. Leave
    was extended in this category until 31 May 2014. A further  application
    to remain in the same category was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  9
    September 2014 with no right of appeal. The Appellant has had no  leave
    to remain since then. On 30 April 2018 the Appellant made a  claim  for
    asylum the refusal of which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

2.   The Appellant claimed to be at risk on the grounds  of  his  membership
    of a particular social group namely,  homosexual  men.  The  Respondent
    does  not  accept  the  Appellant's  claimed  sexual  orientation.  The
    Appellant realised he was gay when he was 16 years old  and  he  became
    attracted to a college friend. The Appellant concealed matters from his
    family and friends and hoped that no one would realise he was  gay.  He
    was a practising Muslim and had been taught that homosexuals should  be
    killed. He did not have any relationships with men or women when he was
    living in Pakistan. When he came here to study it was his intention  to
    return to Pakistan at the conclusion of his studies.

3.   He had had two  relationships  with  men  since  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Appellant was taken to a gay club in Soho  by  his  friend
    [J] after which the Appellant started a  relationship  with  [J]  which
    lasted for 18 months. They would go to  the  XXL  gay  club  in  London
    together. The relationship ended when [J]  moved  to  Canada  with  his
    family. The Appellant next entered into a relationship with another man
    called [OA] whom he had met in the XXL club. This  relationship  lasted
    until June 2015. The Appellant had attended gay clubs and used gay apps
    such as Grindr. He had been tested for sexually transmitted disease and
    was presently living in Streatham Vale sharing his house with some  gay
    friends.

4.   The Appellant feared his family in Pakistan who have  been  asking  him
    to get married since 2017. His family told him they had arranged to his
    engagement in Pakistan to a woman known as [A]. He then told his family
    he was gay; he felt compelled to do so because he did not wish to  ruin
    [A]'s life. The Appellant's uncle came on the  telephone  and  verbally
    abused the Appellant and the Appellant's brother threatened to kill the
    Appellant. His last contact with his family was on 8 February 2018.  He
    had been suffering from anxiety when  he  attended  for  his  screening
    interview on 30 April 2018 and had meant to say that he told his family
    two weeks before the screening interview that he was gay but mistakenly
    had said he had told them two months before the screening interview.

The Decision at First Instance

5.   The Judge did not find the Appellant's claim  to  be  credible  to  the
    lower standard. If the Appellant was gay  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect that he could explain in more detail how he came to realise  his
    sexuality and the barriers and issues he faced in trying to  live  that
    different life in  Pakistan  given  the  restrictive  situation  there.
    Instead the Appellant has asserted that in coming  to  terms  with  his
    sexuality he avoided contact with friends and family. This was a  vague
    explanation in the Judge's view, see [56] and it was more credible that
    the Appellant was concentrating, as he had maintained in his interview,
    upon his studies. It was reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant
    would have  applied  for  protection  upon  arrival  here  but  it  was
    noticeable that he had told the Respondent  it  was  his  intention  to
    complete his studies then return.

6.   If the Appellant were genuinely  a  homosexual  it  was  reasonable  to
    conclude that he would find  how  his  sexuality  was  treated  by  the
    Islamic faith to be upsetting. He had not sought to change his religion
    or provide any details of the conflicts he  had  experienced  with  his
    faith or how he had tried to resolve them. If the Appellant was  in  an
    intimate relationship with a person for 18 months, it was not  credible
    to think he would not know that person's date of birth. The explanation
    that the Appellant was under a lot of stress was being used by  him  to
    explain away a deficiency in his account. It was not  credible  to  say
    that the Appellant had no photographs of himself with  [J]  because  he
    did not possess a camera when the possession of a smart  phone  was  an
    everyday item. As a student he would be required  to  keep  in  contact
    with his college by email and would thus need a smart phone.

7.   It was not credible that the Appellant could not remember the  date  of
    birth of the man he claimed to have had a second relationship with. The
    Appellant was in a relationship with this person for over two years and
    he would have wanted to know this person's age and date  of  birth.  It
    was inconsistent that on the one hand the Appellant  said  he  did  not
    know of [O]'s immigration status but later said that [O] was a  British
    citizen and believed the Appellant only wanted to be in a  relationship
    with [O] for that reason,  to  get  status.  On  the  other  hand,  the
    Appellant had been clear in his interview with the Respondent  that  he
    had never asked [O] about his immigration status. Photographs  said  to
    show the Appellant with [O] could not be verified. The  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had been in a relationship with either [J]
    or [O] as claimed.

8.   The evidence of a supporting witness, Mr Raja, was found by  the  Judge
    to be partisan and was accordingly afforded less weight, see [77].  The
    Appellant's attendance at  gay  clubs  was  not  determinative  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality. It was reasonable to conclude that  the  persons
    the Appellant shared a house  with  would  be  able  to  speak  to  the
    Appellant's  personal  circumstances,   but   no   supporting   witness
    statements  had  been  obtained  from  them.  The  Appellant  had  been
    inconsistent about when he claimed to have told his family that he  was
    gay. The Judge did not accept the Appellant had a conversation with his
    family in Pakistan. The Appellant's conduct in overstaying his  student
    visa and not leaving when required damaged the Appellant's credibility.
    The Judge dismissed the appeal.



The Onward Appeal

9.   The Appellant appealed against this  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had appeared at first instance and who appeared before  me.
    Nevertheless, counsel's grounds persistently referred to the  Judge  as
    she notwithstanding that Judge Coutts is male. The grounds argued  that
    the Judge had not made clear findings about the witness Mr Raja who had
    given evidence that he had seen  the  Appellant  in  a  wide  range  of
    circumstances and situations.  Mr  Raja  was  either  mistaken  in  his
    genuinely held belief or was lying but it was not possible to tell from
    the determination which decision the Judge had made. The  question  was
    whether the Judge should have asked himself did he accept the  witness'
    evidence? The Judge was not obliged  to  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    witness but was obliged to make findings as to credibility.

10.  The Judge had failed to take into account the  particular  difficulties
    of an asylum claim made on the  basis  of  sexuality.  A  report  dated
    September 2013 from the UK Lesbian and Gay Immigration Group was before
    the Judge which commented extensively on delay in  claiming  asylum  in
    homosexual cases. Small discrepancies should never be the  basis  of  a
    refusal of protection because of a lack of credibility.

11.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 15 February  2019.  He
    noted that the Judge had stated that the evidence of Mr Raja was  found
    to be partisan and thus afforded less weight in the round.  Given  that
    the attendance of Mr  Raja  at  the  hearing  and  the  extent  of  his
    knowledge had been acquired on the basis  of  being  a  friend  of  the
    Appellant it was arguable that the Judge should have found Mr  Raja  to
    have been credible and attached greater weight to Mr  Raja's  evidence.
    The Judge should have set out clear findings  why  Mr  Raja's  evidence
    that the Appellant was seen kissing other men was not accepted. It  was
    arguable that the absence  of  any  further  evaluation  of  Mr  Raja's
    evidence affected the outcome. It was arguable that the features of  Mr
    Raja's evidence were relevant to the conclusions reached  although  not
    necessarily determinative thereof. It was also arguable that  too  much
    weight had been attached to the absence of the witnesses referred to at
    [79] of the decision (the persons with  whom  the  Appellant  shared  a
    house). The evaluation by the Judge of the application of section 8 had
    been affected through not taking  into  account  the  totality  of  the
    factors as identified in the permission application.

The Hearing Before Me

12.  For the Appellant counsel argued that the  witness  Mr  Raja  had  been
    granted refugee status on the basis of his membership of  a  particular
    social group, gay men in Pakistan, but the Judge had not made  adequate
    findings in relation to Mr Raja's evidence. Mr Raja was sure  that  the
    Appellant was homosexual. He had given wide-ranging evidence  that  the
    Appellant had frequented gay situations and had interacted  with  other
    men. There were only two possible conclusions about Mr Raja's  evidence
    either he was mistaken, or he was lying. The Judge had not  given  much
    weight to that evidence but had not made a decision why he rejected  it
    for example because it was mistaken. The Judge was obliged to say  what
    evidence he accepted or rejected and why. The 2nd ground was  that  the
    Judge had overlooked the report "Missing the Mark" which had offered an
    explanation why there could be  delay  in  disclosure  in  LGBT  cases.
    Counsel emphasised that she  relied  principally  on  ground  one,  the
    treatment of Mr Raja's evidence.

13.  In reply, the Presenting Officer acknowledged that the  Respondent  had
    granted Mr Raja asylum status  and  it  was  not  a  case  of  Mr  Raja
    succeeding on appeal to a Tribunal. The Judge had  dealt  at  [76]  and
    [77] with whether Mr Raja was mistaken or lying.  What  the  Judge  had
    said at [77] was permissible, that he had  found  his  evidence  to  be
    partisan as  a  friend  of  the  Appellant  which  detracted  from  its
    probative value and so was afforded less weight in the round.  At  [78]
    the Judge had arrived at permissible and well-made  findings  that  the
    Appellant's attendance at gay clubs and that he had been  seen  kissing
    other men were not  on  their  own  determinative  of  the  Appellant's
    sexuality. In arriving at those conclusions, the  Judge  was  following
    the guidance.

14.  There were a vast  number  of  adverse  credibility  findings  in  this
    determination such as: the 3-and-a-half-year delay in claiming and  the
    absence of evidence from either of the men said to be in the  two  main
    relationships which the Appellant had had in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Judge had rejected the Appellant's claim not have a smart phone and the
    Appellant had failed to provide evidence from his housemates. When  set
    in the context of  the  claim  these  were  permissible  even  if  some
    findings were stronger than others. There  was  nothing  irrational  or
    perverse about the Judge's determination. The guidance  from  the  2013
    report cited in the grounds did not have the force of law. [78]  showed
    the Judge was not taking a binary or over prescriptive view. The  Judge
    was entitled to  take  the  delay  point  into  account  at  [85].  The
    Appellant's conduct in  overstaying  his  visa  and  not  leaving  when
    required damaged the Appellant's credibility but having considered  all
    matters in the round such damage was minimal  because  the  Appellant's
    evidence was otherwise not credible.

15.  In closing counsel accepted that this was not a  rationality  challenge
    and it was not being argued that the  Judge's  credibility  conclusions
    were either  irrational  or  Wednesbury  unreasonable.  The  issue  was
    whether the Judge had dealt properly with Mr Raja's  evidence  and  the
    guidance.

Findings

16.  The Judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness and  gave
    a number of  reasons  which  led  him  to  that  conclusion.  The  main
    complaint taken against the determination is in relation to the Judge's
    treatment of a supporting witness Mr Raja who had been granted  refugee
    status by the Respondent on the  grounds  of  sexual  orientation.  The
    Judge rejected Mr Raja's evidence because he found it to be partisan as
    Mr Raja was a friend of the Appellant. As  an  interested  witness  the
    weight that could be placed on Mr  Raja's  evidence  was  reduced.  The
    principal issue in this case turns on whether that self-direction which
    appears at [77] was or was not a material error  of  law.  The  reduced
    weight afforded to Mr Raja's evidence  was  a  factor  in  the  overall
    credibility assessment of the Appellant's claim to be gay. However,  it
    is going too far to suggest that the Judge should have made  a  finding
    on whether Mr Raja was or was not lying. The burden of proof was on the
    Appellant. He put forward Mr Raja as a witness, but Mr Raja was not, in
    the Judge's view, an impartial witness. He was someone who was a  long-
    standing friend of the Appellant and wished to support the  Appellant's
    claim. Such a  situation  is  not  unknown  in  this  jurisdiction.  An
    Appellant might call  a  close  relative  to  confirm  the  Appellant's
    account  of  matters,  but  that  evidence  might,  depending  on   the
    circumstances, be given little weight by  a  Judge  because  the  Judge
    concludes that the relative has allowed their closeness to an Appellant
    to influence their evidence.

17.  A misguided attempt to help a friend or family  member  does  not  mean
    that a Judge has to make a finding that the witness  is  lying.  It  is
    sufficient that the Judge in assessing the weight of the various pieces
    of  evidence  ascribes  little  weight  to  that  particular   witness'
    evidence. I bear in mind that this Judge had the benefit of seeing both
    the Appellant and Mr Raja give evidence and be cross examined. It was a
    matter for the Judge to assess the evidence that was being given to him
    and decide what weight if any he could place upon it. As the Presenting
    Officer submitted to me, there were many areas  where  the  Appellant's
    evidence was found to be unreliable. The Judge had  to  weigh  all  the
    evidence and arrive at a holistic assessment in the round.

18.  I do not accept that the Judge had come to a view  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility based on what  the  Appellant  had  said  and  then  as  an
    afterthought dismissed Mr Raja's evidence. That would be  to  make  the
    mistake prohibited by the authority of Mibangi. A fair reading  of  the
    determination shows that the Judge considered all the evidence  in  the
    round before arriving at any specific conclusions. The findings  on  Mr
    Raja's evidence for example come before the  Judge's  findings  on  the
    section 8 delay point under the 2004  Act  and  also  come  before  the
    Judge's  conclusion  at  [84]  that  the  Appellant  had  not   had   a
    conversation with his family in Pakistan informing  them  that  he  was
    gay. The Judge found it more credible  that  the  Appellant  was  under
    pressure  to  get  married  and  when  the  Appellant   rejected   that
    arrangement it prompted a claim for asylum in order to avoid  a  return
    to Pakistan. In short, the Judge found that the Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was not motivated by a need  or  desire  to  seek  international
    protection.

19.  The 2nd ground of onward appeal in this case is  that  the  Judge  paid
    inadequate attention to the UKLGIG report. I agree with the  submission
    of the Presenting  Officer  that  the  Judge  evidently  did  have  the
    guidance on the correct treatment of sexual orientation claims in  mind
    when giving his determination. At [78] the  Judge  specifically  stated
    that behaviour was not the basis on which one could conclude a person's
    sexual orientation (and see page 13 and onwards of the UKLGIG  report).
    The report states that small discrepancies should never be the basis of
    a refusal of protection because of what is as a result  said  to  be  a
    lack of credibility. That is true of any credibility assessment in this
    jurisdiction. The problem for the Appellant was  that  these  were  not
    small discrepancies in his account but fundamental ones which  went  to
    the core of his claim.

20.  There were significant omissions  such  as  the  failure  to  call  the
    Appellant's housemates, there was a lack of knowledge of  the  two  men
    with whom the Appellant had said he had  lengthy  relationships,  there
    was  no  supporting  evidence  for  example  photographs  showing   the
    Appellant with [J] in circumstances where it  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected that evidence to have been  relatively  easily  provided.  The
    burden was on the Appellant and it was for him to provide  evidence  in
    support of his claim. A failure to provide  evidence  in  circumstances
    where it was reasonable to expect such evidence, entitled the Judge  to
    form an adverse credibility view. I do not find there was any  material
    error of law in the determination in  this  case  and  the  grounds  of
    onward appeal are no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  result.  I
    dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15 May 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 15 May 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
