
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12556/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                         |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                  khan [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and he appealed and  following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 5 March 2018, Judge of  the
    First-Tier  Tribunal  Traynor  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeals  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human right's grounds.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal which was granted on  23
    March 2018 by Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison.  Her
    reasons for so granting were:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission in time  to  appeal  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Traynor) promulgated  on
         5 March 2018 whereby it dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
         the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  his  application  for
         protection.


         2. It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law for the following
         reasons: - (a) for possibly not  giving  the  legal  representative
         sufficient time to put forward his  examination-in-chief  including
         details of photographs of the Appellant's political  activities  in
         the UK and in stopping the Representative in making submissions  on
         the case papers  when  they  were  not  introduced  before  through
         questioning; (b) by failing to set out the appropriate standard  of
         proof; (c) although the Appellant may not have made any application
         on 9 January, 2008 this is immaterial it  is  arguable  that  Judge
         placed weight in his credibility assessment on the  fact  that  the
         Appellant abandoned his motorbike and fled on foot which  he  finds
         to be highly incredible because he would more likely than not  have
         been caught without taking into account that the Appellant had said
         that the road ended and there was a wall in front of them and  that
         he had no choice but to abandon his motorbike; (d) by finding  that
         the  Appellant's  parents  failed  to  report  the  attack  without
         considering the objective evidence; (e) by failing to give adequate
         reasons why he  rejects  the  documents  lodged  by  the  Appellant
         including failing to consider a newspaper report at Shyamal  Sylhet
         which confirms the Appellant's role within the BNP; (f) by  placing
         weight on the fact that as a reason  for  claiming  protection  the
         Appellant had difficulty with his business, owed money and did  not
         want to return which did not take account  of  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant was running a successful business but he became  indebted
         later but not prior to coming to the UK; (g)  by  failing  to  take
         into  account  the  photographs  and  other  evidence  put  forward
         including the evidence of his witness with regard to his sur  place
         political activities and (h) by finding that it is unlikely  for  a
         person with a case against  him  to  leave  the  country  when  the
         objective evidence has pointed out in the  grounds  for  permission
         show that 99% of people attempting to leave the  country,  even  if
         charged with crimes, would not normally face difficulties."


 3. The appeal initially came before me on 27  April  2018.  Amongst  other
    things it was suggested that the Judge  had  materially  erred  in  not
    allowing examination in  chief.  Unfortunately,  at  that  hearing  the
    Appellant was represented by the same representative who  had  appeared
    in the First-Tier Tribunal. That therefore caused  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing to be adjourned and I caused directions to be  issued  for  the
    furtherance of the appeal. Those directions were:-

         "1.  Upon Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Appleyard  having  adjourned
         the hearing of 27 April 2018,  the  following  directions  for  the
         furtherance of this appeal are made:


               A. The issues raised in the appeal relating to the conduct of
                  the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
                  capable of being agreed between the parties. To this end:


                   i. The Appellant's representatives shall prepare a draft
                      schedule of material facts and forward  the  same  to
                      the Respondent within 14 days.


                  ii. The Respondent  shall,  within  a  further  14  days,
                      transmit   her   response    to    the    Appellant's
                      representatives.


                 iii. The  parties'  representatives  will  then  take  any
                      further necessary steps to reach agreement.


                  iv. The agreed schedule /  statement  of  facts  will  be
                      forwarded to the Upper Tribunal within 6 weeks of the
                      sending of this Order.


               B. The Appellant's  representatives  should  reflect  on  the
                  choice of advocate  to  present  the  appeal  hearing  and
                  should prepare a witness statement from the  advocate  who
                  appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, paying  attention
                  to the Upper Tribunal's decision in BW Afghanistan  [2014]
                  UKUT 00568 (IAC)."


 4. At today's hearing Mr Haque confirmed that  the  schedule  of  material
    facts to be agreed upon had been provided not only to the Tribunal  but
    also to the Respondent along  with  a  witness  statement  and  all  in
    compliance  of  the  above-mentioned  directions.  Unfortunately,   the
    Respondent had failed to comply with the directions.

 5. Ms Everett acknowledged  that  that  was  the  position.  Further  that
    consequently there had been discussions between the two representatives
    and it was agreed  that  by  consent  the  Judge's  decision  contained
    material errors as argued in the grounds and that the appeal should  be
    remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

 6. In  the  circumstances,  albeit  with  some  dissatisfaction  with  the
    Respondent's failure to comply with directions, I agree.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Traynor.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                     Date:  1  October
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

