
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13237/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 July 2018                         |On 21 November 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           Mr Abdul Qadir Hassanlu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood, I A S (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, who claims to be a national of Iran, has permission to
challenge the decision of Judge Chowdhury sent on 15 February 2018
dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 30
November 2017 refusing his protection claim.  One of the reasons given by
the respondent for rejecting his claim to be a national of Iran was that
when fingerprinted in Germany he had given a different name but had said he
was from Kirkuk, Iraq, and it was not considered he had given a reasonable
explanation "for giving Iraqi national details in Germany" (he had claimed
it was because there was no interpreter available and his agent acted as
interpreter).

2.   In her decision, when assessing the appellant's claim to be a national
of Iran, the judge concluded at paragraph 46 that it is "probable that [the
appellant] was on the Iraqi side of the border".

3.   I am persuaded that the judge's decision should be set aside for
essentially two reasons.  The first relates to what the judge stated at
paragraph 44:

"44. Secondly, I also reject the evidence that his agent in Germany gave
the immigration authorities Iraqi national details for the Appellant.  I do
not find, even on the lower standard of proof, that the German immigration
authorities would use the Appellant's agent as an informal interpreter.
Further it is entirely unclear what advantage it would bring to either the
Appellant or the smuggler by stating that he was from the IKR rather than
from Iran."

4.   The judge's reasoning that it was "entirely unclear what advantage it
would bring to either the appellant or the smuggler [the judge must mean
the agent] by stating that he was from the IKR rather than from Iran" is
problematic because (i) the details the appellant had given to the German
authorities specified Kirkuk, which is not in the IKR; and (ii) Kirkuk was
at that time identified by UNHCR and other organisations producing reports
on Iraq as a contested area, so there was a prima facie advantage to the
appellant's claim if he was in fact from Kirkuk. On its own the only other
reason given in this paragraph for rejecting the appellant's claimed
nationality - the lack of likelihood that the German authorities would
permit an agent to interpret - is unduly speculative given the known
strains on the German asylum system by having to process very large numbers
of applicants. Further the other main reason given by the judge for
rejecting the appellant's claim regarding his nationality, namely that he
lacked fluency in Farsi, is rendered questionable by the accepted fact that
in border areas Farsi would not necessarily be the "lingua franca", even on
the Iranian side of the border.

5.   My second main reason for setting aside the decision harks back to the
matter which I identified at the outset, namely that in the course of
rejecting the appellant's claim to be a national of Iran, both the
respondent and the judge appear to have found that the appellant was in
fact a national of Iraq.  If that was indeed their finding, then it was
incumbent on both to take note of the fact that the appellant might be at
risk in his home area of Iraq and that if his home area was a contested
area (as Kirkuk certainly was at the time) then there would need to be a
consideration of whether he could internally relocate in Iraq; and further
and in any event, there would need to be an assessment of whether he could
realistically obtain a CSID.  This was not a case when the respondent (or
the judge) sought merely to rely merely on the appellant having failed to
show what his nationality was.

6.   As Mrs Aboni conceded, in such circumstances it was incumbent on the
judge to have addressed risk on return to Iraq as well as risk on return to
Iran.

7.   I do not seek to suggest that the appellant has established his claim
to be a national of Iran or to have been involved in border activities
putting him at risk. Both these matters must be for the next judge to
assess. However, I cannot exclude that the judge's erroneous approach to
the issue of the appellant's claim to be a national of Iran may have
affected her overall approach to assessment of the appellant's credibility.
 In such circumstances, I consider that it would be unsafe to seek to
preserve any of the judge's findings of fact and I see no alternative to
the case being remitted to be heard de novo by the FtT.

Directions

(1)  If the FtT Judge who rehears this case decides that the appellant is a
national of Iran, then he or she will need to go on to consider whether the
appellant has established a well-founded fear of being persecuted in Iran.

(2)  If the judge finds that the appellant is not a national of Iran, he or
she will have to decide whether there is sufficient evidence to establish
if he is a national of Iraq.  If it is concluded the appellant is a
national of Iraq, the judge will need to go on to consider whether the
appellant would have a well-founded fear of being persecuted in Iraq, give
whatever findings are made about his home area.

To conclude:

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

The case is remitted to the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:16 November 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

