
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13434/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 1st May 2019   On 30th May 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    M F K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    and Canter (Dale House)
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He came to the United
        Kingdom with leave as a student in September 2009. Thereafter, he
        made various applications. He was granted further leave to remain
        as a student until October 2014.Subsequent applications were
        unsuccessful. The last of these was refused in August 2015. Then,
        in September 2015, he made a claim for protection. That claim was
        refused on 12 November 2018. His appeal against that decision was
        unsuccessful.

     2. The basis of his claim is his relationship with a Mrs K. Mrs K is
        also from Pakistan and came here as a student. Her husband remained
        in Pakistan. She made an earlier claim for protection similar to
        the appellant's which was refused and dismissed on appeal. She and
        the appellant now have 3 children; [M], born in March 2012, [Z],
        born in January 2016 and [A], born in 24 March 2017. The appellant
        claims to fear not only his own family but also the family of Mrs
        K.

     3. In refusing his claim the respondent did not accept he had
        established a real risk from either family. His credibility was
        questioned and reliance was placed upon section 8 of the 2004 Act.
        If the claim were true then the respondent concluded there would be
        sufficiency of protection for him and he could relocate. Reference
        was made to the best interests of the children and the conclusion
        was it would be best served by return to Pakistan with both
        parents.

     4. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Davies at Manchester on 2 January 2019. In a decision promulgated
        on 18 January 2018 it was dismissed.

The Upper Tribunal

     5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted on the
        basis it was arguable the judge was wrong to consider himself bound
        by the findings made in the decision of Mrs K. Her appeal was heard
        in Manchester before First-tier Judge De Haney and dismissed in a
        decision promulgated on 3 June 2015.It was also argued that the
        judge failed to give adequate reasons behind the decision.

     6. First-tier Judge De Haney had found that Mrs K was in fact divorced
        from her husband in Pakistan, something she denied. The judge also
        found that she had married this appellant in an Islamic marriage
        ceremony in the United Kingdom. The judge had also found that her
        family were supportive of the relationship between Mrs K and the
        appellant.

     7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies heard from the appellant and Mrs
        K. The judge did not find either credible. The judge said:

         68.I have paid particular regard to the findings made by
         Immigration Judge De Haney in his decision promulgated on 3 June
         2015... I have taken into account the evidence of the appellant's
         partner in that regard but I am satisfied to the lower standard
         that her evidence commenting   on Immigration Judge De Haney's
         findings is as he concluded fabricated I take into account that
         this appeal hearing is not an appeal against the findings made by
         Immigration Judge De Haney. No evidence had been put before me to
         suggest that Immigration Judge De Haney's decision was successfully
         appealed against and therefore I am bound by the clear and cogent
         findings made...


         70. The evidence before me indicates that the Appellant and his
         partner are indeed husband and wife having gone through an Islamic
         marriage ceremony. Therefore their children are not children who
         have been born outside wedlock. I therefore conclude that the
         Appellant's claim to be in need of international protection is
         wholly without merit.

     8. Miss Patel relied on the grounds of appeal and the grant of
        permission. She said this was not a Devaseelan situation and even
        if it were, the earlier decision is the starting point not the end
        of the matter. She also argued that the reasoning behind the
        decision was inadequate. She referred me to paragraph 69 when the
        judge stated without further reasoning `The Appellant's partner's
        evidence as to why she had stated she was married to the appellant
        previously is wholly without credibility'.

     9. Miss Patel submitted the judge did not properly consider the
        evidence of the appellant. An explanation had been given as to why
        the families were told of the relationship and this was not
        considered. She referred to the threatening text messages which
        prompted the claim. It was argued in the alternative that the
        family could relocate within Pakistan. However, she submitted their
        location would be revealed through the presence of their children
        and the judge had not considered this.

    10. Mr Tan opposed the appeal and referred me to paragraph 29 where the
        judge refers to taking all the evidence into account, including the
        decision of First-tier Immigration Judge De Haney. I was referred
        to the cross-examination of the appellant at paragraph 34 and 35.
        He adopted the rule 24 response which cited the decision of Ocampo
        which at paragraph 24 said:

             "... Re- litigation of issues which have already been resolved
             is contrary to the public interest, and nothing in the process
             suggest that the first application should or must
             automatically be treated as irrelevant to second
             applications..."

    11. At paragraph 71 the judge gave an explanation for rejecting the
        explanation given as to why their families were told. He submitted
        in the circumstances it was not necessary to set out findings in
        detail. At paragraph 74 the judge had referred to the documents
        produced and having concluded if they were married there was no
        logical basis behind the claimed threats. Regarding the question of
        relocation, he submitted that no evidence has been led as to how
        the family could be traced through the children.

    12. In response, Miss Patel referred me back to paragraph 68 where the
        judge referred to being 'bound' by the previous decision. She
        accepted that if the judge had said the previous decision was the
        starting point that the challenge would fall away. She said that
        the 2 grounds upon which permission was granted were in the
        alternative. She said the judge did not properly consider the
        evidence or the witness statements of the parties. Rather, the
        judge made the bare assertion about them being married.

Consideration

    13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies was presented with a bundle on
        behalf of the appellant for the appeal. This contains detailed
        statements from the appellant and Ms K. The statements seek to
        refute the conclusion that Ms K is divorced from her husband and
        has married the appellant. In her statement she details her visit
        Visa appeal and seeks to explain why she had told her lawyer she
        was divorced.

    14. The bundle contains the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge De
        Haney. That decision records Mrs K's account whereby she said she
        came to the United Kingdom in September 2004 and then returned to
        Pakistan in 2006 to marry. She stated she then returned to the
        United Kingdom to finish her studies, returning to Pakistan the
        following year. There is reference to her wanting to be divorced
        from her husband but claiming her family would not allow this.

    15. She then came back to the United Kingdom in March 2011.She then
        gave birth to her 1st child by the appellant in March 2012. There
        was a further pregnancy in November 2013 but the child was
        stillborn in July 2014. They now have 2 other children.

    16. Reference was made to an earlier student Visa appeal where she
        stated she had married the appellant in an Islamic ceremony in July
        2011. There was reference to a witness statement in that earlier
        appeal in which she refers to an Islamic marriage to the appellant.
        Before Judge De Haney she denied such a marriage took place,
        stating she had lied in her statement and before that tribunal.

    17. Judge De Haney concluded that Mrs K was not a witness to the truth.
        At paragraph 26 judge concluded that when she returned to the
        United Kingdom in 2011 she was divorced from her husband and
        subsequently married the appellant.

    18. Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002]
        UKIAT 00702 gave guidance on the extent an adjudicator in an appeal
        based solely on human rights grounds should rely on finding made in
        a previous determination dealing with an asylum claim. The case
        arose because following an unsuccessful asylum claim a further
        claim could be made that  removal would breach the persons human
        rights.

    19.  The guidance given was that the first Adjudicator's determination
        should always be the starting-point. Facts happening since the
        first Adjudicator's determination can always be taken into account
        by the second Adjudicator. If before the second Adjudicator the
        Appellant relies on facts that are not materially different from
        those put to the first Adjudicator the second Adjudicator should
        regard the issues as settled by the first Adjudicator's
        determination and make his findings in line with that
        determination rather than allowing the matter to be re-litigated.

    20. The present situation is different in that the appeal before First-
        tier Tribunal judge De Haney concerned Mrs K rather than this
        appellant. Furthermore, the appeal was heard in May 2015 and the
        present appeal in January 2019.Nevertheless, the same central issue
        arose in both appeals, namely, the marital status between the
        parties. Between the 2 appeals Mrs K had further children. In the
        2nd appeal both parties gave evidence and there was an appeal
        bundle provided. So far as a core issue was concern there was
        little by way of new evidence.

    21. In Ocampo v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
        Civ 1276 it was pointed out it was doubted that the principles of
        res judicata or issue estoppel have any application, certainly in
        their full rigour, to appeals before immigration tribunals.
        However, the Devaseelan guidelines are relevant to cases where the
        parties involved are not the same but there is a material overlap
        of evidence. This clearly is the situation here.

    22. It is highly desirable that there is consistency between judicial
        decisions on the same issue. There may be good reasons for
        different outcomes. For instance, evidence may have been produced
        in the 2nd appeal which provides a basis for not following the
        outcome of the 1st. There may have been changes in the interval.

    23. In the present appeal although the judge refers at paragraph 68 to
        being bound by the previous decision I find the judge did not mean
        this literally. Had the judge adopted this approach there would
        have been no need to have set out all the details given in the
        decision. At paragraph 29 the judge referred to the evidence at
        hearing and the submissions whilst commenting that the earlier
        decision was particularly pertinent. Given the common issue this is
        really an obvious point. However, the approach of the
        representative indicated that the relationship between the
        appellant and Mrs K was in dispute at that hearing. Both were cross-
        examined about their relationship.

    24. Notably, in the 1st appeal this appellant did not give evidence and
        there was reference to a breakdown in the relationship turned out
        to be temporary. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies had the benefit
        of hearing from both. At paragraph 38 he records that the appellant
        was asked if Mrs K had tried to obtain a divorce from her husband.
        He did not answer questions about this until the judge reminded him
        of the nature of the proceedings, as set out at paragraph 31.the
        judge had a detailed statement from Mrs K where she sought to
        reargue the conclusion made by First-tier Tribunal judge De Haney.

    25. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies at paragraph 68 indicated he was
        having particular regard to the findings made by First-tier
        Tribunal judge De Haney. Given the common issues arising and the
        evidence upon which the earlier decision was made this was an
        obvious thing to do. The judge refers to taking into account the
        explanation provided by Mrs K but rejected it. At paragraph 70 the
        judge referred to the evidence before him. Clearly therefore the
        judge is not simply adopting the earlier decision but is looking at
        all the evidence presented. At paragraph 74 the judge referred to
        the documentary evidence.

    26. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies correctly use the
        earlier decision in his evaluation. The evidence does not indicate
        he simply adapted that conclusion. Rather, the judge looked at all
        of the evidence in the round before reaching a conclusion. There
        was ample evidence before the judge to reach that conclusion. Based
        upon this primary finding then the remainder of the claim really
        fell away. I find the judge gave more than adequate reasons behind
        his conclusion. In summary, I find no material error of law
        demonstrated.

Decision

No material error of law has been shown in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Davies. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
Dated 27th May 2019







