

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13285/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                    |
|On 15 February 2019                   |On 14 May 2019                 |
|                                      |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      H

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)










                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. On 30 November 2017, the Secretary of State refused  the  claimant's
       application for international protection. The claimant appealed  but
       on 26 February 2018, following a hearing of  24  January  2018,  the
       First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) dismissed his appeal.  Permission
       to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted and on 3 December  2018,
       I set aside the tribunal's decision and directed that  the  decision
       be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  after  a  further  hearing.  That
       hearing took place on 15 February 2019. In remaking the decision,  I
       have decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal against the  Secretary
       of State's decision of 30 November 2017. What follows amounts to  an
       explanation as to why.

    2. The claimant is a national of Albania. He was born on 22  June  2000
       and was, therefore, as of 15 February 2019, aged eighteen years.  He
       lived in a village close to Shkoder in the northern part of  Albania
       with his family. He entered the United Kingdom (UK) on 20 March 2017
       in  a  clandestine  manner.  It  is   recorded   that   he   claimed
       international protection on that date. As with most such  applicants
       he attended a screening interview  and,  thereafter,  a  substantive
       asylum interview. The  factual  claim  he  made  was  a  simple  and
       straightforward one. He  said  that  his  father  had  been  violent
       towards him persistently and from an early age, and  had  also  been
       violent towards his mother. In his substantive asylum  interview  he
       mentioned being beaten (as I understand it frequently) with a  belt.
       He says that there came a time when he could tolerate  the  violence
       no longer and so, assisted financially by an uncle, he fled  Albania
       and came to the UK. He has asserted, or it has been asserted on this
       behalf, that if he is to return to his home area in Albania he  will
       be subjected to physical violence at the hands of his  father;  that
       there will not be available to him a sufficiency of protection  from
       the authorities in Albania;  and  that  he  could  not  safely  take
       advantage of an internal flight alternative  but  that  even  if  he
       could, it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

    3. The Secretary of State accepted, to the lower standard applicable in
       cases where international protection is sought,  that  the  claimant
       had been a victim of violence at the hands of his  father.  But  the
       Secretary of State thought that the authorities  would  be  able  to
       provide a sufficiency of protection and that, if not,  he  would  in
       any event be able to re-locate to a different part of Albania.  That
       is why his application was refused. As noted, the claimant's  appeal
       to the tribunal was  unsuccessful.  The  tribunal  itself  concluded
       there would be a sufficiency of protection, internal flight  was  in
       any event available, and that he could not succeed under  Article  8
       of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). When I set  aside
       that  decision  I  preserved  the  tribunal's  positive  credibility
       findings with respect to the claimant's assertion that he  had  been
       subjected to violence by his father. I  did  not  preserve  anything
       else. I directed that there be a further  hearing  so  that  matters
       relevant to the remaking  of  the  decision  could  receive  further
       consideration. I suggested  that  the  key  issues  would  be  those
       concerning sufficiency of protection, internal flight and Article  8
       of the ECHR. That proved to be the case.

    4. When I heard the case on 15 February 2019 I had before me all of the
       documents which had been before  the  tribunal.  That  material  was
       supplemented by an additional bundle filed on behalf of the claimant
       (meaning that there were three claimant  bundles  in  total)  and  a
       skeleton argument filed on behalf of the claimant and drafted by  Mr
       Jagadesham.

    5.  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  prior  to  receiving
       submissions  from  the  two  representatives.  The  claimant's  oral
       evidence was relatively brief. He adopted a witness statement  of  7
       February 2019 and told me that he has a sister who is engaged to  be
       married.  He  has  various  other  relatives  in  Albania.   As   to
       submissions, Mr Diwnycz relied upon the content of the Secretary  of
       State's detailed written decision  (sometimes  referred  to  as  the
       "Reasons for Refusal Letter". Mr Jagadesham relied upon his skeleton
       argument. As to sufficiency of protection,  he  contended  that  the
       evidence including background  country  material  demonstrated  that
       such was not in place for victims of domestic violence  in  Albania.
       He referred me, in that context, to a number of items of documentary
       evidence which he asserted pointed that way. As to internal  flight,
       there would be the risk of his  father  encountering  him  but  even
       absent that, it would be unreasonable to expect the  claimant  as  a
       very young man to relocate. He would be absent  family  support  and
       has no previous work experience.  The  evidence  is  that  he  lacks
       "maturity and life skills". As to Article 8 of the ECHR,  he  should
       succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  satisfied  the
       requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) of those Rules.

    6. At the hearing  I  noted  that  Mr  Jagadesham's  skeleton  argument
       contained references to a number  of  items  of  background  country
       material where those items  had  not  themselves  been  produced.  I
       thought  there  might  be   some   possible   unfairness   in   such
       circumstances, if I were not to give Mr Diwnycz  an  opportunity  to
       read and comment upon those items. Accordingly, after the hearing, I
       issued directions facilitating the making of  such  comments  and  a
       reply to any comments which might be made. But I have heard  nothing
       more. I have assumed, therefore, that the Secretary  of  State  does
       not have any further comments to make. In view  of  that,  there  is
       simply nothing for Mr Jagadesham to reply  to.  I  have,  therefore,
       decided the appeal on the basis of the material before me.

    7. I shall turn, first of  all,  to  the  question  of  sufficiency  of
       protection. As is well known, for  there  to  be  a  sufficiency  of
       protection it is not required that there be a system in place  which
       guarantees absolute protection. Such would be unrealistically.  What
       is required, then, is protection to a practical standard which takes
       account of the duty a state owes to all of its own citizens.

    8. The Secretary of State has, as  indicated,  accepted  a  history  of
       physical abuse being directed towards the claimant by his father. It
       has not been argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that, if the
       claimant were to return to his home area even if  not  returning  to
       the actual family home, the antipathy his father feels  towards  him
       would be diminished. As to the  willingness  or  capability  of  the
       authorities to assist the claimant in  such  circumstances,  I  have
       asked myself what I can take from applicable country  guidance  case
       law. Mr Jagadesham in his skeleton argument  and  oral  submissions,
       sees  support  for  the  contention  that  there  would  not  be   a
       sufficiency of protection in what was said in the  country  guidance
       cases of AM and BM (Trafficked women)  Albania  CG  [2010]  UKUT  80
       (IAC) and TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT  00092  (IAC).
       Of course, as the case names suggest,  those  cases  were  concerned
       with claimants who had been trafficked and  who  are  female.  Those
       cases are not, therefore, directly on point. But that is not to  say
       I cannot derive some assistance from what was said in those cases.

    9. In AM and BM  it  was  said  that  in  the  context  of  a  risk  of
       persecution which might be faced by  a  trafficked  female,  at  the
       hands of her family members, "there  is  little  evidence  that  the
       state would intervene, particularly in the north of the country". In
       TD and AD it was said that with respect to  trafficked  women  there
       was "in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but it
       will not be effective in every case". What seems to  me  to  be  the
       relevant indications in those cases is that there  is  a  system  in
       place for the detection and apprehension and punishment  of  violent
       offenders but that there is or at  least  has  historically  been  a
       reluctance on the part of the authorities  to  intervene  in  family
       issues. Because the cases are focused upon the  particular  concerns
       of trafficked women I do not think I can  take  anything  more  from
       them in terms of the guidance they give to me in the context  of  my
       decision in this appeal.

   10. As to the background country material, the Secretary  of  State,  in
       the detailed written decision of 30 November 2017, has referred to a
       lot of quite generalised information regarding the way in which  the
       law enforcement services operate.  What  is  said  does  acknowledge
       shortcomings with respect to corruption and a shortage of resources.



   11. The claimant's  representatives  have  produced  background  country
       material concerning the way in  which  the  authorities  operate  in
       Albania and some further documentation of that sort is  referred  to
       and highlighted in Mr Jagadesham's skeleton argument. A report of  2
       December 2016 produced by the Refugee  Documentation  Centre  (Legal
       Aid Board, Ireland) relied upon various sources  which  demonstrated
       that domestic violence remained a serious concern in Albania as  did
       corruption within the police force. An Albanian  Helsinki  Committee
       report produced on 17 December  2006  (and  therefore  quite  dated)
       talked of hundreds of thousands of children being subjected to abuse
       within the family and in schools. It was said that violence  against
       children remained a major  problem  in  Albania  but  that  violence
       towards children  was  not  prohibited  by  law.  A  United  Nations
       Childrens Fund  report  of  1  June  2016  indicated  that  violence
       remained a daily  reality  for  many  children  and  adolescents  in
       Albania. It was said that in 2015 the Albanian police had registered
       1,167 crimes against children. A Freedom House report of 28 May 2018
       observed that domestic violence remained a serious concern. A  Human
       Rights in Democracy Centre report released on a date in 2018  talked
       of a lack of support for  victims  of  domestic  violence  including
       women, children and the elderly. A Legal Aid Board report of 26 June
       2018 talked of there being an inclination to preserve the  unity  of
       family at all costs and suggested that that might explain what  were
       said  to  be  "disturbing  failures  in  the  procedure  in  issuing
       protection orders for children".

   12. Of course, the claimant is now an adult albeit  only  just.  But  it
       does not follow that simply because  he  has  attained  the  age  of
       eighteen he cannot be a potential victim  of  domestic  violence  or
       that greater protection will be afforded to him by  the  authorities
       than would have been the case had he still been a  child.  I  accept
       that there is an operating system in Albania which  is  capable,  if
       its potential is reached, of affording  protection  for  victims  of
       domestic violence be they children, adolescents, trafficked women or
       elderly individuals. But I conclude on the  basis  of  the  material
       currently before me (without making any findings which  are  in  any
       sense binding upon  other  tribunals)  that  this  claimant  in  his
       particular circumstances, if he were to  be  returned  to  his  home
       area, would not have a sufficiency of protection available  to  him.
       That is because the material shows that the mechanisms which are  in
       place are not yet effectively operating in such a way as  to  afford
       him a sufficient level of protection to reach the Horvath  standard.
       That, I stress, is a view which I have reached on the basis  of  the
       material before me. It  might  be  that  had  there  been  different
       material in front of me I would have reached a different view.

   13. My having concluded matters in the claimant's favour with respect to
       sufficiency of protection I must now go on to consider the  question
       of internal flight. As to that, I accept, as  Mr  Jagadesham  points
       out, that Albania is a relatively small country  with  a  relatively
       small population. But, that  said,  according  to  the  Home  Office
       country policy and information note of July 2017, it covers an  area
       of  28,748  square  kilometres,  has  twelve  counties,   thirty-six
       districts and sixty-five municipalities  and  has  a  population  in
       excess of three million people.

   14. The first consideration with respect to internal flight  is  whether
       the claimant would be safe if he did relocate  away  from  his  home
       area. The relatively small size of the country  and  the  relatively
       small size of its population, therefore, are matters of relevance. I
       note references in AM and BM which Mr Jagadesham highlights  in  his
       skeleton argument, to the effect that  the  country  is  small.  The
       Upper Tribunal, in that case, referred to evidence given by  one  Dr
       Schwandner-Sievers to the effect that "it is not  possible  to  live
       somewhere without  being  known",  due  to  family  links.  But  the
       evidence is to the effect that the claimant does have only one enemy
       or, at least, only one who might be motivated to harm him. There  is
       nothing to suggest that the claimant's  father  has  any  particular
       connections which will aid him in tracking down the claimant even if
       he would actively want to and, indeed, there is nothing  to  suggest
       that there is any mechanism in place which would lead to his knowing
       of the claimant's arrival back in Albania if the  claimant  went  to
       live away from the home area. Further, the chances of the claimant's
       father  happening  upon  the  claimant  must  be  limited.  I   have
       concluded, therefore, notwithstanding the  small  geographical  area
       and the relatively small population, the claimant would be  able  to
       safely relocate. That, though, is not the end of the matter  because
       I must now go on to ask myself whether it would be reasonable or put
       another way unduly harsh to expect the claimant to so relocate.

   15. As to that, the claimant is a young man. There is nothing to suggest
       that he is anything other than fit and healthy and there is  nothing
       to suggest that he would be incapable of  performing,  for  example,
       physical work such as manual labour. He has  received  education  in
       Albania up to the age of sixteen (see his answer to question  22  in
       his substantive asylum interview). Such education might equip him to
       take on various employment tasks and, as a  minimum,  it  cannot  be
       said that he is an uneducated  individual.  Of  course,  being  from
       Albania, he speaks Albanian. Since he has lived  most  of  his  life
       there, he will be used  to  Albanian  society  and  relevant  social
       mores.

   16. Mr Jagadesham stresses that although the claimant  is  no  longer  a
       minor, he is, nevertheless, very young. That is so.  I  accept  that
       there  is  no  magic  in  a  person's  eighteenth   birthday   which
       effectively converts, of itself, a child to an adult.  But  speaking
       generally a person who  is  aged  eighteen  years  might  be  better
       equipped than a person who is aged, for example, sixteen  years,  in
       the context of settling to life in a new location.

   17. It is pointed out on behalf of the claimant that, even though he has
       now attained the age of eighteen, he continues to  receive  what  is
       described by a social worker, Ms K Monday in a letter of 14 November
       2018 as "a high level of support". It is said in that  letter,  that
       he has never lived alone though he has now been  moved  to  what  is
       described  as  "semi-independent  living  with  support  along  with
       another young person who  he  made  friends  with  at  his  previous
       placement". I have carefully considered everything  which  has  been
       said in that letter. It is relied upon as  evidence  that  he  would
       experience difficulty if living  alone  in  Albania.  But  there  is
       nothing in the letter which amounts, on my reading,  to  a  positive
       assertion that the claimant is not capable of living alone. The mere
       fact that he has not done so previously does not mean he cannot.  It
       is argued on  behalf  of  the  claimant  that  he  would  experience
       difficulty in obtaining employment in Albania. Reference is made  to
       a European Commission Albania 2016 report which  indicates  that  in
       2015  the  unemployment  rate  was  running  at  17.1  %  and   that
       unemployment remained high amongst certain groups  including  women,
       young people and persons with disabilities. Of course, the  claimant
       would fall into the "young people" category. I would accept that the
       unemployment rate does appear to be troublingly high.  But  it  also
       seems clear that the percentage of the workforce  in  employment  is
       greater than the percentage of the workforce not in employment.  The
       claimant, as I have said, is on the face of it, healthy. He has  had
       something of an education. It may  be  difficult  for  him  to  find
       employment but I would conclude, on the material before me, that  he
       would have reasonable prospects of being able to do so.

   18. As to freedom of movement within Albania, it is said in the  Country
       Policy and Information Note of July 2017 that the  constitution  and
       the law provides for freedom of  internal  movement  (see  paragraph
       2.3.1 of that Note). The  US  State  Department  2016  Human  Rights
       Practices Report reiterates that the law  provides  for  freedom  of
       internal movement but adds  that  in  order  to  receive  government
       services, individuals moving within the country must transfer  their
       civil registration to their new community of residence and prove the
       legality  of  their  new  domicile  through  property  ownership,  a
       property rental agreement, or utility bills. On the face of  it,  it
       might be thought to be difficult for a new returnee to Albania to do
       that. A UK Home Office report of 25 July 2017 contained  within  the
       claimant's original bundle, contains information indicating  that  a
       degree of assistance is provided to returnees in order to facilitate
       their  return  (see  page  34  of   that   bundle).   Perhaps   more
       significantly, reference is  made  in  that  report  to  information
       obtained by the  British  Embassy  in  Tirana  to  the  effect  that
       returnees are required to register in an employment office in  order
       to enable them to access social state support. It is also  indicated
       that the various municipalities  in  Albania  have  housing  offices
       where "returned citizens who do not have accommodation can  register
       to benefit from the status of a homeless person and subsequently  to
       benefit social housing" (see paragraph 35 of the same bundle).

   19. In putting all the above together and in bearing in mind that  there
       clearly is some assistance facilities  in  place  for  returnees,  I
       would conclude that the claimant would be able to relocate and, with
       that  assistance,  circumvent  any  administrative   or   procedural
       difficulties with respect to the transfer of his civil  registration
       should that be necessary. The availability  of  a  degree  of  state
       support and possible assistance with  respect  to  housing  is  also
       something which would make relocation less problematic.

   20. I have concluded that it would not be unduly harsh  or  unreasonable
       to expect or require the claimant to take advantage of  an  internal
       flight alternative within  Albania.  That  means  his  claim  to  be
       entitled to international protection is not made out.

   21. I now turn to the possible application of Article 8 of the  European
       Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). It was argued before me that  the
       claimant should  succeed  under  paragraph  276(ADE)(1)(vi)  of  the
       Immigration Rules because there would be very significant  obstacles
       to his integration into Albania. But Mr  Jagadesham,  upon  inquiry,
       confirmed that he did not seek to rely upon Article 8  of  the  ECHR
       outside the Rules. As to  the  very  significant  obstacles  test  I
       accept that what is called for is a broad evaluative  judgment.  But
       the various matters which have caused me to conclude that  it  would
       not be unreasonable to expect the claimant to  internally  relocate,
       are (whilst the test is not identical)  of  relevance  to  my  broad
       evaluative consideration. The claimant  is  familiar  with  life  in
       Albania. He speaks an appropriate language. I have concluded that he
       will have reasonable prospects of obtaining some employment and,  if
       he might need it, of obtaining some state support and some degree of
       assistance in reintegrating himself. In the  circumstances  I  would
       conclude that he does not, in fact, come close to demonstrating that
       he can benefit from paragraph 276(ADE).

   22. In light of the above, in remaking the decision, I have  decided  to
       dismiss the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision
       of 30 November 2017.

   23. Finally, I am asked to direct anonymity. Mr Jagadesham says  that  I
       should do so "in light of the sensitivity of matters raised in  this
       case, including past (accepted) domestic abuse".  I  am  not  wholly
       convinced that the circumstances justify anonymity  but  Mr  Diwnycz
       did not seek to argue against it and,  on  balance,  I  suppose  the
       claimant is a very young man and is entitled to his privacy.  So,  I
       have decided to grant that request.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  has  already  been  set  aside.  In
remaking the decision, the Upper Tribunal dismisses  the  claimant's  appeal
from the Secretary of State's decision of 30 November 2017.  The  appeal  is
dismissed on international protection grounds and on human rights grounds.



Signed:                      Dated: 2 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

I have decided to grant anonymity to the claimant. I have done  so  pursuant
to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules   2008.
Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the  claimant  or
any member of his family. The grant of anonymity applies to all  parties  to
the  proceedings.  Failure  to  comply  may  lead  to  contempt   of   court
proceedings.



Signed:                      Dated: 2 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



To the Respondent
Fee award

No fee is payable. Accordingly, there can be no fee award.


Signed:                      Dated: 2 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

