

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/13581/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |     Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2018                 |On 01 February 2018                   |
|                                   |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                                BEHZAD ALAMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Holmes counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 22 May 1986 and is a national of Iran.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lambert promulgated on 2 February 2017 which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  1
   December 2016 to refuse the Appellants  protection  claim  based  on  his
   alleged  conversion  to  Christianity  which  was  not  accepted  by  the
   Respondent to be genuine.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Lambert ("the Judge") dismssed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision finding that :
   a) The Appellants previous immigration history with  adverse  credibility
      findings made by two previous  Judges  'inevitably'  had  a  knock  on
      effect on considerations of credibility in the current appeal.
   b) She accepted that there was  evidence  of  regular  Church  attendance
      since February 2015.
   c) The Appellants failure to refer to his claimed conversion when he made
      further submissions on 18 June  2015  and  his  explanation  for  that
      failure were rejected by the Judge.
   d) The Appellants stated reasons for his conversion were vague. There was
      no evidence of 'soul searching' or 'seeking guidance' in  relation  to
      his decision to convert.
   e) She accepted that there were right and wrong answers  to  faith  based
      questions and that these were not determinative.
   f) She accepted that the Reverend Woollaston s  evidence  was  'genuinely
      and honestly' given. However she noted that the Reverend who formed an
      opinion as to the genuine nature of the Appellants conversion had  not
      provided a statement and  his  interaction  with  Reverend  Woollaston
      before baptism was very brief and that he did  not  receive  baptismal
      lessons. Reverend Woollaston's evidence failed  to  indicate  on  what
      basis she may have exercised any discernment in this particular  case.
      She concluded that although  genuinely  given  the  evidence  was  not
      determinative.
   g) She concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity.
   h) The Appellant would return as a failed asylum seeker who made a  false
      claim to have converted to Christianity  but  remained  a  Muslim  and
      would not be at risk on return.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged  arguing:  that  the  Judge  erred  in  her
   assessment of the previous appeal determinations;  failed  to  apply  the
   Dorodian guidelines; her assessment of Reverend Woollaston's evidence was
   flawed and failed to take account of evidence in favour of the Appellant.
7.  On 31 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  refused  permission  to
   appeal. The grounds were renewed with an additional ground that he  Judge
   erred in her assessment of the submission that it was  Church  membership
   rather than mere belief that would put the Appellant at risk on return.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Holmes  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

9. Ground 2 took issue with the Judges basis for  rejecting  the  Appellants
   conversion at paragraph 6.6: the finding that the majority of Muslims did
   not convert as a result of the  activities  of  ISIS  was  an  irrelevant
   consideration as it was the Appellants decision that was in issue. By its
   nature a decision in relation to religious beliefs was a personal one and
   it was wrong to look for rationality. The Judge imposes a requirement  of
   soul searching as a pre requisite for  conversion  but  in  fact  in  the
   Respondents bundle at B page  2  paragraph  10  the  Appellant  describes
   having long conversations with Muslim friends about faith.

10. The Dorodian witness was not dealt with properly  and  assessed  against
   the background material that Church attendance was illegal. The Reverends
   evidence was that she had spoken at length with the previous  pastor  and
   that the Appellant had been attending Church for two years. The  previous
   pastor was  ill  and  unable  to  carry  out  the  baptism  and  Reverend
   Woollaston stepped in. The concern was that the Judge was importing those
   considerations set  out  in  paragraph  6.6  to  her  assessment  of  the
   Reverends evidence.

11. In relation to the final ground paragraph 6.13 did not  go  far  enough.
   The Appellant had attended Church for 2 years and  been  baptised.  Would
   those facts of themselves be enough to treat him as an apostate and would
   the Iranian authorities take at face value  his  assertion  that  he  was
   'just  pretending'  about  his  conversion.  He  would  be  treated  with
   suspicion ad be detained in circumstances that breached Article 3.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

13. The Appellants previous history is relevant to his claim in that he  had
   previously been found not to have been a witness of truth.

14. The Judge found that  it  was  also  relevant  that  the  Appellant  had
   previously failed to make reference to his  claimed  conversion  when  he
   made further submissions.

15. The Judge was  entitled  to  approach  the  Appellants  claim  from  the
   starting point that he came from a theocracy and that the reasons he gave
   for his conversion were vague. The Judge was entitled to  note  that  the
   fact that ISIS killed other  Muslims  did  not  result  in  many  Muslims
   changing their religion.

16. In relation to the Dorodian  witness  all  she  could  do  is  give  her
   opinion that the Appellant had been truthful. The Judge was  entitled  to
   take into account that the Reverend knew  nothing  about  the  Appellants
   background and believes unchallengingly those  who  approach  them  about
   conversion. A Dorodian witness is not determinative of an appeal.

17. In relation to the final  ground  the  Appellant  was  simply  a  failed
   asylum seeker and was not at risk on return. The Appellant in SSH  was  a
   returning Kurd in relation to whom  the  Iranian  authorities  are  hyper
   vigilant. There was  no  evidence  to  support  the  claim  that  if  the
   Appellant stated that he had lied about his conversion to Christianity he
   would be of interest to the Iranian authorities. He was simply  a  failed
   asylum seeker and SSH did not suggest that there was  a  risk  for  those
   failed asylum seekers whose claimed conversion was rejected.

18. In reply Mr Holmes on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

19. The  decision  must  be  read  as  a  whole  and  paragraph  6.6  is  of
   significance. The Judge used a comparator that was not open to her. There
   was no evidence that Islam was at the core of the Appellants being as  he
   had never suggested he was a devout Muslim.

20. In relation to Ground 4 either Iran was a dangerous theocracy or it  was
   not. If the authorities had concerns about  the  Appellant  he  would  be
   detained and a risk  would  arise  as  the  Appellant  has  a  record  of
   unchallenged attendance at Church and has been baptised.

Finding on Material Error

21. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

22. In relation to Ground 1 that the Judge was in error in her  approach  to
   the previous decisions in this case I find no error  of  law.  The  judge
   properly directed herself in accordance with the law, and summarised  the
   issues at paragraph 5.1 that his current claim had to be assessed against
   his previous immigration history.  She  was  therefore  applying  as  her
   starting point the previous decisions of the immigration judges that were
   part of her bundle applying the well-established principles of Devaseelan
   (2002) UKIAT 00702.  It  was  undisputed  that  the  Appellant's  history
   included an unsuccessful asylum  clam  on  political  grounds  which  was
   dismissed in 2010 and a further unsuccessful asylum appeal  dismissed  in
   2011 in the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal.  The  Judge  was  therefore
   entitled to find that in these repeated applications he was shown to have
   been someone 'prepared to put forward evidence that is not true in  order
   to further a desire to remain in the UK.' She does not suggest that  this
   was determinative of the present appeal but it was clearly a factor  that
   she was entitled to take into account in her overall  assessment  of  the
   credibility of the Appellants current claim.

23. In relation to Grounds 2 and 3 that the Judges approach to Dorodian  and
   the evidence of the witness Reverend Woollaston  was  flawed  I  find  no
   error. The Judge no doubt reminded herself that Dorodian is a decision of
   the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  from  2001.   It  is  available   for
   reference, but is not an authority the FtT or the UT is bound to  follow.
   It says that no-one should be regarded as a  committed  Christian  unless
   vouched for by a minister of a church.  It does not say that an Appellant
   vouched for by a minister should be found  to  be  genuine.  That  always
   remains a question for the judge to answer on all the evidence.

24. The Judge was therefore entitled to look at  the  evidence  of  Reverend
   Woollaston in the round with all of the other evidence before  her.  Thus
   she took into account  as  indicated  above  the  Appellants  immigration
   history. She took into account the fact  that  when  the  Appellant  made
   further submissions in 2015, at a time when he  claims  to  have  been  a
   committed Christian albeit not baptised, he  made  no  reference  to  his
   alleged conversion and she examines this and  his  explanation  for  this
   failure in detail at paragraph 6.5 .

25. The Judge was also entitled to consider the explanation  and  motivation
   the Appellant chose to give for why he, as a person brought up in Iran as
   a Muslim, made such a momentous decision to convert at paragraph 6.6. She
   properly recognised that conversion was a personal matter but given  that
   his explanation was that ISIS killing other Muslims was  nothing  new  in
   early 2015 when he started attending Church it was open to  her  to  find
   this was an unsatisfactory explanation. She also noted that the behaviour
   of ISIS did  not  prevent  the  overwhelming  majority  of  Muslims  from
   pursuing their faith and that there was no evidence of what she described
   as ' soul searching or seeking guidance' but  these  were  comments  that
   reflected the overall finding that his account of his own journey to  the
   Christian  faith  was  not  clearly  explained.  They   were   also   not
   determinative of the Judges finding that she  did  not  accept  that  the
   Appellant was a genuine Christian but part of the overall assessment.

26. In  relation  to  the  Judges  approach  to  the  evidence  of  Reverend
   Woollaston the Judge was not required  to  find  that  her  evidence  was
   determinative of the appeal :that is not what Dorodian  says.  The  Judge
   makes clear (6.4 and 6.9) that she accepted the evidence given  that  the
   Appellant  had  regularly  attended  the  Church  since  February   2015.
   Nevertheless the Judge gave a  number  of  reasons  why  she  found  that
   although the Reverend was honest and genuine in the views  she  expressed
   these were not views that the Judge found outweighed her  other  concerns
   about  the  Appellants  claimed  conversion.  She  therefore  found  that
   Reverend Woollaston was not the Pastor who made  the  decision  that  the
   Appellant was ready to be baptised as this Pastor (Reverend  Parodi)  was
   too ill to perform the baptism but there was no evidence from him in  any
   form and he did not of course attend the hearing. She noted  that  having
   heard evidence from the Reverend that  the  Reverend  had  little  or  no
   context  in  which  to  assess  the  genuine  nature  of  the  Appellants
   conversion: thus it was open to her to note that she had  never  baptised
   an adult, had no other Iranians in her  congregation,  knew  very  little
   about his immigration history and she found that  it  was  understandable
   that the Reverend thought it 'inconsistent to  approach  people  with  an
   attitude of distrust.' None of these factors are decisive in  the  Judges
   assessment but she is required to assess what weight she  can  attach  to
   the  Reverends  assessment  of  the  genuine  nature  of  the  Appellants
   conversion and it is reasonable for her to  find  that  evidence  of  the
   Reverends that  these  matters  potentially  impacted  on  the  Reverends
   ability to make such a judgement about the Appellant.

27.  In relation to the final Ground I find no weight  in  that.  The  Judge
   addresses this in paragraph 6.13 on the basis that  the  Appellant  would
   present on the airport as a failed asylum seeker of no previous  interest
   to the Iranian authorities who had manufactured a number of false  claims
   while in the UK including a false claim about being a Christian and  this
   would not put him at risk. No evidence was produced before the  Judge  to
   suggest that mounting a false claim based on religious  conversion  would
   result in ill treatment and paragraph 23 of SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
   failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC), relied  on  by  Mr
   Holmes, does not support this argument. In both SSH  the  Tribunal  heard
   evidence to the effect  that  the  Iranian  authorities  are  aware  that
   economic migrants make false asylum claims in Europe, in this  Appellants
   case should he choose to tell the authorities this claim was  part  of  a
   history of advancing claims that  were  rejected  by  UK  authorities  as
   false.

   "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may  have
   towards  perceive  slights  against  their  own  state  in  the  form  of
   untruthful allegations about the conduct of the state,  but  equally  one
   can expect a degree of reality on their part in relation to  people  who,
   in the interests of advancing their economic circumstances, would make up
   a story in order to secure economic betterment in a wealthier country."

28. The evidence before the  Judge  did  not  justify  departure  from  that
   position  and  its  application  in  the  context   of   a   person   who
   disingenuously converts to Christianity and confesses, in effect, that he
   'went through the motions' of baptism in order to remain in the UK.

29. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

30. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

31. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date 30
January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


















