
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13670/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Pickthall instructed by Linga & Co Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    discretion could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  4  November
    1989.  She arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  17  December  2016  and
    claimed asylum.  That claim was refused by the Secretary of State on  4
    December 2017.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing, her appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Suffield-Thompson) in a determination promulgated on 4 May 2018.

 4. On 18 June 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E  M  Simpson)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

The Judge's Decision

 5.  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  and
    rejected the appellant's claim that she  had  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated by the Sri Lankan authorities, including being raped  while  in
    detention, because she was involved with the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  Before
    the judge, the appellant recounted much of her claim as set out in  her
    asylum interview.  She accepted she had lied and said she had been told
    what to say by an agent.  However, she maintained her  claim  that  she
    had been detained and ill-treated  (including  being  raped  whilst  in
    detention)  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  because  of   her   LTTE
    connections.

 6. Of course, the fact that the appellant  had  previously  lied  did  not
    assist her case, in particular  her  claim  that  she  was  to  now  be
    believed.  However, in support of her claim she relied upon  an  expert
    psychiatric report from Dr Robin  Lawrence.   This  report  was  highly
    supportive of her claim, diagnosing her with  PTSD  stating  that  "the
    trauma she describes is a convincing cause of her PTSD" (page 31 of the
    bundle).

 7. In her determination, the judge considered  Dr  Lawrence's  report  and
    ultimately concluded that she could not  "place  great  weight  on  the
    report".  Her reasons are at paras [44]-[48] as follows:

         "44. I  now  turn  to  the  issue  of  the  alleged  rape  and  the
             psychiatric report.  The  Appellant  was  seen  by  Dr.  Robin
             Lawrence, at the request of the Appellant's solicitors, on  26
             March 2018.  He is a Consultant,  general  adult  psychiatrist
             and as such I accept him as an expert for the purposes of this
             appeal.  It was clear from his report that he is aware of  his
             duties to the court in writing a report.  He saw the Appellant
             who was assisted by an interpreter.  He  assessed  her  as  of
             quite low intelligence.

         45.  He said that  she  was  confused  in  her  story  telling  and
             confused her two detentions.  He says this is consistent  with
             PTSD.  It is of course also consistent with a person  who   is
             not being truthful.  It is also the case that people with  low
             intelligence become confused and  she  may  find  it  hard  to
             maintain a consistent version of events.  He said that she was
             dizzy at times and talking very fast and that she said she was
             ashamed of the rape.

         46.  I firstly note that the both the Appellant and her lawyer told
             the court  that  she  would  not  disclose  the  rape  at  the
             interviews as she was ashamed and had to be forced to disclose
             this to a female staff member of  her representatives and  yet
             she was able to fully disclose her alleged  story  to  a  male
             psychiatrist who she had never met before.   Although  I  note
             that he says the symptoms of PTSD are hard to  feign  he  does
             not say they are impossible.  I also find that it  is  natural
             for her to be very stressed as she is  in  a  foreign  country
             meeting people and professionals knowing how much rests on the
             acceptance of her story.  He says she was  talking  very  fast
             and this was the case at the hearing but I also not that  many
             Appellant are nervous at hearings and talk  very  rapidly  and
             they are not all diagnosed with PTSD.

         47.  The doctor appears to have taken the  Appellant's  account  at
             face value and it is therefore natural that he may have  drawn
             certain conclusions that had he known she has given a  variety
             of different accounts may have given him reason to draw  other
             conclusions.  She also said that she feels hopeless, worthless
             and pointless but again this is how many  people  coming  from
             other countries  feel  as  they  have  left  their  homes  and
             families behind and although she may well  be  suffering  from
             depression (Appellant's bundle, page 15) it does not mean that
             the depression stems from the version of events that  she  has
             given.

         48.  The doctor states that the Appellant needs an  anti-depressant
             (Appellant's bundle page 30).  He does conclude that he  finds
             it  highly unlikely that the Appellant could make up her  PTDS
             symptoms and I take note of that assessment.  However, due  to
             the fact that  the  Appellant  has  given  so  many  different
             accounts and that even in her oral testimony she  contradicted
             some of her witness statement I find that it is  not  possible
             to say that her PTSD has been caused by  the  situations  that
             she has recounted.  It is possible that there are other things
             that happened in Sri Lanka, such as abuse within  her  family,
             in her marriage etc. or things that have happened  in  the  UK
             since she came here that could have caused her  to  have  PTSD
             and depression and the doctor is saying it is  caused  by  her
             detention and rape as he has accepted her  version  of  events
             unquestioningly.  I find that I cannot place great  weight  on
             the report".

Discussion

 8. Ms Pickthall submitted that the judge had wrongly discounted the weight
    to be placed upon Dr Lawrence's report.  She submitted that it was  not
    the case that the expert had simply taken the appellant's  evidence  at
    face value.  Further, the expert had considered whether  the  appellant
    was "simulating  her  symptoms"  and  concluded  that  it  was  "highly
    unlikely" (at page 30 of the bundle).  He had given  reasons  why  that
    was his expert opinion.  Further, he had considered whether a "possible
    cause" of her PTSD  was  "other  trauma"  other  than  that  which  the
    appellant described but,  Ms  Pickthall  submitted,  Dr  Lawrence  gave
    reasons (at page 31 of the appellant's bundle) why  he  considered  the
    trauma, in particular her claimed rape, was a "convincing cause of  her
    PTSD" including that  her  psychological  response  occurred  when  she
    recalled the "sexual abuse whilst in detention".  Further, Ms Pickthall
    submitted that the judge had, in effect, speculated on other  potential
    causes of the appellant's PTSD at para [48].  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had fallen into error in concluding that Dr Lawrence's report was
    not one upon which "great weight" could be placed.

 9. In my judgment, the judge did fall into error in her assessment of what
    weight should be placed upon Dr Lawrence's report.   I  accept,  as  Ms
    Aboni submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State, that the weight to
    be attached to a report is primarily for the judge at  first  instance.
    Here, however, in my judgment the judge's reasoning does not  stand  up
    to scrutiny.  It was not the case that Dr Lawrence took the appellant's
    account at face value.  In any event, he gave very specific reasons why
    her PTSD (which he considered her to suffer  from)  was  "convincingly"
    caused by the trauma of sexual abuse whilst in detention.  That  was  a
    central feature of the appellant's claim and, in my judgment, the judge
    was wrong to place no "great weight" on that conclusion in his  report.
    At para [46] of the determination, the judge appears to come very close
    to rejecting the expert's opinion that the appellant even suffers  from
    PTSD.  Although, the judge does then  appear  to  resile  from  such  a
    finding and rather disregards the expert's report that the  appellant's
    PTSD is connected to her claimed ill-treatment.  However,  the  judge's
    comment in para [47] that the expert took the  appellant's  account  at
    face value, ignores the conclusion carefully reached  that  the  trauma
    was "convincingly" caused by sexual abuse in  detention  and  that  her
    response was "diagnostic of sexual abuse".   In  para  [48]  the  judge
    fails, in my judgment, properly to engage with the  expert's  reasoning
    and, instead, speculated that there might be other causes of  her  PTSD
    upon which there was no evidence whatsoever, for example that  she  had
    been abused within her family or her marriage  or  that  something  had
    happened to her in the UK since she came here.  These matters were  not
    part of the evidence and, in  any  event,  such  reasoning  could  only
    feature as substantive reasoning if the judge  properly  grappled  with
    the expert's assessment of whether "other  causes"  could  explain  the
    appellant's PTSD.  That, as I have already said, the judge did not  do.



10. Consequently, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the  judge  failed
    properly to grapple  with  the  expert  psychiatric  evidence  and  her
    reasons for concluding that she could not "place great  weight  on  the
    report" are inadequate to sustain that finding.

11. Although the judge gave  her  other  reasons,  the  psychiatric  expert
    report was a crucial part of the appellant's claim and relevant to  her
    credibility.  The judge's failure to properly consider it  was,  in  my
    judgment, a material error in reaching her adverse credibility finding.
     As a consequence, that adverse credibility finding cannot stand.

Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal and the decision is set aside.

13. Having regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding and para 7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of  this
    appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            10, January 2019
