
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13872/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2019                           |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     KGH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Ford dated 4 March 2019 dismissing the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  16  December  2017
    refusing her protection and human rights claim.

2.   The Appellant asserts that she is a national of Eritrea  and  that  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 August 2017.  She asserted that she
    was born in Asmara, Eritrea and that both her  parents  were  Eritrean.
    She stated that her father was killed in around 1993 and that in  1994,
    when the appellant was approximately 5 years old, her mother  took  her
    to live in Sudan where  she  remained  for  the  next  23  years.   The
    Appellant's mother  died  when  the  Appellant  was  7  years  old  the
    Appellant was then cared for by a neighbour, an Amharic speaking  woman
    from Ethiopia residing in Sudan.

3.   The Appellant stated that she did housework for  this  woman  but  that
    she also suffered sexual abuse at the hands of a member of the  woman's
    household. The Appellant stated that she was eventually able to  obtain
    her own accommodation. She had a  son  who  she  stated  was  conceived
    through rape but the Appellant later formed a  consensual  relationship
    with a man from Ethiopia.  In 2017 the Appellant left her son with  her
    partner, and left Sudan travelling eventually  to  the  United  Kingdom
    where she claimed asylum.

4.   She sought protection on  the  grounds  that  she  was  a  national  of
    Eritrea, that she had left Eritrea illegally at the age of 5  and  that
    if returned there she would be subjected to indefinite military service
    which would amount to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

5.   The Respondent rejected  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  she  was  a
    national of Eritrea, for reasons  which  included  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had spoken Arabic during her screening interview, and Amharic
    during her substantive SEF interview, rather than Tigrinya, as might be
    expected of a national of  Eritrea.  Further,  within  her  substantive
    interview she had stated that the languages that she spoke were  Arabic
    and Amharic, stating also that  'I  understand  Tigrinya  but  I  can't
    explain it as much'.  When asked what language her parents spoke before
    they passed away the  Appellant  is  recorded  as  saying  Tigrinya  at
    question [25].  When asked at [26] what language  was  spoken  at  home
    with her mother the Appellant stated Tigrinya, Amharic and Arabic.

6.   In the decision letter the Respondent noted that the Appellant did  not
    fully understand Tigrinya which was said to be  the  main  language  of
    Eritrea.  It was also noted that the Appellant's mother had only spoken
    Tigrinya and that was the language the Appellant had used  to  converse
    with her mother in at home.  It  was  said  that  this  represented  an
    inconsistency with the Appellant's answer at [26] of the SEF where  she
    stated that she had spoken Tigrinya, Amharic and Arabic at  home.   The
    Respondent asserted that the Appellant's claim  that  Amharic  was  the
    principal  language  used  at  home,  was  inconsistent  with   country
    information that Eritreans in Eritrea spoke Tigrinya (although  I  note
    that this point does not seem determinative  of the assessment of  what
    language the Appellant might have  spoken  after  leaving  Eritrea  for
    Sudan.)

7.   It  was  suggested  at  paragraph  34  of  the  decision  that  it  was
    implausible that the Appellant would only speak Amharic  as  an  adult,
    and it was unlikely, if she had spoken Tigrinya up to age of 7 that she
    would now speak no Tigrinya. The Respondent was also  critical  of  the
    extent of the Appellant's knowledge of the  geography  of  Eritrea  and
    ultimately found that the Appellant was not a national of Eritrea.

8.   The Appellant appealed, her appeal  first  came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal at the Birmingham Hearing Centre on  31
    January 2018 resulting in her appeal being  dismissed.   The  Appellant
    successfully appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hemingway setting aside the judge's decision and remitting  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  It was thus that the  matter  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford at the Birmingham Hearing  Centre
    on 22 February 2019.

9.   The Appellant gave evidence before the judge although the  language  in
    which he did so does is not stated  in  the  decision.  The  notice  of
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 16 December 2017  requested
    that an Amharic interpreter be made  available.   I  presume  therefore
    that the Appellant spoke Amharic in her evidence on 22 February  before
    the judge but my decision  in  this  appeal  does  not  turn   on  what
    language the appellant used for the hearing before the judge.

10.  The judge made findings including the following  (in  summary)  in  the
    following paragraphs of her decision:

         13.  It was not credible that the Appellant would have left her  11
             year old son in the care of her partner with whom she had been
             living for a relatively short period of time before travelling
             by herself across several countries.


         17.  (a) (i)  The Appellant's claim that she had attempted to visit
                      the Ethiopian  Embassy  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
                      described as a somewhat farcical visit and  that  the
                      Appellant's  efforts  to  speak  with  staff  at  the
                      embassy would be given no weight.


                  (ii) The  Appellant's  inability  to  speak  Tigrinya  was
                      inconsistent with the Appellant's mother having  been
                      her carer to the age of 7.


                  (iii)     The  Appellant  could  not  answer  geographical
                      questions regarding Eritrea that she might reasonably
                      have been expected to answer if she had left  at  the
                      age of 5, had lived with her mother for  another  two
                      years in Sudan and then lived with an Ethiopian woman
                      thereafter whilst mixing with  Eritrean  ex-pats  and
                      not going to school.


                  (ix) The Appellant had showed no curiosity  about  Eritrea
                      until the Respondent disbelieved her claim  to  be  a
                      national of Eritrea.


                  (v)  The Appellant  had  called  no  Eritrean  friends  or
                      contacts in the UK to give evidence on her behalf.


                  (vi) The Appellant had actually given no clear reason  for
                      leaving Eritrea when she did.


                  (vii)    No clear reason had been given by  the  Appellant
                      for failing to apply for residence status in Sudan.


                  (viii)    Although  the  Appellant  had  stated  that  her
                      partner would have problems in Ethiopia she  did  not
                      say what they were.


11.  The judge then found at paragraph 18-19:


         '18. I do not accept that this Appellant has  established  even  to
         the lower standard of proof that she is a national  of  Eritrea  or
         that she was born there.  She is not being removed to Eritrea.  She
         will therefore face no risk whatsoever of  compulsory  conscription
         by the Eritrean authorities.

         19. I find that this Appellant has lied about her  nationality  and
         that she has yet to tell the truth about her nationality.  I cannot
         find what nationality she actually is as she has yet  to  make  any
         honest enquiries with the Ethiopian Embassy, the  Sudanese  Embassy
         or the Eritrean Embassy as to whether they recognise her as one  of
         their nationals."

12.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

13.  The Appellant appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  permission  initially
    being  refused  but  granted  on  renewed  application.   The   renewed
    application argued that the judge erred, in summary, as follows:

     i) The judge failed to assess the Appellant's nationality in the light
        of the Eritrean nationality law.  The  judge  had  failed  to  make
        findings as to the origins of the Appellant's parents, which was  a
        material consideration when assessing the Appellant's  nationality.
        Reference was made to paragraph 3 of  FA  (Eritrea  -  Nationality)
        Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00047.


    ii) In finding it implausible that the Appellant would  not  know  more
        about the geography of Eritrea, the judge failed  to  give  any  or
        adequate consideration to the fact that the  Appellant  had  stated
        that she had left that country at the age of 5.

    (iii)    Whereas the judge had stated that the Appellant had  given  no
         clear reason for leaving Eritrea when she did, this failed to  take
         into account the Appellant's evidence that she had  left  with  her
         mother in 1993 or 1994 following the death of her father.


    (iv) The judge had made inconsistent findings, finding on the one  hand
         that the Appellant had lied  about  her  nationality,  whereas  the
         judge had stated that she was unable to find what  nationality  the
         Appellant was; these were inconsistent with one another.


    (v)  The judge had misdirected herself in law in relation  to  standard
         of  proof;  whereas  it  was  for  the  Appellant  to  establish  a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that she was a national of Eritrea,
         it was for the Respondent to show on  a  balance  of  probabilities
         that the Appellant was a national of Ethiopia,  if  the  Respondent
         adopted the position of making a positive assertion that  that  was
         her nationality (see Jamila Omar Hamza v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2002] UKIAT 05185).


    (vi) Failing to make any  or  adequate  findings  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's claim for leave to remain on private life grounds under
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in particular as to whether she would  have
         very significant obstacles to integration into Ethiopia.

14.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  on  21
    June 2019 on the basis that the grounds of appeal were arguable.

     Submissions

15.  Mr Howard adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  and  expanded  on  them  as
    follows.  In relation to the suggestion by the judge at [17(a)(v)] that
    the Appellant had called no Eritrean friends or contacts in the  UK  to
    give evidence on her behalf, this failed to take into account a witness
    statement which the Appellant had filed in support of her appeal from a
    friend (Mr GG) dated 29 October 2018.  Although it  was  accepted  that
    this witness had been unable to attend, Mr  Howard  asserted  that  the
    judge erred in law in failing to have  any  regard  whatsoever  to  the
    content of Mr G G's witness statement.  The witness statement provided,
    amongst other things, that he had known the Appellant in Sudan and  had
    met her again coincidentally in the United Kingdom.  He  asserted  that
    he was aware that the Appellant was originally from Eritrea because  in
    Sudan the Appellant had told him all about her problems and  that  they
    had got to know each other.

16.  During Mr Howard's submission on the judge's suggestion at  [17(a)(vi)]
    asserted that the Appellant had  given  no  clear  reason  for  leaving
    Eritrea, I indicated that it was my view that this  appeared  to  be  a
    typographical error and that the judge appeared  to  have  intended  to
    refer to Sudan.  The point being made in  that  paragraph  overall  was
    that the Appellant had, in the judge's view given no clear  for  reason
    for leaving Sudan when she  did.   The  paragraph  continues  "...  she
    described no incident that made her leave.  She  was  living  with  her
    partner and her son in Sudan and it was a very odd thing to do to leave
    at that point when she had a son to care for."  The  remainder  of  the
    paragraph all relates to her departure from  Sudan.  Mr  Howard  argued
    nonetheless that the judge had still not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    suggesting that the Appellant had not given an adequate explanation for
    leaving Sudan. He invited me to set the decision aside.

17.  Mrs Aboni resisted the Appellant's appeal  suggesting  that  the  judge
    had directed herself in law appropriately and had made findings of fact
    which were open to her on the evidence.  There was no adequate evidence
    that the Appellant had made  sufficient  enquiries  to  the  Ethiopian,
    Eritrean or Sudanese authorities as to whether she may be treated as  a
    national of any of those countries.  Mrs Aboni asserted that the  judge
    had been right to observe the limitations on the  Appellant's  language
    abilities in Tigrinya and it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  treat  the
    Appellant's inability to speakTigrinya fluently as  supportive  of  the
    finding that the Appellant was not a national of Eritrea.

    Discussion

18.  It is right to acknowledge that the judge did  not  make  any  specific
    finding as to the nationality of the  Appellant's  parents.   I  accept
    that in accordance with the relevant  Eritrean  nationality  laws,  the
    origins of the Appellant's parents would be material to the question of
    the Appellant's own nationality.

19.  However, the Appellant had asserted in evidence that her  parents  were
    Eritrean and the judge set out at [2] the Appellant's  account  of  her
    early life in  Eritrea.  The  judge's  finding  overall  was  that  the
    Appellant had not made out to a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that
    her claim to be of Eritrean origin was true.   Although  there  was  no
    specific rejection of the proposition that the Appellant's parents were
    both Eritrean, this is implicit within the judge's  findings.   I  find
    that the judge has not proceeded under any misapprehension  as  to  the
    provisions of the Eritrean nationality proclamation and  it  is  to  be
    assumed that the  judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  if  she  were
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  parents  were  Eritrean,  then   the
    Appellant would also be Eritrean.


20.  However,  the  judge  gave  a  number  of  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    suggestion that the Appellant was from Eritrea.   I  find  in  all  the
    circumstances of the case that  the  judge  was  not  additionally  and
    specifically obliged to state that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's parents were Eritrean.


21.  The Appellant's next ground is that the judge erred in law  in  failing
    to have any or adequate regard to the fact that the Appellant had  left
    Eritrea at the age of 5.  However, it is clear that when assessing  the
    Appellant's linguistic abilities and the  extent  of  her  geographical
    knowledge of Eritrea, the judge was fully aware of the age at which the
    Appellant was said to have left Eritrea. The judge took the  view  that
    the Appellant's lack of fluency in Tigrinya was not consistent with her
    account that she continued to live with her mother up until the age  of
    7, and associated with Eritreans in the  diaspora  community  in  Sudan
    thereafter. I find that such a finding was reasonably open to the judge
    on the evidence, and I find that the judge has  not  erred  in  law  in
    failing to take any material factor into account at that  part  of  her
    decision.

22.  In relation to the judge's finding that  the  Appellant  had  given  no
    specific reason for leaving Eritrea I find that this is a typographical
    error in the judge's decision.  It is clear to me that  the  judge  was
    here referring to the Appellant having given no particular  reason  for
    leaving Sudan at the time  that  she  did.   Mr  Howard,  adapting  his
    arguments in the light of my  finding  that  that  represented  a  mere
    typographical error, argued that the judge in those  circumstances  had
    erred in law in failing  to  have  regard  to  the  reasons  which  the
    Appellant had given for her departure from Sudan at  that  time,  which
    included repeated arrests and  harassment  from  the  Sudanese  police.
    However, it is apparent from the judge's decision at  [17(a)(vi)]  that
    the judge was aware of the claim that that such arrests had been taking
    place, and yet there did not seem, to the judge's satisfaction, to be a
    sufficiently cogent reason why the Appellant decided to leave Sudan  at
    the time, bearing in mind, as the judge did, that  the  Appellant  left
    behind her approximately 11 year old son with a relatively new partner.
     The judge took the Appellant's evidence into account, and her decision
    is not perverse.

23.  I find that there is not  necessarily  any  inconsistency  in  a  judge
    finding on the one hand that an appellant has not told the truth  about
    their nationality, but being unable to make a positive determination as
    to what other nationality the appellant held.  It may be the  case,  as
    here, that the judge  is  not  satisfied  to  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood the Appellant has established that  she  is  a  national  of
    Eritrea, but the judge is unable to find  what  other  nationality  the
    Appellant may be.  There is no error in the  judge's  approach,  in  my
    view.

24.  The Appellant also argues that the judge  has  misdirected  herself  in
    law, in failing to acknowledge that the burden  of  proof  lay  on  the
    Respondent  to  establish  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    Appellant was a national of Ethiopia.  Even if that represents the  law
    accurately, the judge has  not  made  any  positive  finding  that  the
    Appellant is in fact a national of Ethiopia.  She has instead  rejected
    the Appellant's proposition that she is a national of  Eritrea.   I  do
    not find that the judge has erred in-law in  failing  to  identify  any
    relevant burden on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  that  the
    Appellant is of a particular nationality.

25.  I find that there is nothing in  the  suggestion  that  the  judge  has
    erred in  law  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Ethiopia.  I accept that  it  would  have
    been preferable for the judge to have made a reference to  the  correct
    test  of  'very  significant  obstacles  to  integration'  rather  than
    'insurmountable  obstacles  to  integration'  as  the  judge  set  out.
    However, the finding that para 276ADE(1) was not satisfied was made  in
    the context in which the Appellant had, in the judge's view, failed  to
    give accurate information as to her national origins.

26.  In relation to Mr Howard's submission, made for the first time  in  the
    hearing before me, that the judge had erred in law in failing  to  make
    any findings on the evidence set out in the witness  statement  of  the
    Appellant's  friend  Mr  G  G,  this  matter  was  not  raised  in  the
    Appellant's grounds of appeal, and is  not  Robinson  obvious.  In  any
    event, I have rejected the Appellant's challenge  against  the  judge's
    decision in all other respects, and this point alone would not, even if
    it were established that the judge erred in  law  in  relation  to  the
    alleged failure to advert to the evidence of Mr  G  G,  have  made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

27.  In all the circumstances I find that there is no material error of  law
    in the judge's decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.


    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                     Date 20.11.19

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                     Date 20.11.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



