
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13015/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 22nd July 2019 On 28th August 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR A K W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Swain, Counsel, instructed by Templeton Legal
                    Services.
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Kenya, born in June 1992. He came to
      the United Kingdom in January 2018 on a visit Visa. In April 2018 he
      claimed protection on the basis he would be at risk if returned
      because he is Gay.

   2. He claimed he was orphaned as a child and raised by step-parents. His
      stepfather began to sexually abuse him from around the age of 11. The
      abuse went on until 2014 when the appellant went to work in Qatar. The
      appellant would return to Kenya for holidays, staying with his
      stepfather.

   3. By his late teens he began to realise he was Gay. By that stage his
      relationship with his stepfather had developed into one of affection
      and he referred to him as his partner. He learnt that his stepfather
      had been killed, allegedly for abusing children. The appellant
      returned from Qatar and was met by his friend David. David was from
      the neighbourhood and was also Gay. David drove him to his
      stepfather's home. He saw the house had been burnt down. He felt at
      risk from locals because his stepfather had disclosed he was his lover
      and was Gay. He went to the police for protection but they did not
      help. He decided to leave the country and advised his friend David to
      do the same. A friend, Nicole, sponsored him for his visit Visa.

   4. His claim was refused on 29 October 2018.The respondent did not accept
      he had established he was Gay or of the claimed occurrences in Kenya.
      His credibility was a central issue.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Seeloff at Hatton
      Cross on 22 March 2019.In a decision promulgated on 1 April 2019 it
      was dismissed. The judge did not find the appellant has established he
      was at risk and did not find the claim credible.

   6. For the appeal, the judge had the usual bundle from the respondent.
      The judge had a letter from his church; a letter from an organisation
      Rainbows across Borders, and statements from friends as to his
      sexuality. Various pieces of medical evidence were presented.

   7. The appellant was represented by Counsel. A Home Office presenting
      officer attended. The judge, in light of the medical evidence
      provided, considered it appropriate to treat the appellant as a
      vulnerable witness. He gave evidence and was cross-examined. The judge
      also heard from two witnesses who knew the appellant in the United
      Kingdom.

The Upper Tribunal

   8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge erred in the treatment of a medico-legal report dated 17 March
      2019 from a Dr Ginn, consultant psychiatrist. Reference was made to
      paragraph 68 of the decision where the judge stated:

         "It is clear that none of the medical professionals have questioned
         whether or not the Appellant's account is true. Accordingly whilst
         they have all described the Appellant as showing symptoms of mental
         illness and post-traumatic stress disorder none of them appeared to
         have given consideration to the possibility that the account was
         being manufactured or embellished or whether the symptoms could
         have a different cause from what the appellant claims."

   9. A rule 34 response dated 3 July 2019 has been provided opposing the
      appeal. It was submitted that the judge directed himself
      appropriately. The response contended that the credibility of the
      appellant's account was a question of fact to be decided by the judge
      and the weight to be attributed to any piece of evidence was for the
      judge. It was contended the judge provided sustainable reasons for
      departing from the medical evidence and finding the appellant's
      account unreliable.

  10. I have been provided with a copy of the decision JL (Medical reports -
      credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145. I have also considered the
      content of the appeal file and the medical reports submitted in the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  11. Mr Swain, Counsel, relied on the grounds advanced. In response, Ms
      Cunha made the point that the presenting officer as recorded at
      paragraph 40 of the decision had submitted that the medical evidence,
      including the most recent psychiatric report, did not attribute any
      symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder to the claim of being
      abused as a child. The presenting officer had also questioned how he
      could then subsequently form a relationship with his abusive
      stepfather. The judge dealt with this at paragraph 54 to 56. The judge
      acknowledged his lack of expertise on how the victims of abuse would
      subsequently respond. The judge accepted, given that the appellant was
      in Qatar, he may not have been aware his stepfather was abusing other
      children. However the judge did not find it credible that his
      stepfather would reveal to other people he had been abusing the
      appellant or that he was Gay.

  12. Referring to the judge's comments about the psychiatric report she
      submitted the judge did not have to suspend his belief. She submitted
      the psychiatric report did not increase the appellant's credibility.
      There were other factors upon which the judge relied in rejecting the
      claim. For instance, the judge did not find his account of losing
      contact with his friend David plausible. The judge also questioned at
      paragraph 57 his explanation for coming to the United Kingdom. The
      judge pointed out he had a work visa for Qatar and could have
      travelled there rather than waiting and applying for a visit Visa for
      the UK . At paragraph 66 the judge commented that no one from Rainbows
      across Borders had attended to give supportive evidence. A letter
      submitted did not say that the organisation is only open to the Gay
      community. No one from the appellant's Church had attended to support
      the claim that they believed he was Gay.

  13. In response, Mr. Swain referred me to the psychiatric report at
      paragraph 8.2 onwards. It concluded that the findings on examination
      of his mental state were consistent with the history he gave. He
      submitted the judge had not properly considered the report. He then
      referred to the other points taken by the judge in assessing the
      appellant's credibility and submitted the judge wrongly applied
      section 8 and paragraph 339L of the rules was complied with. He made
      the point that the appellant applied for protection during the course
      of his existing visit Visa leave and the claim was not made following
      arrest or suchlike.

Consideration.

  14. In considering any decision on appeal is important not to simply focus
      upon a single phrase or paragraph. Rather, whilst a judge is required
      to consider and evaluate the central aspects of the claim and the
      supporting evidence the decision must be looked at as a whole.

  15. In this appeal the appellant said he was at risk in Kenya because he
      was Gay. The respondent did not accept he was Gay and so it was for
      the appellant to establish this, albeit by the low standard
      applicable. In considering such a claim the historical account can be
      very significant. Subsequent events, for instance, how the person has
      led their life since coming to the United Kingdom and also provide
      indicators. Medical reports can add support to the credibility of the
      claim. In summary, a number of factors come into play.

  16. The judge accurately sets out the claim being made at paragraphs 2
      through to 9 and the respondent's reasons for refusal at paragraphs 10
      to 15. The judge was provided with appeal bundles which included
      medical evidence. The judge had considered the medical evidence at the
      outset and was agreeable to treating the appellant as a vulnerable
      witness. He attended and gave evidence and was cross-examined.

  17. A number of points were made by the presenting officer challenging his
      credibility. There was a discrepancy in his account as to when he
      realised he was gay. His oral evidence was it was that it was in 2010
      yet on three separate occasions in his asylum interview said it was
      2015. The appellant offered an explanation. He also confirmed he had
      no Gay relationships whilst living in Qatar. He was then questioned
      about how he knew his stepfather was abusing other children. He said
      he had his suspicions but in any event his friend David told him over
      the telephone. He then said he had lost contact with David, explaining
      he had thrown his form with his contacts away as the agent who brought
      him here with trying to extort money from him. He said he had been
      known David for 20 years but had been unable to contact him through
      social media.

  18. He also claimed to have lost contact with a former partner in the
      United Kingdom, Moses. He was asked about Rainbows across Borders and
      said that the group only admitted Gays. The witness was called the
      organisation to confirm that.

  19. Two witnesses were called in support of the claim. The first, MM, said
      the appellant had lived with him and his family and had not disclosed
      that he was Gay for over 10 months. he was also unaware of any
      relationships the appellant had in the United Kingdom. Another
      witness, HS and was unaware of any relationships in the United
      Kingdom.in submissions the presenting officer highlighted the fact
      that the two witnesses called were unaware of any relationship in the
      United Kingdom.

  20. The judge made the point that he had no expertise as to how the victim
      of abuse might later on in life view their abuser. The judge made the
      point that it was not credible his stepfather would tell others of his
      behaviour. The judge also question why the appellant would return to
      Kenya given what he said his friend David had told him. The judge said
      there was no apparent reason for David to flee as the appellant had
      advised. Judge had raised the question why the appellant did not if
      genuinely in fear returned to Qatar rather than waiting for a UK visa.
      The judge rejected his claim about losing his phone and his contacts.

  21.  The judge also questioned how he obtained his visit Visa. His sponsor
      was not in attendance. The judge then dealt with the appellant's
      account of life in the United Kingdom. The judge referred to the
      evidence of MM who was described as the appellant's good friend.
      However, the judge commented he was unaware the appellant was Gay
      until he revealed this 10 months later. Apparently MM's mother knew
      from the outset but had not told her son. That witness and the second
      witness were unaware of his claim relationship in the United Kingdom.

  22. The judge commented that several potentially relevant witnesses did
      not attend. This included his claimed former partner, Moses.The judge
      referred to the documentary evidence supplied. A letter from Rainbows
      across Borders does not state the organisation was only open to the
      Gay community but describes itself as a social group. The judge dealt
      with the evidence about the appellant's church. Consequently, there
      were a number of pieces of evidence which had been analysed by the
      judge and which detracted from his claim.

  23. The judge comments on paragraph 339L of the rules. The judge pointed
      out the appellant had the benefit of professional advice. I can see no
      fault with this.

  24. The judge then turned to the medical evidence, pointing out that none
      of the compilers of the report have question whether his account is
      true. I find no fault with this comment. The truth of the underlying
      account may go to the reliability of the report. Furthermore, it does
      not necessarily follow that a diagnoses of post-traumatic stress
      disorder means the account given to the doctor is correct. Clearly, it
      is for the judge to decide what facts to accept and reject. This is
      not the doctor's task and indeed the psychiatrist in preparing the
      report provided comments that it was prepared on the assumption that
      what the appellant told him is true. Consequently, the report needs to
      be analysed in this context.

  25. Before dealing with the psychiatrist report I would refer, by way of
      analogy, to the very supportive GP report from Dr Wikrama-Seka dated
      20 November 2018. The doctor first saw the appellant on 26 June 2018
      as an emergency and the doctor referred him to the mental health team.
      The bulk of the report repeats the appellant's claims as if they were
      facts: for instance, it refers to him having witnessed horrific and
      dramatic events in Kenya.

  26. There is a letter from the mental health team dated 4 December 2018
      which more sensibly refers to the appellant `reporting' nightmares as
      a result of `alleged' abuse (my emphasis).

  27. I now turn to the psychiatric report. The doctor refers to what is a
      normal clinical practice and classifications in order to reach a
      diagnoses. The doctor refers to situations where reliance is placed
      upon a sound evidential base and also experience. At section 7 the
      doctor sets out the appellant's account of events in Kenya and his
      treatment since being in the United Kingdom. He was asked about his
      day-to-day life here. At 7.3 .25 he was asked questions directed
      towards a clinical diagnoses, such as hypervigilance and avoidance. At
      7.4.3 the doctor said objectively he was reactive and his speech was
      articulate. He was orientated in time, place and person. The doctor
      concluded he did not meet the diagnostic criteria for any mental
      disorder. The diagnostic criteria for a diagnoses of depression was
      not met nor of post-traumatic stress disorder. The doctor did not feel
      he should be regarded as a vulnerable witness. The doctor concluded
      that his account was consistent with mild-to-moderate depression in
      the recent past and this had resolved. However, the doctor felt his
      condition could deteriorate if his antidepressant treatment stop or he
      was placed in situational stress. The doctor concluded by stating the
      appellant reports he has come close to making suicidal attempts and
      therefore there was a potential in the future for self-harm.

  28. The judge is not completely accurate in stating none of the medical
      professionals have questioned whether his account is true. Some of the
      doctors, notably his GP have taken at face value that the claim is
      true. A report which does not provide a critical and objective
      analysis can be afforded less weight than one which does However,
      other members of the community mental health team referred to his
      `claims'. The consultant psychiatrist at 8.2 does comment on whether
      the diagnosis is consistent with the appellant's account. In part, the
      doctor is straying into what is a matter for the judge but
      nevertheless he has been invited to make comment by the appellant's
      representatives. He can express an opinion and has commented that he
      did not describe symptoms out of keeping with the rest of his
      presentation or history and the findings were consistent with the
      history.

  29. JL (Medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145points out
      that the more a diagnosis is dependent on the account given the less
      weight can be attached to the report. Doctors are guided to bear in
      mind that ultimately whether an account of underlying events is
      credible is for the judge not the doctor. However, this does not mean
      the doctor cannot form an opinion. The final headnote in the case
      refers to the fact that medical reports may well involve an assessment
      of the compatibility of the account with physical marks or medical
      conditions.

  30. In summary, I find no material error demonstrated in how the judge
      dealt with the appeal. The psychiatric report does not confirm a major
      disabling mental illness. The judge's comments at paragraph 68 of the
      appellant showing symptoms of mental illness and post-traumatic stress
      pitch matters higher than that stated in the psychiatric report.

  31.  In terms of determining the underlying account the report is of
      limited probative value. There was no argument of any discrepancy in
      the assessment of his claim attributable to any cognitive impairment.
      It was not argued his mental state was such that article 3 would be
      breached on return.

  32. The judge has gone through different aspects of the evidence and has
      made an assessment of the claim which was open to him on the evidence.
      As stated, the judge is wrong in stating that none of the medical
      professionals have questioned the truth of the underlying account.
      However, I do not find this detracts from the reliability of the
      judge's overall conclusion on the appeal.



Decision

No material error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Seeloff has been established. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date: 26 August 2019

