
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13002/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2019                                |On 29th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    H. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK illegally in October 2015
and made a protection claim which was refused on 30 October 2018. The
Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard, and dismissed, by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Bircher, in a decision promulgated on 9 January 2019.
The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Beach on 15 February 2019 on the very brief ground
advanced, that the Judge had failed to make reference to relevant country
guidance. The Respondent did not reply to that grant with a Rule 24
response.

The Appellant's case was that as a Kurd, he had come to the adverse
attention of the authorities in Iran as a result of his smuggling
activities on behalf of a Kurdish group. He claimed to have left illegally,
and to be without any identity documents. His sur place claim was that the
very act of returning him, and re-documenting him from the UK, would in the
circumstances place him at risk upon return. His Iranian nationality and
his Kurdish ethnicity were not disputed, although the remainder of his
account was.

The grounds offer no challenge to the Judge's rejection as untrue of the
Appellant's evidence concerning his experiences as a smuggler in Iran. Both
parties are agreed therefore that whatever else, this element of the
decision must stand.

Before me both parties were however agreed that the Judge failed to make
any findings of fact upon three relevant issues; (i) whether the Appellant
had at the date of the hearing any identity documents in his possession, or
in the possession of his family in Iran; (ii) whether the Appellant was in
truth in contact with his family in Iran; and, (iii) whether the Appellant
had left Iran illegally, or would be perceived to have done so upon return
to Iran.

It is not clear whether the Judge intended to accept, or to reject, the
Appellant's claim to have been involved in political activity in the UK
that was opposed to the Iranian regime [19-20]. Even if she did, the
parties are agreed that there is no finding as to whether there was a real
risk that the activity relied upon in the UK had already come, or would in
the future come, to the attention of the Iranian authorities in the event
of enquiries made into him either in advance of re-documentation, or, upon
his return to Iran. The decision is silent on these issues.

In addition, both parties were agreed that the Judge failed to make any
express reference in the course of her decision to either the guidance to
be found in  SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]
UKUT 308, or, HB (Kurds; Illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2018
UKUT 430. The latter had been promulgated prior to the Judge writing her
own decision. Not only was there no express reference to the guidance to be
found in these decisions, but the parties were agreed that even when read
as a whole her decision did not address all of the relevant issues.

In the circumstances both parties agree that a fresh hearing is the only
pragmatic course open, in order that relevant findings might be made upon
the sur place activities, and, whether the Appellant faces a real risk of
harm upon return to Iran in the light of the guidance to be found in HB. I
agree. As set out above however the rejection of the Appellant's evidence
concerning his smuggling activities is unchallenged and must stand. It will
be for the fresh hearing to determine whether in those circumstances there
is any substance to the Appellant's unresolved claims to have left Iran
illegally, and, to be unable to contact his family. Whilst it is not easy
at present to see why those claims would be true if he were not a smuggler
wanted by the authorities, as he had initially claimed, he must have the
opportunity to put his case in this respect, and have an adequately
reasoned decision made upon it.

In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre.

    A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required.

    The Respondent must file and serve a copy of the Appellant's screening
    interview, or confirm that none took place, by 5pm 7 June 2019.

    The Appellant must file and serve any further evidence on which he
    intends to rely in support of his appeal by 5pm 7 June 2019.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    10 June 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                                Date 24 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
