








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13867/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 14th June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                             Miss Fatemeh Armoun

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hoshi of Sabeers Stone Greene Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Handler promulgated on the 7th March 2019,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claims.  The  appellant
    claims to be at risk if returned to her country of  nationality,  Iran,
    by reason of her conversion to Christianity and her having  attended  a
    house church in Iran in the past.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bibi on 9th April 2019. Thus the case appeared before me
    to determine whether or not there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The first challenge to the decision cites paragraph 26 of the  decision
    in which the judge referred to a possibility  that  the  appellant  had
    attended a house church, which had been raided by the authorities,  and
    her name had been given to the authorities  by  others  that  had  been
    arrested. It is submitted that having accepted the possibility  of  the
    Iranian authorities being aware of the appellant's  identity  there  is
    then a reasonable likelihood that the appellant on return to Iran would
    face questioning. Such risk of the appellant being questioned as to her
    attendance at the house church would mean that  the  appellant  was  at
    risk from the authorities in Iran.

 5. The sentence has to be considered in context. The judge  in  paragraphs
    20 to 25 had made adverse  credibility  findings  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's claim, material amongst those findings is the fact that the
    appellant having claimed to have  converted  to  Christianity  in  Iran
    could give no justification for her conversion or an explanation of the
    reasons for her conversion. There appears to be no challenge in respect
    of those adverse findings of fact. Indeed there are subsequent findings
    of fact which likewise have not been challenged.

 6. Having made adverse credibility findings the judge in paragraph 26 then
    sets out the following:-

         26 The appellant has not provided satisfactory  information  as  to
         how she would have been known  to  the  authorities  in  Iran.  Her
         evidence was that no one saw her on the day that the  first  church
         that she was due to conduct was raided. It is possible that  people
         who were arrested on that day and  questioned  by  the  authorities
         gave her name. However it is not consistent  that  the  authorities
         would wait until November to investigate.

 7. Having made a series of adverse credibility findings the judge was also
    finding that the appellant had not proved that the authorities in  Iran
    knew her name. The  judge  then  considers  the  possibility  that  the
    authorities knew her name what they would have done and  concludes  the
    authorities would not have waited until  November  to  investigate  the
    appellant. The judge in paragraph  27  makes  a  finding  that  if  the
    appellant had attended at a house church and her name had been given to
    the authorities in Iran, the Iranian authorities would not have  waited
    before investigating the appellant. The judge in the  circumstances  is
    finding the appellant's claims  not  credible.  Whilst  the  judge  has
    considered the possibility he rejects such as a credible account.

 8. The finding is at best secondary to the finding  that  the  appellant's
    account overall was not credible including not being satisfied that the
    appellant had converted or attended church in Iran. The judge has given
    valid reasons for making the findings that she has. Having not accepted
    the appellant's account and having found that the authorities  did  not
    know her name, the judge has merely given an additional reason for  not
    accepting the appellant's account. The  judge  was  merely  questioning
    that if individuals had given  the  appellant's  name  the  authorities
    would not have waited until November to seek to arrest and  investigate
    the appellant and therefore the appellant's account was not accepted in
    that regard. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to
    make on the basis of the evidence.

 9. The 2nd issue taken with  regard  to  the  decision  asserts  that  the
    findings set out in paragraph 28 of the decision  are  unjustified  and
    unfair. It is suggested that the finding by the judge that it  was  not
    credible that the appellant's  command  of  English  language  was  not
    sufficient to discuss and understand Christianity was in  part  missing
    the point of the evidence. The appellant's case was that there  was  an
    English-language class and after the class she and another S  discussed
    Christianity in the English language. It suggested that the  judge  has
    entered into speculation.

10. That has to be seen in  the  context  of  the  findings  of  the  judge
    otherwise with regard to the appellant's  claim.  The  judge  had  made
    adverse credibility findings in paragraphs 22 to 25 which had  disposed
    of the substance of the appellant's claim. Similarly in  paragraph  29,
    30 and 36 to 38 similar adverse credibility findings had been made  but
    no challenge had been raised with regard to those findings.  The  judge
    has dealt with significant aspects of the appellant's  claim  and  made
    findings with regard to credibility which have not been  challenged  in
    the grounds. The  matter  of  the  discussion  with  S  had  also  been
    considered in paragraph 24 and 25.

11. The findings in respect of paragraph 28 have to be  considered  in  the
    context of the findings overall. The  judge  has  clearly  given  valid
    reasons for rejecting major aspects of the appellant's account and  for
    finding that significant aspects had not been satisfactorily  explained
    by the appellant including those  aspects  concerning  her  discussions
    with S about Christianity and why  the  appellant  thereafter  took  an
    interest in Christianity.

12.  The  challenges  made  to  the  decision  are  nothing  more  than   a
    disagreement with the findings of fact made by the judge. The judge has
    carefully considered all of the evidence and set out valid reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's account.

13. Those were findings of fact the judge  was  entitled  to  make  on  the
    evidence. In the circumstances there is no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

14. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 14 June 2019



