
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/13664/2018
                                                               PA/13665/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     G N
                                    n G c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellants are mother and daughter born on 20 July 1980 and 25  May
    2013 respectively. The second  appellant  is  dependent  on  the  first
    appellant.

2.    The  first  appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge French dismissing her appeal against  refusal  to  grant
    her asylum in the UK and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3.   The judges' decision that the appellant and her daughter are  nationals
    of Malawi was upheld by UTJ Dawson who stated that he was not persuaded
    that there was any arguable merit in the challenge to the finding  that
    the appellants are nationals of Malawi as adequate reasons  were  given
    by the judge.

4.   Permission to appeal Judge French's decision was granted by UTJ  Dawson
    because he was of the view that the cursory  treatment  of  the  second
    appellant's circumstances and best interests do raise  the  possibility
    of an arguable error.

5.   The first appellant's evidence  recorded  at  para  1  of  the  judge's
    decision was that there  had  been  concerns  about  [N]'s  social  and
    communication difficulties and she had been  referred  for  assessment.
    The judge noted that in a letter dated 22 August 2018 from a Paediatric
    Consultant, it was commented that she had recently made  good  academic
    progress. The judge said it was not clear that there had been a  formal
    diagnosis that [N] was on the autistic spectrum, but even  if  she  had
    been, it was a wide spectrum, and some children were less  affected  by
    that condition than others.  The judge said  that  interestingly  in  a
    support plan that  had  been  produced  by  Coventry  SEND,  there  was
    reference to a household including not just the child and her  parents,
    but a cousin who was not mentioned elsewhere.

6.   Towards the end of para 9, the judge finds  that  the  first  appellant
    had claimed that her younger daughter had medical needs which could not
    be met in either in Zimbabwe or Malawi, but he was satisfied that there
    were adequate medical services available.

7.   Mr Whitwell accepted that the judge had made an error of law by  giving
    cursory treatment to the second appellant's circumstances.  I  find  in
    addition that there was no express consideration of  the  child's  best
    interests.

8.   Accordingly, I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  cannot  stand.  The
    appellants' appeal is remitted to Birmingham for rehearing by  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge French.

9.   The hearing is limited to the Article 8 appeals of the appellants.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  20 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

