
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13751/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 12 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Willkins, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant in this decision identified as HMM.



Introduction


       1. In a decision promulgated on 28  March  2019,  I  found  that  the
          First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') made an error  of  law  in  dismissing
          the appellant's appeal on international  protection  grounds,  and
          that the decision should be remade by the  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')
          at a resumed hearing.  I now re-make the decision.


Background facts

       2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He
          claims that he left Erbil  when  he  was  2  years  old  with  his
          immediate family and this was because of  a  family  feud  with  a
          maternal uncle there.  In 1997 the family became resident  in  Ali
          Rash, in Ninewa Governorate.


       3. The appellant claims that his  maternal  uncle  travelled  to  Ali
          Rash in order to threaten the family in 2012 and in  addition  his
          cousin tried  to  recruit  him  to  ISIL.   In  October  2014  the
          appellant left Ali Rash because he was in  fear  of  ISIL.   After
          making his way illegally out of Iraq and across Europe he  applied
          for asylum on 15 December 2015.

Issues and evidence

       4. According to  the  recent  country  guidance  in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM
          (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400
          (IAC) ('SMO'), the appellant's home area is no longer a  contested
          area.


       5. At the beginning of the hearing, the representatives  agreed  that
          a proper application of SMO narrows the disputed  issues  in  this
          case as follows:


              i) Although the appellant was born in Erbil in 1994,  when  he
                 was 2 he left with his family to reside in Ali Rash,  where
                 he remained until his departure.  In  the  decision  letter
                 the SSHD accepted at [19] that the appellant was a resident
                 of Ali Nash.  In the circumstances,  the  appellant  cannot
                 properly be considered 'a  former  resident  of  the  Iraqi
                 Kurdish Region' ('IKR').  He will therefore be returned  to
                 Baghdad and not to the IKR - headnote 7 of SMO.


             ii) The appellant is unlikely to be able to pass  the  relevant
                 checkpoints leaving Baghdad  airport  and  when  travelling
                 around the city without a Civil  Status  Identity  Document
                 ('CSID')  or  Iraqi  National  Identity  Card  ('INID')   -
                 headnote 11 of SMO.

            iii) The appellant does not have and will not be able to  obtain
                 an INID within Iraq because he would have to travel to  his
                 home area to obtain one  in  person,  which  he  cannot  do
                 without the requisite identification - headnote 16 of SMO.

             iv) I must determine whether the  appellant  will  be  able  to
                 obtain a replacement CSID through the use of a  proxy.   As
                 he is not from Baghdad, he is unlikely to be able to obtain
                 a replacement CSID there - headnote 15 of SMO.

              v) According to a press release dated 31 October 2019 from the
                 UNHCR, Ninewa Governorate inaugurated the first NIDC centre
                 in East Mosul "which will provide  Iraqi  citizens  with  a
                 national ID card". This implies  that  the  requisite  INID
                 terminal has been installed and the office  will  therefore
                 not be issuing CSIDs.  The appellant's  home  area  of  Ali
                 Rash is located near to East Mosul and this is likely to be
                 his 'local office', although  Mr  McVeety  queried  whether
                 this might be his father's place of birth office in Erbil.

       6. Mr McVeety indicated that he continued to dispute the  appellant's
          claim that he did not  have  any  family  contact  whatsoever  and
          could not enlist their support to obtain  identity  documentation.
          He however agreed that if  I  accepted  the  appellant's  evidence
          that he was unable to contact his family and could  not  obtain  a
          CSID, then in accordance with the country guidance he was at  risk
          of serious harm in Iraq.

       7. Having agreed the ambit of  the  appeal,  Ms  Wilkins  called  the
          appellant to give evidence.   He  relied  upon  a  recent  witness
          statement and was briefly cross-examined.

Submissions and findings

       8. Mr McVeety invited me to find the appellant's claim to  have  fled
          his home area without knowing where his family  went  and  without
          taking his CSID from his home to  be  implausible.   He  submitted
          that the appellant's claim was  not  credible  and  he  should  be
          disbelieved.   Mr  McVeety  conceded  that  if  I   accepted   the
          appellant's claim to have no  contact  and  no  means  of  contact
          family members in Iraq to assist  in  obtaining  a  CSID  then  in
          accordance with SMO he faces serious harm upon return to Iraq.

       9. Having had the opportunity to  consider  the  detailed  papers  in
          advance of the hearing I indicated that I did  not  need  to  hear
          from Ms Wilkins on the issue  of  credibility.   This  is  because
          notwithstanding  the  doubts  that  arose  from  the   appellant's
          evidence, as highlighted by Mr McVeety  and  the  decision  letter
          dated 14 October 2017, I was prepared to accept the  core  of  the
          appellant's account to be reasonably likely.  This was  consistent
          with the country background evidence relevant to  the  appellant's
          home area.  ISIL's domination of Mosul from 2014 to July  2017  is
          summarised in SMO at [258].  The majority of the  population  fled
          in very difficult circumstances.  I accept  that  the  appellant's
          cousin was involved in ISIL at a low level and the appellant  fled
          at a time of widespread confusion and comprehensive  conflict.   I
          accept that the appellant was able alongside many others, to  flee
          the grasp of ISIL as  this  time  of  widespread  confusion.  This
          explains his failure to maintain viable contact  with  his  family
          members.  Whilst I have doubts that  the  maternal  uncle  tracked
          the family down I accept that there was some sort of  family  feud
          which meant that the appellant has not had contact with his  uncle
          in Erbil for a very lengthy period.

      10. I therefore reject Mr McVeety's submission  that  the  appellant's
          evidence regarding family contact was implausible.  I am  prepared
          to accept his evidence, given the lower  standard  of  proof.   It
          follows that as the appellant has no meaningful means  of  contact
          family members, he is unable to enlist  their  support  to  obtain
          identity documentation.  As Mr McVeety accepted, it  follows  from
          those findings that the appellant would  be  unable  to  obtain  a
          CSID, and in accordance with the country guidance he  is  at  risk
          of serious harm in Iraq.

      11. In any event, the evidence from the UNHCR I have summarised  above
          tends to suggest that the appellant's home office  in  East  Mosul
          no  longer  issues  CSIDs.   Although  it  is  possible  that  the
          appellant's 'local office' might be his father's  place  of  birth
          office in Erbil, I do not consider that to  be  reasonably  likely
          given the family's circumstances and history.  The  appellant  was
          formerly resident outside  of  the  KRI  and  would  therefore  be
          returned to  Baghdad.   Absent  the  requisite  identification  he
          would not be able to safely travel to the KRI.

      12. I also heard from  Ms  Wilkins  on  whether  the  reason  for  the
          appellant's  prospective  future  harm  relates  to  a  Convention
          reason.   She  took  me  to  passages  in  SMO  to   support   the
          proposition that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
          the appellant will have a pro-ISIL political  opinion  imputed  to
          him.

Re-making the decision

      13. For the reasons I have already set out above, I  accept  the  core
          of the appellant's account.  I therefore accept he has no  contact
          with and no means of contacting family members in  Iraq.   I  also
          accept that he has no means of obtaining a CSID.  In any event  it
          is likely that the  appellant's  nearest  office  is  unlikely  to
          issue a CSID at all (far less by proxy) as a result of the  phased
          replacement of the CSID system, and the fact  that  it  has  begun
          the INID system - headnote 16.


      14. As the appellant will not be able to obtain a replacement CSID  or
          INID, upon return to Iraq he faces a real risk of serious harm  in
          Baghdad, and will be unable to relocate to his home  area  or  the
          KRI.

      15. I must  also  consider  whether  that  serious  harm  will  be  is
          reasonably likely to  be  inflicted  for  reasons  relating  to  a
          Convention reason.  In this particular  case  it  is  particularly
          important to consider whether  a  pro-ISIL  political  opinion  is
          reasonably likely to be imputed to the appellant - see paras  292-
          298, 313 and 411 of SMO.  If yes, that is the end  of  the  matter
          and the appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  for  a
          Convention Reason.

      16. The appellant is reasonably likely to have  a  pro-ISIL  political
          opinion imputed to him in light of the following: he  is  a  young
          Kurdish Sunni man of 'fighting age' and  he  comes  from  an  area
          with a known significant ISIS presence / link.   Although  he  has
          been in the UK since 2014, he has no viable means of proving  this
          (in the context of the Iraqi collectivist society) and no  one  to
          vouch for him in Baghdad as he has no family  or  contacts  there,
          in the  context  of  country  background  evidence  that  suggests
          individuals  are  not  trusted  without   having   complied   with
          comprehensive security requirements - see para 412 of SMO.


Decision

      17. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal and  find
          that his removal would breach the Refugee Convention  and  Article
          3 of the ECHR.



Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge             of             the             Upper              Tribunal
                   Date:5 March 2020
