
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13821/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24th July 2017                  |On 17th August 2017                     |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KCK
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, instructed by OTS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a national of  Cameroon  born  in  1989.   His  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his  protection  claim  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed on 20th February 2017.
2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the  grounds  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. It
    was alleged that before the Appellant's witness [BD] gave  evidence  he
    was handed a piece of  paper  by  someone  who  was  sitting  with  the
    Appellant at the back of the courtroom. The judge failed to investigate
    the content  of  the  note  and  the  hearing  was  unfair  (Alubankudi
    (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 (IAC) and Elayi  (fair  hearing  -
    appearance) India [2016] UKUT 508).

3.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on the  ground
    that it was arguable that there  was  procedural  unfairness  following
    Alubankudi because the matter was not investigated by the judge and the
    judge relied on the witness' evidence in the decision.

4.   Judge Zahed was invited to comment on the assertion in the  grounds  of
    appeal. He stated that counsel for the Respondent [AJ] had stated  that
    BD was looking at a piece of paper. He could not  remember  whether  it
    was at the start of the cross-examination or sometime during the course
    of it.  On being alerted to this the judge told BD that  he  could  not
    refer to any notes or his witness statement and  that  he  should  give
    evidence from his own memory and put the piece of paper away. That  was
    the end of the matter.  It was never raised again by any  party  either
    during the course of the evidence or in submissions, although the judge
    did ask AJ whether she had a view on whether BD  was  credible  or  not
    given he  was  a  third  party.  The  judge  noted  in  his  record  of
    proceedings that the presenting officer was neutral on BD.

5.   In the Rule 24 response, counsel for the Appellant [RD] stated that  AJ
    did not contest the reliability  of  the  evidence  of  BD  in  closing
    submissions. BD testified that he had seen evidence of the  Appellant's
    openly gay lifestyle, kissing his boyfriend. AJ indicated that she  was
    neutral as to BD's evidence even though RD had indicated that this  was
    insufficient and amounted to a failure to challenge.


Submissions

6.   Mr Melvin relied on the grounds, the statement dated  10th  April  2017
    by AJ and the reply from the judge.  He  submitted  that  there  was  a
    material error of law and the matter should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing because the note that had  been  handed  to
    the witness amounted to procedural unfairness.

7.   Mr Collins submitted that there was a  difference  of  opinion  between
    the statement of AJ and the statement made by the judge. What was  said
    by AJ at paragraph 6 of her statement was not reflected in the  judge's
    note or in the note of RD. There was also  the  question  of  why  this
    matter was not mentioned at the hearing. If AJ was concerned  that  the
    witness' evidence had been tainted by  the  note,  then  there  was  no
    explanation for why she failed to mention it in closing submissions and
    why she did not challenge  the  witness  on  the  point  during  cross-
    examination. In any event, the Appellant and his  partner  were  cross-
    examined at length and the judge's findings at paragraphs 17, 21 and 23
    of the decision were not challenged. The judge found that the Appellant
    was gay and that he would behave in an openly gay way  if  returned  to
    Cameroon. This disposes of the appeal and since there was no  challenge
    to these findings by the Respondent in the application for  permission,
    there was no material error  of  law.   The  evidence  of  BD  was  not
    determinative of the appeal.


Discussion and Conclusions

8.   In her statement, AJ stated: "I confirm that  I  was  representing  the
    Secretary of State as a Home Office Presenting Officer at the  time  of
    the said hearing (12th January 2017) at Hatton Cross. I confirm that  I
    witnessed from the beginning of the hearing that a friend or  associate
    of the Appellant sat at the back of the court throughout  the  hearing.
    The man at the back of the court handed a small folded piece  of  white
    paper to the witness BD before BD gave evidence.  I confirm that I  had
    noticed that the man at the back of the  courtroom  had  written  on  a
    small piece of paper and handed the folded note to the witness  as  the
    witness walked into the tribunal hearing. I confirm  that  the  witness
    took the piece of paper as he sat down, he unfolded it and appeared  to
    read the contents of the said note.  The witness  then  glanced  around
    the courtroom where his eye caught mine as he  gave  evidence.  At  the
    start of my cross-examination I alerted Immigration Judge Zahed of what
    had taken place, the judge then told the witness to put the paper  away
    and allowed him to continue to give evidence. At the end of the hearing
    Immigration Judge Zahed asked  me  to  confirm  that  the  witness  was
    reliable. I stated that I could not provide a comment. This was because
    I had reported the passing of a note to Immigration Judge  Zahed  about
    that very witness, (BD) earlier on during the hearing.  I made  a  note
    of my observations.  I confirm that the contents are true to  the  best
    of my knowledge and belief."

9.   Judge Zahed, in his statement, stated: "I have been  asked  to  comment
    as to what happened at the hearing on 12th January 2017.  I  have  seen
    the grounds of appeal,  my  Record  of  Proceedings,  my  Decision  and
    Reasons and the witness statement of AJ of counsel who represented  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department. As far as I  can  recollect
    AJ during cross-examination stated that BD (the  appellant's  landlord)
    was looking at a piece of paper. I cannot remember whether  it  was  at
    the start of the cross-examination or at some time during the course of
    it.  On being alerted to this I told BD that he could not refer to  any
    notes or his witness statement and that he should  give  evidence  from
    his own memory and put the piece of paper away. That was the end of the
    matter.  It was never raised again  by  any  party  either  during  the
    course of the evidence or in submissions before me.  If it were a  more
    serious matter I would  have  made  a  note  if  it  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings. I did ask AJ as to whether she had a view on whether Mr  B
    was credible or not given he was a third party.  I see from  my  Record
    of Proceedings I have recorded that the Presenting Officer was  neutral
    on BD.  I certainly do not recall that AJ had told me that there was  a
    person who had been in the hearing room from the start and had  written
    something on a piece of paper that he handed to BD as he walked  in  to
    give evidence. If that was the case I would have expected  AJ  to  have
    raised it as soon as BD sat down or when he began to give his  evidence
    in examination-in-chief. I note from my Record of Proceedings  that  BD
    adopted his witness statement and then gave quite a lot of evidence  in
    examination-in-chief.  If I was aware that this was a note passed to BD
    from someone who had been in the hearing room when  the  Appellant  and
    his partner was giving evidence, then I would have investigated  as  to
    what was on the note. Otherwise the whole point of having  the  witness
    sit outside the hearing room so that he would  not  hear  the  evidence
    would  have  been  frustrated.   However,  I  note  that  BD  was   the
    Appellant's landlord and not his partner where questions were asked  of
    the Appellant and then of the partner to see whether the same  evidence
    was give [sic]. There was no question asked of  the  Appellant  or  his
    partner that was also asked of BD to see if his answer  was  consistent
    with them.  He simply gave evidence as to the  fact  that  he  saw  the
    Appellant and his partner together and he  knew  they  were  in  a  gay
    relationship."

10.  Having considered the contents of  both  statements  and  the  Rule  24
    response, I find that the judge was not aware that  the  note  that  BD
    appeared to be reading from was  given  to  him  by  somebody  who  was
    sitting at the back of the courtroom prior to him giving  evidence.  If
    that had been the case the appropriate action would have been for AJ to
    notify the judge prior to BD giving evidence-in-chief. She did  not  do
    so. Her evidence is that she raised the matter before she  started  her
    cross-examination.

11.  I am satisfied that if the judge had been made aware that the note  had
    been passed to the witness by somebody who had been in the hearing room
    for the  duration  of  the  hearing,  including  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his partner, the judge would have investigated the matter
    further and asked to see the note from which BD appeared to be reading.



12.  The judge was alerted by AJ to the fact that the  witness  was  reading
    from something and the judge warned the witness to  put  the  piece  of
    paper away and give evidence from his own recollection. If AJ was aware
    that a note had been passed to BD and therefore his evidence  could  be
    tainted, she could have raised the matter at that point with the judge.
    She did not do so, nor did she raise it in her closing  submissions  or
    when specifically asked by the judge to comment on the  credibility  of
    BD. She stated that she could not provide a comment. It was recorded by
    the judge that she was neutral as to the credibility of BD.

13.  The judge found at paragraphs 18 and 19: "I  have  taken  into  account
    the evidence of the appellant's landlord.  I found him to be a credible
    witness.  He stated that he was aware that the appellant and Mr A  have
    been in a relationship for over two years.  He stated, 'I have no doubt
    about the nature of their relationship because on a number of occasions
    I have walked in on them kissing each other  in  the  living  room'....
    Having heard and seen BD give his evidence and be cross-examined by the
    presenting officer I found him to be a credible and  reliable  witness.
    I note that in submissions the  presenting  officer  was  neutral  with
    regard to the evidence of BD and did not  submit  that  he  was  not  a
    credible witness."


14.  Accordingly, on the Respondent's own evidence, the  credibility  of  BD
    was not challenged, notwithstanding the allegation  that  he  had  been
    passed a note by somebody present in the hearing room. It could not  be
    said that the judge had acted in an inappropriate way or that there was
    apparent bias in the way that he dealt with the hearing.

15.  Further, there was no  material  error  of  law  as  a  result  of  any
    procedural unfairness because the evidence of BD was  not  material  to
    the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal.   The  Appellant  and  his
    partner gave consistent evidence and the judge gave clear  findings  at
    paragraphs 17, 21 and 23 in which he stated:

         "17. Both the appellant and Mr A were cross-examined at  length  by
             the presenting officer.  I find that they have been consistent
             with each other regarding the evidence that they had given.  I
             note that both the appellant and his partner stated  that  the
             appellant had received a silver plated ring from  his  partner
             although there was some confusion as to which Xmas it was.   I
             remind myself that the appellant must prove his  case  to  the
             lower standard of a real possibility."


         "21. I  have  taken  into  account  that  the  appellant's  family,
             principally his aunt from the United States,  has  funded  his
             MSc in International Business and Politics at  QMC  University
             of London  last  year.   I  find  that  the  appellant  is  an
             intelligent and articulate  man  and  having  heard  him  give
             evidence as to his journey into  realising  his  sexuality  as
             well as what he has stated in his witness  statement,  I  find
             that he is a gay man."


         "23. Having found that  the  appellant  is  a  gay  man  in  a  gay
             relationship with Mr A, and having heard the  appellant  state
             that he feels very comfortable in his skin as a gay man I find
             that he would not choose to hide the fact that he is gay if he
             were  returned  to  Cameroon.   I  thus  find  that  in  these
             circumstances that the appellant is at risk of [sic] return to
             Cameroon given the background evidence and thus  I  allow  his
             asylum appeal."



   16.     I  find  that  the  judge's  conduct  of  the  hearing  was   not
    procedurally unfair nor was there any appearance of bias  such  that  a
    hypothetical fair-minded observer might well conclude that the  hearing
    was unfair. There was no error of law in the  judge's  decision  and  I
    dismiss the Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 1st August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


