
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13972/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2017                      |      On 15 August 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                 R N (IRAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Saldanha, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Loughridge sitting at Newport on 26  January
    2017) dismissing his protection claim which was brought on  the  ground
    that he was a Christian convert  who had come to the adverse  attention
    of the authorities in Iran as the result of attending a  house  church.
    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in  favour  of  the
    appellant, and I  consider  that  the  anonymity  direction  should  be
    continued for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.





The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 23 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

    2) The grounds argue that the Judge fell into error by failing to  take
       into account material evidence and by failing to attach  appropriate
       weight to the evidence of one Reverend Rees ([50], [54] and [56]  of
       the decision referred to).

    3) It is generally a matter for the Judge as to what weight he  or  she
       places  on  relevant  evidence,  subject  to  such  evidence   being
       considered satisfactorily.  In the present instance, it is  arguable
       that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
       appellant's claimed Christianity in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  his
       assessment of the weight to be given to Reverend Rees' evidence,  is
       flawed.  Permission is accordingly granted on all grounds pleaded.

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 8 June 2017, Paul Duffy of the Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  He pleaded that the  grounds  of
    appeal were simply disagreements with the findings of the  Judge.   The
    findings were open to the Judge on the evidence before him.   Questions
    of weight were matters for the Judge, and it was open to the  Judge  to
    place the weight that he did on the evidence of the Pastor.

The Application to Vary the Grounds of Appeal

 4. On 31 July 2017, the appellant's solicitors notified the Upper Tribunal
    in writing that they were applying under Rule 5(c) to vary  the  notice
    of appeal so as to include the following:

         The assessment of the appellant's credibility by the Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is flawed through failure to make a finding  on
         the evidence of the appellant's father-in-law, [AM].  Although  the
         evidence of this  witness  is  set  out  at  paragraph  24  of  the
         determination, the Judge makes no findings on it.  The evidence  of
         the witness was material to the appellant's evidence of  conversion
         to Christianity.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Saldanha sought permission to advance the additional ground  of
    appeal set out in the letter of 31 July 2017.  He  submitted  that  the
    new ground of appeal was "Robinson obvious".

 6. He had not attended  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant had been represented by Counsel at the hearing, and the  same
    Counsel had settled the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. He explained that AM was a fellow asylum seeker, and that  AM's  appeal
    against the refusal of his protection claim had been dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in May 2017.  I asked him whether the appellant had
    been a witness in AM's asylum appeal, just as AM had been a witness  in
    the appellant's asylum appeal.  Mr Saldanha answered this  question  in
    the negative.

 8. Mr Tarlow opposed the application for permission to vary the grounds of
    appeal, and I ruled: (a) that I would I reserve my decision on  whether
    permission should be granted; and (b) that, in the interim, it  was  in
    accordance  with  the  overriding  objective  for  Mr  Saldanha  to  be
    permitted to develop the new ground of appeal de bene esse.

 9. Mr Saldanha submitted that the  evidence  of  AM  corroborated  crucial
    aspects of the appellant's account of how events unfolded in Iran,  and
    the Judge's failure to make a finding on AM's evidence was a fatal flaw
    which  rendered  unsafe  his  overall  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility, and in particular the credibility of his  claim  to  be  a
    genuine Christian convert, as Reverend Rees believed  him  to  be.   He
    relied on AK (Failure to assess witness's evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT
    00230.  In reply, Mr Tarlow adhered to the Rule 24 response settled  by
    his colleague.

Discussion

10. Rule 5(3)(c) of the Tribunal (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  confers  upon
    the Upper Tribunal the jurisdiction to permit or  require  a  party  to
    amend a document.  I decline to exercise the jurisdiction in this case,
    for two reasons.

11. Firstly, I do not consider that the issue can reasonably be categorised
    as  a  Robinson  obvious  one,  in  circumstances  where  presumptively
    competent Counsel who appeared at the hearing settled  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

12. The entire focus of the permission application settled by Counsel is on
    the Judge's treatment of the evidence of the  Reverend  Rees  whom  she
    describes as being "an  independent  witness  who  has  had  first-hand
    knowledge and involvement of A's activities and  involvement  with  the
    church since his arrival in the UK."

13. Counsel called AM as a witness to give  evidence  which  supported  the
    appellant's account of becoming involved in a house church in Iran, and
    his account of recruiting his father-in-law AM to join him at the  same
    house church.  Having reviewed the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, it did not appear to Counsel that the way in which the Judge had
    addressed the potentially corroborative evidence  of  AM  disclosed  an
    arguable error of law.

14. Secondly, the Rules require the appellant to apply first to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for permission to raise a new ground of appeal,  as  Rule
    21(2) states that  a  person  may  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    another Tribunal only if -  (a)  they  have  made  an  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  which  made   the   decision
    challenged; and (b) that application has been refused or has  not  been
    admitted or has been granted only on limited grounds.

15. However, although I refuse permission to vary the grounds of appeal,  I
    will treat the issue raised by Mr Saldanda as  potentially  buttressing
    the case pleaded by Counsel that the Judge failed to consider "material
    evidence".

16. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to Muse &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph  33,
    Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

17. In AK, the IAT criticised an experienced Adjudicator for not giving any
    indication as to the nature or content of the evidence  given  by  five
    supporting witnesses, and for failing to make any assessment as to  the
    credibility or otherwise of their evidence, or to give any  reason  for
    arriving at his assessment.

18. In this appeal, there were two supporting witnesses, of  whom  Reverend
    Rees was by far the most important, as he was an independent witness.

19. With regard to the evidence of Reverend Rees,  there  is  no  complaint
    along the lines of the Judge failing to engage with his evidence or  to
    make findings on its probative value.  On analysis, the  error  of  law
    challenge pleaded by Counsel is one of perversity.  She pleads that the
    Judge ought to have attached "appropriate weight" to  the  evidence  of
    Reverend Rees because (a)  he  was  an  independent  witness,  (b)  the
    decision to baptise the appellant very quickly had been  vindicated  by
    the appellant's subsequent active involvement with his church; and (c),
    Reverend Rees had refused to support others in claiming asylum where he
    had concerns about whether their asylum applications were genuine.

20. On a fair reading of the Judge's detailed and  thoughtful  analysis  of
    the evidence of Reverend Rees, and the other evidence bearing upon  the
    appellant's  activities  since  arriving  in  the  UK   (contained   in
    paragraphs 49-56), I find there is no merit in  the  case  advanced  by
    Counsel, and Mr Saldanha did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

21. Mr Saldanha focused his attention on paragraph [57],  where  the  Judge
    said that it followed  from  his  observations  about  the  appellant's
    activities in the UK, that, "in  determining  whether  the  appellant's
    claim is genuine the focus should be on his life before he left  Iran."



22. As I have previously highlighted, the error of law  challenge  advanced
    by Counsel begins and ends with the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs [50]-[56].  She mounts no error  of  law  challenge  to  the
    Judge's findings on the appellant's life before he left Iran.

23. It is beyond argument that there is no express finding by the Judge  in
    paragraphs [58] onwards about the credibility of the evidence given  by
    AM.  However, I consider that it is implicit in what the Judge says  at
    paragraph [60] that he is  rejecting  the  evidence  of  AM  about  his
    attendance at the house church, alongside his rejection of the evidence
    of the appellant on the same issue.

24. At paragraph [24], the Judge records AM  as  having  stated  in  cross-
    examination that he attended the house church approximately  10  times;
    that he did not need to speak to anyone before attending,  because  the
    appellant vouched for him; and that the appellant had spoken to some of
    the other members beforehand, and explained that AM wanted to  go,  and
    had made the arrangements. At paragraph [60], the Judge said:

         The key issues, in my view,  are  the  plausibility  arguments  put
         forward by the respondent regarding: M disclosing so readily to the
         appellant that he had converted to Christianity and was attending a
         house church; the lack  of  vetting  of  the  appellant  before  he
         attended; the lack of  vetting  of  the  appellant's  father-in-law
         before he attended (my emphasis); the way in which the response  of
         the informer attending the meeting on 29 April  2016  was  to  pray
         that he had changed; and the fact that M was arrested individually,
         2 days after that meeting.

25. At paragraph [72], the Judge addressed another aspect  common  to  both
    their accounts, which was the plausibility  and  hence  credibility  of
    them not being all arrested at a meeting of the  house  church,  rather
    than the authorities only targeting M on a different occasion, so as to
    give other members of the house church the opportunity to escape.   The
    Judge said as follows:

       I cannot, of course, completely rule out the possibility that M  was
       arrested as  an  individual  because  the  objective  evidence  does
       indicate that sometimes individuals are arrested on their own with a
       view to being recruited as an informant.  However, I find that to be
       a highly improbable scenario after just one meeting attended by  the
       informer.  As far as I can see there is only a single  reference  in
       the Danish Report  to  members  of  house  churches  being  arrested
       individually, in contrast to numerous references to the  authorities
       conducting the raids on  meetings  and  arresting  all  the  members
       together.

26.  The Judge continued, in paragraph [73], as follows:

       In the light of these two  key  findings  much  of  the  appellant's
       account unravels.  For example, it inevitably follows that I  reject
       the appellant's claim that he went into hiding  that  day  with  his
       father-in-law, and that his house was  subsequently  raided  by  the
       authorities (my emphasis).

27. It is apparent from the foregoing that the Judge has engaged  with  the
    evidence of AM as well as  with  the  evidence  of  the  appellant.   I
    consider that the Judge has given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  the
    appellant's claim of past persecution in Iran to be not  credible,  and
    in so doing he has given adequate reasons for finding AM's claim (which
    was essentially identical to that of the  appellant)  to  be  also  not
    credible - and hence, by necessary implication, that AM's  account  did
    not credibly support the appellant's account.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 14 August 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

