
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13353/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 29th March 2019                   |on 9th April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     IT
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G McGowan, Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal David Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
       rights grounds.

    2. The appellant is a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  The
       appellant claims to be at risk in Iran on two main grounds. The first
       is because he is gay.  The second arose from an incident in 2011 when
       the appellant was working as a taxi driver.  He took his nephew and
       his nephew's friend into town, where they displayed a Kurdish flag.
       The appellant was arrested and detained for a month, during which
       time he was tortured and mistreated.  The judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal made adverse credibility findings.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that the Judge of the
       First-tier Tribunal had arguably erred by disregarding medical
       evidence which was before him.  The judge had also arguably erred by
       failing to consider how the appellant might be treated at the border
       on return to Iran.

    4. At the hearing before me the parties were agreed that the appeal
       should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Govan indicated
       that he would not seek to defend the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal.  Not only was there the issue of the medical reports but
       the judge had not made a finding on the appellant's sexuality and had
       not had regard to country guidance on the return of Kurds to Iran.

    5. I note that the lack of a finding on the appellant's sexuality was
       raised in the application for permission to appeal.  I am satisfied
       that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to
       make a finding on this question, as well as by disregarding the
       medical reports and by not properly considering the risk at the
       border on return to Iran.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       accordingly set aside.

    6. In view of the extent of fact-finding which is required to re-make
       the decision I agree with the parties that the proper course is to
       remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with
       paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.  The appeal is remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard before a differently
       constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.

Conclusions

    7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    8. The decision is set aside.

    9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard
       before a differently constituted Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally
decided I make such a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a
court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.
This direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to
comply with the direction may give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


M E Deans   4th April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
