
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13372/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                  | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 September 2018                    | On 01 October 2018                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                     S s
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnyz, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed against a decision
    of  the  Respondent  refusing   his   application   for   international
    protection.  The  Appellant's  application  had  been  refused  as  the
    Respondent was not satisfied  as  to  his  credibility.  The  Appellant
    appealed and following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated  on  13
    February 2018, Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Cope  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which, on 7 March  2018,  was
    granted by Judge Adio. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1. The Applicant seeks permission to  appeal  in  time  against  a
         decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (Judge Cope) who in a  decision
         promulgated on 13th February 2018 dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
         on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds.  The
         very long Grounds of Appeal mostly state that the Judge  failed  to
         take account of relevant  considerations.  However,  the  important
         ground which has a bearing on most of the other grounds is Ground 8
         in which  Counsel  argues  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
         Presidential Guidance.

         2. At paragraph  5  of  the  decision  the  Judge  noted  that  the
         representatives had included  a  copy  of  the  joint  Presidential
         Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers
         of the First-Tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal.  The  Judge  at
         paragraph 6 stated that the  matter  would  be  dealt  with  below,
         referring to matters pointed out at paragraph 5. It  is  not  clear
         from the Judge's decision whether the Joint  Presidential  Guidance
         was correctly applied. There is no finding as to whether or not the
         Applicant was a vulnerable witness. I accept that  the  absence  of
         this finding is that there has been no distinction between evidence
         which can be regarded as unreliable because of  his  mental  health
         disorder and evidence which is incredible because he is  lying,  as
         rightly pointed out at paragraph 42 of the grounds  of  application
         for permission to appeal. I find that all grounds are arguable, but
         more importantly based on the grounds at paragraph 40 to 42.  There
         is an arguable error of law due to the failure to  apply  correctly
         the Presidential Guidance Note and the effect that would  have  had
         on the findings of fact of the Judge."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset both representatives referred  me  to  ground  5  of  the
    Appellant's application for permission to appeal  where  it  is  argued
    that the Judge materially erred in making findings contrary to  country
    guidance and with particular reference to paragraphs 82 to  83  of  his
    decision.  There  he  considers  it  "highly  implausible"   that   the
    Appellant's agent would help him in his release  from  the  authorities
    and was able to assist in the Appellant's departure through the airport
    on his own passport and that the Appellant's release had been  achieved
    through bribery and departure through the airport without  apprehension
    does not indicate lack of State interest. I was referred  to  paragraph
    146 of the authority in GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) where there is reference to the use of
    bribery in these circumstances.

 5. Both representatives urged me to  accept  that  not  only  was  this  a
    material error but also others existed within the  grounds.  That  said
    ground 5 alone was such that it was conceded that the Judge's  decision
    could not stand and that fresh findings of fact were needed.

 6. I share that analysis.

 7. The decision contains a material error of law.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Cope.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                                 Date:  24   September
2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard





