








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13118/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Manchester     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th April 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |On 15th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                         Mr Aravinthan Amirthalingam

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Popal counsel instructed by Greater London
                    Solicitors Limited

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Davies promulgated on the 11th  January  2019  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   Asylum,
    Humanitarian Protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keane on 22nd February  2019.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. At the hearing before me having made submissions on the  basis  of  the
    grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant's  representative  began  to  make
    submissions on the basis  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  treat  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness. No application was initially  sought
    to amend the grounds of appeal. The submissions were being made without
    amending the grounds. None of the existing grounds of appeal relate  to
    the issue of whether or not the appellant was a vulnerable  witness  or
    whether or not  the  judge  had  treated  the  appellant  in  a  manner
    appropriate to being a vulnerable witness.

 5. I raised the issue with Ms Popal. I established with Ms Popal that  she
    was making submissions on the basis that the judge had not  within  the
    decision itself referred to the appellant as a vulnerable  witness  and
    had not identified what steps had been taken to take that into account.



 6. Ms Popal was not counsel at the original hearing. She did not have  any
    notes  indicating  that  something  had  arisen  to  suggest  that  due
    consideration had not been given to the appellant.  Ms  Popal  did  not
    identify any specific prejudice arising to the appellant by  reason  of
    the manner in which the hearing had been conducted.

 7. Mr Tan pointed out that whilst there were medical reports at  best  the
    reports had suggested that the appellant, if he needed them, was  given
    breaks during the hearing.

 8. It was only when asked to justify taking a  point  not  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal, that Ms Popal made application for  leave  to  amend
    the grounds.

 9. The grounds of appeal had been settled by counsel that had attended the
    hearing. No issue had been raised as to the conduct of the proceedings;
    the manner of treating the appellant; or any prejudice arising  to  the
    appellant.  Ms Popal could not identify any way in which the  appellant
    had been prejudiced by the conduct of the proceedings. Ms  Popal  could
    not state what had happened  during  the  proceedings  or  whether  the
    suggestion in the  reports  had  been  followed,  that  is  giving  the
    appellant breaks when it was felt necessary.

10. There was no basis for alleging that the  judge  had  not  treated  the
    appellant in an appropriate manner.  In  the  circumstances  I  refused
    leave to amend the grounds.

Factual background

11. The appellant lives in the north of Sri Lanka in Vavuniya, an  area  in
    which there was a lot of fighting at the time of  the  Civil  War.  The
    appellant had claimed that his problems commenced in 2008/January  2009
    during the time of the Civil War in Sri Lanka. The LTTE  were  forcibly
    recruiting individuals into the LTTE.

12. The appellant has referred to  a  number  of  brothers  but  he  cannot
    remember or say whether or not his  brothers  were  forcibly  recruited
    into the LTTE. Given that the appellant was  living  with  one  of  his
    brothers in the UK the judge did question whether that was credible  in
    the  circumstances.  There  were  other  factors  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's brother which the judge similarly did  not  find  credible.
    One of the appellant's brothers gave evidence and denied being a member
    or involved with the LTTE and also stated  that  he  did  not  know  if
    another had been a member of the LTTE. The judge concluded on the basis
    of the evidence that the appellant's family were not  involved  in  the
    LTTE and would not be of interest to the authorities as such. That  was
    a finding of fact that the judge was entitled to make on  the  evidence
    that had been presented.

13. The appellant's evidence was that he was not a supporter  of  the  LTTE
    but he was forcibly recruited into the LTTE. At the time the  appellant
    was some 15 years old. His conscription lasted for approximately 15 -20
    days or so. He was trained for some 15 days and then made to  guard  an
    area with others. However the appellant with the others  fled  after  a
    week or so into a Sri Lankan army controlled area. The  appellant  then
    appears to have met up with his father. The  appellant  them  with  his
    father was moved to a camp in Vavuniya where they were held for up to 3
    months. The appellant claims that his details were  taken.  He  paid  a
    bribe and was released.

14. In interview the appellant had referred to the fact that his father was
    so unwell that he had to be sent to Vavuniya  hospital  from  the  camp
    (see answer 97, page C21). Thereafter  the  appellant  and  his  father
    appear to have returned to  Vavuniya.  The  appellant  had  no  further
    involvement with the LTTE.

    Submissions

15. The appellant's representative relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal  as
    originally submitted. In the grounds of appeal it is suggested that the
    judge has erred by failing to appreciate that there are 2 documents one
    an arrest warrant and the other an open arrest warrant. It is suggested
    that paragraph 63 the judge has failed to take account that  there  are
    in fact 2 documents.

16. The 2nd grounds of appeal alleges that the judge  has  failed  to  make
    material findings of fact.

17. The 3rd ground of appeal relying on  the  case  law  submits  that  the
    appellant was arrested because he was of significant  interest  to  the
    authorities; he therefore fell into the country guidance case  list  of
    risk categories (see GJ); those that tortured do not do so  necessarily
    for rational reasons; the judge failed to assess what had changed;  and
    finally the appellant had been tortured for political reasons.

    Consideration

18.  The  judge  had  noted  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies   in   the
    appellant's account relating to material elements  of  the  appellant's
    account.

19. With regard to the submissions in respect of  the  arrest  warrant  the
    judge has in  paragraph  63  analysed  the  difference  between  the  2
    documents. In considering those documents further at  paragraph  67  he
    refers to arrest warrants in the plural.  He  then  gives  reasons  for
    finding  that  the  arrest  warrants  were  unrelated  to  any  alleged
    involvement in the LTTE or in bribery  in  order  to  escape  from  the
    detention camp. The judge has properly  looked  at  the  documents  and
    given valid reasons for reaching  the  conclusions  that  he  has.  The
    findings of fact made were open to on the basis of the evidence. In the
    circumstances the judge has valid  reasons  for  his  conclusions  with
    regard to the arrest warrant including the circumstances in which  such
    was obtained.

20. The judge has made a specific finding that the appellant  had  a  brief
    period of a little more than 15 days as a conscript  in  the  LTTE.  In
    paragraph 28 the judge makes a conclusion that the  appellant  and  his
    family  had  no  connection  to  the  LTTE  save  and  except  for  the
    appellant's brief period of conscription.

21. The appellant claims that the next incident occurred in 2017.  On  14th
    October 2017 the Sri Lankan army came to the family home and questioned
    his father about the appellant's escape from the camp  and  the  bribe.
    Subsequently the appellant had claimed that someone had questioned  his
    father some 2 months  earlier  about  having  been  released  from  the
    military detention camp and a bribe. The appellant suggested  that  his
    father did not mention that to him. The judge did not find such  claims
    credible. Again given the circumstances the judge was entitled to  make
    that finding. The judge found that, if people had been questioning  the
    father about the appellant's release from the camp,  the  father  would
    have mentioned it to the  appellant.  Further  that  if  there  was  an
    interest in the appellant because of alleged connections  to  the  LTTE
    the authorities would  have  returned  to  arrest  the  appellant  much
    earlier. Again the judge has given valid  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that he has.

22. The appellant claims that during the course of being questioned at  the
    home, his father was attacked by some of the soldiers. Again the  judge
    has noted inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account.  The  appellant
    trying to defend his father claims that he accidentally pushed  one  of
    the men/soldiers against a barbed wire fence. The soldier was  injured.
    The appellant was arrested and then he was then taken to Colombo a  six
    hour journey. Once in  Colombo  he  was  detained  and  tortured.   The
    appellant describes himself as being treated as  a  high  profile  LTTE
    person. He was in prison for 14 days. The  appellant  then  appears  to
    have been released on condition that he report every week thereafter in
    Colombo.

23. Given the appellant's profile and the information about  the  appellant
    the judge found that such was not credible. Again the judge  has  given
    valid reasons for coming to that conclusion.

24. The appellant failed to report and ultimately left Sri Lanka coming  to
    the United Kingdom, where his brother was.

25.  The  judge  has  made  findings  with  regard   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances. The majority of the appellant's account  the  judge  has
    rejected. The judge has given valid reasons for the  findings  of  fact
    made. The appellant had never suggested that he was  an  activist  with
    the LTTE or that other than the limited involvement he  had  any  other
    connection to the LTTE. The judge accepted that he may have been  in  a
    camp for displaced persons and that he may have been able to leave  the
    camp by payment of a bribe. Such  he  finds  was  consistent  with  the
    background information.

26. Thereafter the appellant lived an uneventful  life  for  over  8  years
    without any troubles from anyone.

27. The judge has accepted that in about October 2017 there may have been a
    scuffle at the appellant's home address and as a result  a  soldier  or
    the like was injured by the appellant. As a result of  that  the  judge
    accepts that the appellant may have been detained for a short period of
    time and may have been ill-treated. However the judge rejects  much  of
    the rest of the appellant's account and rejects the claim that such was
    in anyway connected to the appellant's detention in the past. The judge
    does not accept that the appellant's detention in 2017 had anything  to
    do with the appellant's former arrest and detention or to  his  release
    and the payment of a bribe. In coming to that conclusion the judge  has
    relied upon the country guidance case and the background information

28. The judge specifically relied upon the headnote's indicating  that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities did not actively seek those who had escaped  and
    did not do so many years after the  event.  Further  unless  there  was
    significant reason to suspect that an individual  was  a  terrorist  or
    working to undermine the unitary nature state the authorities would not
    take an interest in  an  individual.  The  judge  consistent  with  the
    country guidance case has found that the appellant was not treated as a
    high profile LTTE member and has found that the appellant was not taken
    to Colombo. Similarly the judge has rejected the appellant's  claim  to
    have been in hiding in Colombo some weeks prior to leaving the country.

29. The judge has made clear  findings  that  the  material  parts  of  the
    appellant's account are  not  credible  and  that  the  only  cause  of
    interest in the appellant was that the appellant had injured  a  person
    in authority at his  home.  It  was  that  that  had  resulted  in  the
    appellant's detention and mistreatment not any other factor.

30. The appellant's representative  sought  to  argue  that  the  judge  in
    finding that the appellant in the past had been a member  of  the  LTTE
    and that the appellant had been arrested detained  and  mistreated  has
    failed to take account of the country guidance  case  of  GJ  &  others
    (post civil war : returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319.

31. The country guidance case involves facts that are wholly different from
    the present case.  The three appellants in the  country  guidance  case
    had been involved with the LTTE over prolonged periods of time, being a
    member of an LTTE loyalist family, having worked for  the  LTTE  for  a
    period of years and having been involved with the LTTE for  two  years.
    In the present case the  appellant  much  like  many  others  had  been
    forcibly recruit into the LTTE but his  involvement  was  minimal.  The
    judge  was  entitled  in  the  circumstances  to  conclude   that   the
    authorities would have no interest in the appellant and that his arrest
    and detention was not connected to his past.

32. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to conclude that there  was
    no interest in the appellant because of any  alleged  involvement  with
    the LTTE and that the only reason for interest in the appellant was  he
    had injured a soldier. In the circumstances the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude  that  the  authorities  had  otherwise  no  interest  in  the
    appellant and that the appellant was therefore not at risk.

33. The judge has given valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that he
    has. In the circumstances there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

    Notice of Decision

34. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.





Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 14th May 2019

