
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13041/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2019                             |On 25th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     GAB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel, instructed by Kirklees
                    Citizens Advice and Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Smith made
following a hearing at Bradford on 8th August 2018.





Background

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1st January 1985.  She arrived
in the UK on 10th July 2017 and claimed asylum on the basis that if
returned she would be at risk of an honour killing.

The judge did not accept that the core of the appellant's case was true and
permission to appeal was not granted to challenge any of his conclusions in
respect of the asylum claim.

The appellant has a British child, a son, who is 3 months old.  Her
partner, Mr H, is of Kurdish origin like the appellant.  The judge accepted
that M was a qualifying child but considered it reasonable for him to
return to Iraq with his mother.  He said that the appellant had behaved in
an egregious manner, having invented a story to avoid immigration control
as a consequence of which public time and money had been expended on a
false claim.

Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had materially
erred in law in concluding that M could reasonably return to Iraq.  M was a
qualifying child, as a British citizen.  The judge's conclusion was
contrary to the respondent's own IDIs and policies as set out in IDIs
Family (as a Partner or Parent) Private Life: 10-Year Routes; 22nd February
2018:

It states:

"In particular circumstances, it may be appropriate to refuse to grant
leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct gives rise to public
interest considerations of such weight as to justify their removal.  The
circumstances envisaged include those in which to grant leave could
undermine our immigration controls, for example the applicant has committed
significant or persistent criminal offences falling below the thresholds
for deportation set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has a
very poor immigration history, having repeatedly and deliberately breached
the Immigration Rules."

Mrs Petterson did not seek to argue that this decision could be maintained.
 She accepted that it was not possible to equate being untruthful in
relation to an asylum claim with criminality and accepted that the judge's
decision was out of line with the respondent's policy documents relating to
British children.

The Immigration Judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It is not
consistent with the Home Office policies set out above nor with the
decision in MT and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria
[2018] UKUT 88, which requires powerful reasons why a qualifying child
should be removed. In the present case, the matters identified come nowhere
close to what would be needed; indeed, the appellant's conduct is less
culpable than those of the appellants in MT and ET, whose appeals were
allowed.



Decision

The judge's decision in relation to the appellant's asylum claim stands.

His decision in relation to the appellant's human rights claim is set aside
and remade as follows:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

