
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13628/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2018                          |On 26th February 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Wilkins of Counsel instructed by Broudie
                    Jackson & Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  A  J  Parker  (the
    judge) of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FtT)  promulgated  on  10th
    February 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an  Iranian  citizen  born  in  September  1975.   She
    arrived in the UK illegally on 27th May 2016 and claimed asylum on  the
    basis of her conversion to Christianity.

 3. The application was refused on 22nd November 2016 and  the  appeal  was
    heard by the FtT on 26th January 2017.

 4. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant and Roy Teague, an  assistant
    church leader, and concluded that the Appellant was not a Christian, as
    she had not undergone a genuine conversion.  The  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant would be returned to Iran as a Muslim who has  not  converted
    to Christianity.  The asylum and human rights appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Froom.  Renewed grounds  were
    then submitted seeking permission to appeal.  The Appellant relied upon
    four grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Ground 1 contends that the judge committed a misdirection in  law  with
    respect to the necessity and nature of  a  Dorodian  witness.   It  was
    contended that Dorodian [2002] UKIAT 02650 is not  a  starred  decision
    and does not bind the Tribunal.  It was contended that the judge  erred
    in law in concluding at paragraph 24  that  the  Appellant's  case  was
    "significantly weakened" simply by the absence of a church minister  at
    the hearing, especially when there was other evidence such as a baptism
    certificate, photographs of her attending  church,  and  oral  evidence
    from the assistant leader of the church.

 7. It was also contended that the judge had erred by finding at  paragraph
    44 that the minister, Dr Iain Wight, would not attend  in  future  even
    though it was explained that he had booked the wrong date in his  diary
    and was otherwise committed on the date of the hearing.

 8. It was also contended that the judge had erred in law at  paragraph  26
    in finding that Mr Teague did not say in his letter  that  he  believed
    the Appellant was a genuine convert, as although those words  were  not
    actually contained within the letter, the meaning  of  the  letter  was
    that the Appellant was a genuine convert.   It  was  contended  it  was
    procedurally unfair of  the  judge  to  criticise  Mr  Teague  for  not
    confirming in oral evidence that the Appellant was  a  genuine  convert
    when it appears that he was not asked this.

 9. Ground 2 contends the judge  erred  by  placing  weight  on  immaterial
    matters.  It was contended that the judge at  paragraph  29  criticises
    Mehrdad Sadooghi, the minister who baptised the Appellant, for  failing
    to explain why the  Appellant  was  baptised  after  only  two  months'
    attendance at church.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  many  Christian
    churches baptise very young babies.  The judge erred by  placing  "less
    weight on his written letter because of this"

10. It is also contended that the judge erred when finding at paragraph  38
    that the Appellant's alleged lack of knowledge of Christianity was "not
    successfully dealt with at the hearing.  There is very  little  testing
    of her faith at the hearing".   Lack  of  testing  at  the  hearing  is
    immaterial because representatives  are  not  permitted  to  embark  on
    religious quizzes during examination-in-chief and the judge  could  not
    effectively find that there had been a lack of testing at  the  hearing
    if the Respondent had chosen  not  to  ask  such  questions  in  cross-
    examination.

11. Ground 3 contends the judge erred in law by  relying  on  supplementary
    questions asked at the screening interview.  It was contended  this  is
    unfair and reliance was placed upon YL China [2004]  UKIAT  00145.   It
    was contended that the interviewing officer at the screening  interview
    asked  inappropriate  questions  about  the  Appellant's  knowledge  of
    Christianity, and in any event there was an issue with the  interpreter
    at the screening interview.  It was contended that it  was  unfair  for
    the judge to rely upon the Appellant's alleged lack of knowledge of the
    meaning of Easter and whether she had a Bible or not.

12. Ground 4 contends that the judge erred by failing to take into  account
    relevant evidence, by failing to refer or make any findings as  to  the
    detailed account that  the  Appellant  gave  about  her  conversion  to
    Christianity  in  her  asylum  interview  and  witness  statement.   At
    paragraph 34 the judge found that two questions (questions 28  and  39)
    of the asylum interview demonstrated poor  knowledge  of  Christianity,
    when in fact these questions did not relate to  Christianity  and  left
    the impression that the judge had not  in  fact  read  the  Appellant's
    asylum interview.  The judge failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant answered some questions about Christianity correctly.

13. Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey  found  the  above  grounds  to  be
    arguable and granted permission to appeal.

14. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately and had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  in
    relation to the evidence of Mr Teague.  The judge also  considered  the
    non-attendance of the minister who had baptised the Appellant, and  the
    minister of the church currently attended  by  the  Appellant  and  was
    therefore entitled to attach little weight to their written evidence.

15. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

16. Lengthy oral submissions were made  by  both  representatives  and  are
    recorded in full in my Record of  Proceedings  and  summarised  briefly
    below.

17. Miss Wilkins relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application
    for permission to  appeal.   It  was  argued  that  two  ministers  had
    provided letters, and the judge was wrong in law  to  place  no  weight
    upon them.  It was argued that the judge was  wrong  to  find  that  Mr
    Teague did not, in effect, give evidence to say that the Appellant  was
    a genuine Christian convert.  The judge did not take  into  account  Mr
    Teague's evidence of the Appellant's regular attendance at church.

18. With reference to the second ground, Miss Wilkins pointed out that some
    babies are baptised at birth, and there is  no  time  limit  before  an
    individual can be baptised.  The Appellant had pursued Christianity  in
    Iran.  It would not be appropriate  to  attempt  to  test  faith  at  a
    hearing.  It was unfair of the judge to  find  against  the  Appellant,
    because the Respondent at the hearing chose not to  ask  her  questions
    which tested her faith.  The Appellant had  explained  in  her  witness
    statement why she had converted, and this was  not  considered  by  the
    judge.

19. With reference to Ground 3, the Appellant's solicitors had  written  to
    the Respondent following the  screening  interview  pointing  out  that
    there had been difficulties with the interpreter.

20. With reference to Ground 4, it was contended that the judge  had  erred
    by not properly considering the asylum interview, which was evident  by
    the fact that he referred to questions 28 and 29 as demonstrating  poor
    knowledge of Christianity, when those questions  were  not  related  to
    Christianity at all.

21. Overall, Miss Wilkins submitted that the judge  had  made  mistakes  of
    fact and law, and failed to engage with what the Appellant had said  in
    interview and in her witness statement.

22. Mr Bates in making oral submissions relied upon the  rule  24  response
    and pointed out that prior  to  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  had  given
    directions that the parties  should  familiarise  themselves  with  the
    guidance in Dorodian.  It was submitted that the judge was entitled  to
    note the  absence  of  two  ministers,  and  that  there  had  been  no
    application for an adjournment to allow the ministers to attend.

23. It was  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's lack of knowledge of the death of Christ at Easter and  his
    resurrection was a fundamental part of the Christian faith.   Mr  Bates
    pointed out that at question 162 of the asylum interview the  Appellant
    was asked why on her arrival  in  the  UK  she  could  not  answer  why
    Christians celebrate Easter and she did not say she did not  understand
    the interpreter.  Her explanation for not answering  the  question  was
    that she was not feeling very well and was kept away from her  son  and
    she was not prepared to give any answers.

24. Mr Bates submitted  that  the  judge  at  paragraph  24  was  perfectly
    entitled to find that the Appellant's case was weakened by the  absence
    of the ministers and to  note  the  lack  of  any  application  for  an
    adjournment.  With reference to baptism Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to take into account that  the  Appellant  had  been
    baptised two months after joining the church.

25. With reference to testing the Appellant's  faith  at  the  hearing,  Mr
    Bates submitted that it was open to the Appellant's  representative  to
    ask questions of her to demonstrate her genuine belief in Christianity.

26. In response Miss Wilkins submitted that the fact that a minister of the
    church had not attended did not mean that the Appellant could not be  a
    genuine  convert  to  Christianity.   It  was  contended  that  in  the
    solicitors' letter sent after the screening  interview,  the  Appellant
    had explained that the interpreter had not  said  the  word  Easter  in
    Farsi and therefore the Appellant did not know what was being asked  of
    her.

27. Miss Wilkins submitted that if questions were asked of the Appellant to
    demonstrate her faith this would be regarded as being pre-prepared, and
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing would not be  in  a  position  to
    verify the answers.

28. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.   I  will
    address the grounds in  the  order  in  which  they  are  made  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.

Ground 1

29. I do not find this ground discloses a misdirection of law.   The  judge
    was entitled to  find  that  the  Appellant's  case  was  significantly
    weakened by the failure to attend the  hearing,  of  the  minister  who
    baptised her, and  the  minister  of  the  church  that  she  currently
    attended.  The judge did not misapply or misunderstand  Dorodian.   The
    judge did not say that non-attendance of the ministers was fatal to the
    case.  He said that  the  case  was  significantly  weakened  by  their
    absence and he did not err in law in making that finding.

30. The  judge  was  entitled  to  note  that  the  Appellant  was  legally
    represented, and did not seek an adjournment in order for one  or  both
    of the ministers to attend.  The parties had  been  put  on  notice  by
    Tribunal directions dated  18th  January  2017,  that  they  should  be
    familiar with Dorodian and SJ Iran [2003] UKIAT 00158.

31. With reference to the evidence of Mr Teague, it is clear that the judge
    considered that evidence, both oral and written, and in  my  view  gave
    adequate reasons for concluding, taking all the evidence in the  round,
    that Mr Teague's evidence did  not  prove  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine convert.  The judge gave adequate reasons,  and  in  particular
    noted that Mr Teague had only known the Appellant for a short period of
    time.

Ground 2

32. In my view the  judge  at  paragraph  29  does  not  criticise  Mehrdad
    Sadooghi for lack of explanation as to why the Appellant  was  baptised
    after only two months' attendance at church.  The judge at paragraph 29
    states that "We have an explanation why after two months' attendance at
    church (he) baptised the Appellant".  The  judge  is  correct  to  find
    there is an explanation contained within a letter, but is  entitled  to
    point out that the reason for baptism has not  been  tested  in  cross-
    examination, and less weight is placed on the written letter because of
    the minister's non-attendance.  In my view it is not an error of law to
    place less weight on a letter, than may  be  placed  on  oral  evidence
    which is tested in cross-examination.

33. With reference to the criticism of the judge as to his finding that the
    Appellant's  alleged  lack  of  knowledge  of  Christianity  was   "not
    successfully dealt with at the hearing", I do not find the criticism to
    be well-founded.  My reading of paragraph 38 is that  the  judge  found
    that the lack of knowledge displayed by the Appellant in interview  had
    not been successfully explained at the hearing.  That, in my  view,  is
    not an error of law.

Ground 3

34. I do not find that the judge  was  unfair,  in  the  circumstances,  in
    making reference to the screening interview, and the  Appellant's  lack
    of knowledge or understanding  of  Easter.   It  is  correct  that  the
    Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Respondent following the  screening
    interview, but as pointed out by Mr Bates, the Appellant was  given  an
    opportunity to comment upon this in her asylum  interview  at  question
    162.  The reply in the asylum  interview,  in  summary,  was  that  the
    interpreter talked about the Easter celebration and  "I  really  didn't
    know what Easter was about and I mentioned  it  to  my  lawyer  that  I
    didn't know the answer, I wasn't feeling very well on that day,  I  was
    kept away from my son".  The  Appellant  explained  that  she  was  not
    prepared to give any answers and had mentioned to the interpreter  that
    she was not feeling well.

35. The Respondent relied upon YL China [2004]  UKIAT  00145  and  AD  (Sri
    Lanka) [2007] EWCA Civ 1384 in the refusal letter at paragraphs 32  and
    33 contending that the case law proved that asylum seekers are expected
    to tell the truth and answers given  in  screening  interviews  can  be
    compared fairly with answers given later.  The Appellant relies upon YL
    China as authority to confirm that it would not normally be appropriate
    for supplementary questions to be asked.   Caution  must  be  exercised
    when considering answers given in a screening  interview,  it  must  be
    considered whether the Appellant had the  benefit  of  an  interpreter,
    whether there were any difficulties,  and,  for  example,  whether  the
    Appellant was tired after a long journey.  The judge took into  account
    at paragraph 33 that the Appellant claimed to be in good health at  her
    screening interview but in her witness  statement  claimed  that  there
    were problems with the interpreter and that she was not  feeling  well.
    The judge also took into account at paragraph 31 the  letter  from  her
    solicitors dated 8th September 2016  and  specifically  considered  her
    explanation, finding her "attempts to  blame  the  interpreter  carried
    little weight.  I do not accept this explanation".  In my view,  taking
    into account the reply given by the Appellant to question  162  of  the
    asylum interview, the judge was  entitled  to  place  weight  upon  the
    Appellant's lack of knowledge of the death  of  Christ  at  Easter  and
    resurrection.

Ground 4

36. The judge errs at  paragraph  34  in  recording  that  the  Appellant's
    answers to questions 28 and 39 in her asylum interview demonstrate poor
    knowledge  of  Christianity.   Those  questions  do   not   relate   to
    Christianity.  It may be that the judge meant to refer to paragraphs 28-
    39 of the reasons for refusal letter, as he did at paragraph 31 of  his
    decision.  These  paragraphs  of  the  refusal  letter  deal  with  the
    Appellant's screening and asylum interviews, and  contain  comments  by
    the  Respondent  on  the  Appellant's  alleged  lack  of  knowledge  of
    Christianity.  Although the judge erred in referring  to  questions  28
    and 39, I do not find, taking all matters into consideration, that this
    error is material.  I do not find that the judge  has  failed  to  take
    into account relevant evidence.  In my view, a reading of the  decision
    confirms that the judge considered  all  the  evidence,  analysed  that
    evidence, and gave sustainable reasons for conclusions reached.  In  my
    view,  the  grounds  display  a  significant  disagreement   with   the
    conclusions reached by the judge, but do  not  demonstrate  a  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error of law such  that
the decision must be set aside.  I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity direction because the Appellant has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

