
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13557/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28th June 2017                             |On 12th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     Q N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Asimwe (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fowell, promulgated on 20th January 2017, following a hearing  at
    Newport  on  10th  January  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Vietnam, who  was  born  on  [  ]
    1980.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent, Secretary of
    State, dated 29th November 2016, refusing the  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC  395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he had been involved in demonstrations in
    Vietnam, against the  Government  of  China,  on  account  of  the  oil
    drilling carried out by the Chinese Government, following which he  had
    fled  Vietnam.   In  the  UK,  he  had  been  involved  in  some  three
    demonstrations outside the Vietnamese Embassy, such that if he were now
    to be returned to Vietnam, he would face a risk  of  ill-treatment  and
    persecution.

The Judge's Findings

 4.  The  judge  found  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be   riddled   with
    inconsistencies (see paragraph 38 onwards).  The judge went on to refer
    to "the crux of his claim" which "centres on the demonstration in Hanoi
    in May  2014",  and  here  the  judge  concluded  that  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State's case was persuasive, "in that  the  demonstrations
    were in fact encouraged [by the  Vietnamese  Government]  or  at  least
    tolerated by the Authorities there, given the fact that they took place
    at all without police intervention" (paragraph 42).  Second, the  judge
    was  not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  was  ever   simply   fleeing
    persecution  because  he  travelled,  "through  many  safe   countries"
    (paragraph 47).  He gave an account of his journey which the judge  did
    not find to be credible (paragraph 49).  In short, the judge  concluded
    that, "the Appellant was of no interest to the Authorities  in  Vietnam
    when he left the country" (paragraph 50).  The judge  went  on  to  say
    that, "the final aspect is the risk to which he has potentially exposed
    himself by virtue of attending the demonstrations before the Vietnamese
    Embassy" in the United Kingdom (paragraph 50).  It was concluded by the
    judge that the Appellant would not be recognised or traced  from  these
    events, "for the same reason he could not have been traced from  Hanoi"
    (paragraph 51).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons and failed to take into account matters, such as the  Appellant
    attending  demonstrations  in  the  UK,  which  would   have   material
    consequence.  The grounds also state that the judge failed  to  make  a
    finding on the Appellant being trafficked.

 7.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's  application  was
    rejected by DIJ Woodcraft on 15th February 2016,

 8. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal. On  17  March  2017,
    UTJ Rimington  rejected the challenge that the judge had erred  in  the
    findings about a lack of risk  from  attending  demonstrations  in  the
    United Kingdom but granted permission on limited grounds ,

         "Although not disclosed  in  his  asylum  interview  the  Appellant
         refers obliquely to being trafficked in his Statement of Additional
         Grounds.  There is further evidence in his  witness  statement  and
         one line reference  in  the  representative's  submissions  at  the
         hearing at [35] of the decision.  Despite  the  series  of  adverse
         credibility findings, it is arguable that  the  judge  should  have
         clearly addressed the issue of trafficking...".

 9. On 11th May 2017, UTJ  Rintoul  gave  further  directions  following  a
    hearing in which it had been revealed that that on  27th  August  2016,
    the relevant competent Authority made a decision that the Appellant was
    not a person who "on reasonable grounds" could be treated as  a  victim
    of trafficking ( "the trafficking decision").  This  decision  was  not
    referred to in the refusal letter dated 29th  November  2016,  and  the
    Appellant himself made no mention of it.   In  giving  directions,  UTJ
    Rintoul stated  that  the  Appellant  was  now  to  furnish  a  witness
    statement, within ten days of the date of these directions,  explaining
    whether he had received the trafficking decision, whether it  has  been
    discussed with previous representatives, and why he had  not  mentioned
    the decision at his appeal

10. In a letter dated 22nd May 2017, from Pillai & Jones , the  appellant's
    current solicitors  referred to a letter from  J  D  Spicer  Zeb   (the
    appellant's former solicitors, dated 18th May 2017, stating  that  they
    did receive a refusal letter from the competent Authority regarding the
    human trafficking matter; took  the  Appellant's  instructions  on  the
    same, and that they did raise the trafficking aspect in the Grounds  of
    Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is then a short statement
    dated 22nd May 2017 from the Appellant himself, amounting  to  no  more
    than some three sentences, in which he states  that,  "I am  not  sure
    whether we  discussed  about  human  trafficking  in  regards  to  this
    response or not" when referring to having received the  refusal  letter
    of 27th August 2016, which he had passed on to his former solicitors.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before us on 28th June 2017, the Tribunal reminded  both
    representatives attending (in circumstances where the Appellant himself
    had not appeared today) that there was a lack of clarity as to  exactly
    what happened in previous stages of this appeal, and this was important
    because the two salient issues for determination presently were: first,
    whether the Appellant  was  a  victim  of  trafficking;  and  secondly,
    whether he would be at future risk of ill-treatment  or  re-trafficking
    on account of his earlier treatment as a victim of  human  trafficking.
    There was no evidence furnished in relation to  the  second  matter  at
    all.

12. Mr Asimwe, appearing on behalf of the Appellant,  stated  that  he  had
    specifically asked the Appellant whether there would be any  risk  upon
    his being returned back to Vietnam on account  of  his  having  been  a
    victim of human trafficking, but his view was that this  matter  should
    be assumed by the Tribunal, and that there was nothing further he could
    add.  What was significant, submitted Mr Asimwe, was that the Appellant
    had referred to his having been trafficked in his interview and in  his
    witness statement, and this being so, the judge should have dealt  with
    the consequences of this.

13. For his part, Mr Duffy submitted that there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    representations having been made, in circumstances where the  Appellant
    was legally  represented  before  the  Tribunal  of  Judge  Fowell,  in
    relation to the trafficking aspect of the claim, and certainly, nothing
    was ever suggested, and has not been now suggested, as to what the risk
    of re-trafficking is,  were  the  Appellant  to  be  returned  back  to
    Vietnam.  Accordingly, there would be no error of law  in  the  judge's
    determination.

No Error of Law

14. We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)
    such that we should set aside the decision  and  remake  the  decision.
    Our reasons  are  as  follows.   Whereas  it  is  the  case,  as  Judge
    Rimington, in granting permission has  observed,  that  "the  Appellant
    refers obliquely to being trafficked in  his  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds" and  there are  references  in  his  screening  interview  and
    substantive asylum interview as well, this has no  probative  relevance
    to the  issues  at  hand,  in  that  it  cannot  be  demonstrated  that
    submissions were made that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or re-trafficking, specifically on account of his having been
    a victim of trafficking previously.  Despite several requests  from  us
    to do so, Mr Asimwe was unable to show us  that  such  submissions  had
    been made, or that the appellant had himself claimed such a  fear.   It
    simply cannot be argued, as he  appears  to  do,  that  the  fact  that
    someone has been trafficked raises a necessary inference that he  faces
    a risk of serious harm on return.

15. The Appellant  did  not  appear  to  rely  on  trafficking  at  closing
    submissions" and nothing that Mr Asimwe has suggested  today  tells  us
    otherwise.  In the Grounds of  Appeal  that  proceeded  that  decision,
    dated 3rd February 2017, all that  is  said  is  that,  "the  Appellant
    claims to be a victim of trafficking" but that the judge failed to make
    a finding on this matter (at paragraph 5).  There is no proper  attempt
    to link that to a risk on return; rather, that is  simply  and  wrongly
    just assumed. It is for the trafficked person to demonstrate that there
    is a real risk of serious harm or persecution on return to the  country
    of nationality; that is clear from, for example, TD and AD  (Trafficked
    women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC) and HD  (Trafficked  women)  Nigeria  CG
    [2016] UKUT 454 (IAC).

16. The  Appellant,  in  the  hearing  before  us,  has  been  given  ample
    opportunity, by virtue of the directions issued on 11th  May  2017,  to
    state his claim on the basis of his  having  been  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking, but has signally failed to do so, and it remains  entirely
    unclear to us as to how the failure of the judge (such  as  it  is)  to
    refer to the Appellant as having  been  trafficked,  "in  circumstances
    where the matter was not  specifically  or  orally  raised  before  the
    judge" would be at risk of ill-treatment or  re-trafficking  simply  by
    virtue of having been trafficked in the first place. Such a fear, if it
    be  the  appellant's  case,  is  neither  properly  asserted,  nor  has
    sufficient evidence been produced in support of such an assertion.

17. In short, any error by the judge cannot be said to be a material  error
    that would have affected the outcome of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017
