
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13453/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2019                            |On 2nd April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Iqbal of Primus Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Holt  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th January
    2019.  The Respondent before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  the  Appellant
    before the FtT and I will refer to him as the  claimant.   He  made  an
    international protection and human rights claim.  He claimed that he is
    of Kurdish ethnicity, originates from Mosul, and  feared  returning  to
    Iraq because of a blood feud involving his family.

 2. The Respondent refused the application on 1st  November  2018  and  the
    appeal was heard on 3rd January 2019.

 3. The Secretary of State was not  represented  by  a  Presenting  Officer
    before the FtT.  The judge heard evidence from the claimant.  The judge
    noted that the claimant had given conflicting  accounts,  and  rejected
    his claim that his family had been  involved  in  a  blood  feud.   The
    claimant had claimed that he left Iraq with his family in 2013 and fled
    to Syria, but in an earlier account claimed that he left Iraq  in  2003
    and travelled to Syria where he remained until 2014  when  he  went  to
    Turkey.

 4. The judge rejected the account that the claimant had left Iraq in 2013,
    finding that he and his family had left in 2003.

 5. The judge found  that  the  claimant  had  exaggerated  or  lied  about
    elements of his claim but found that he is an Iraqi Kurd  and  that  he
    cannot return to his home area in the Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq  (the
    KRI).  The judge was satisfied that the claimant does not have  a  CSID
    card and found that he would have no way of gaining access  to  such  a
    card.

 6. The judge found that the claimant could not return to the KRI and found
    at paragraph 27 that the claimant has no family, contacts or other "way
    in" to Iraqi Kurdish  society.   Because  of  the  claimant's  lack  of
    identity documents he would not be able to  regularise  his  status  in
    Iraq even outside the KRI.

 7. The judge allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and  with  reference  to
    Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 European Convention.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. The Secretary of State submitted that the judge had  erred  in  law  by
    rejecting the claimant's account of a blood feud but then  allowed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

 9. It was contended that the judge had erred by not  properly  considering
    country guidance case  law,  which  provided  guidance  upon  obtaining
    identity documentation.

10. It was contended the judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons,  by
    finding that the claimant would  be  unable  to  obtain  a  CSID.   The
    Secretary of State described the judge's finding as  speculative.   The
    claimant had made no attempt to contact his family  and  there  was  no
    evidence that he could not do so.

11. It was contended that the judge had mistakenly found  that  any  direct
    flights from the UK would only  go  to  Baghdad.   The  latest  country
    information on Iraq indicated that this was not the case and there were
    direct flights to the KRI.

12. It was submitted that the judge was wrong to stress at  several  points
    in the decision, that the claimant's account was  unchallenged  by  the
    Home Office.  It was contended that the judge was wrong to  proceed  in
    the absence of a Presenting  Officer,  and  wrong  to  fail  to  obtain
    consent from the Secretary of State before considering a new matter, it
    being contended that the claim by the claimant that his family were  in
    Jordan was a new matter and had not previously been considered  by  the
    Secretary of State.

The Grant of Permission

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Scott-Baker in the  following
    terms;

         "3.  The judge records at [4] that the Respondent was unrepresented
             at  the  hearing  and  there  was  no  explanation  for   that
             nonattendance.  In such circumstances it was open to the judge
             to proceed as there were no other obstacles to him considering
             the appeal.  However as a result the findings at [23] and [27]
             that evidence was unchallenged cannot be used as a  substitute
             for  reasoned  findings  and  arguably   the   assessment   of
             credibility may arguably be flawed as a result thereof.

         4.   It was accepted at [24] that the Appellant held  no  CSID  but
             arguably the finding that he had no way of gaining  access  to
             it now was inadequately reasoned, as was the issue  of  return
             to the Kurdish area at [26].  There was arguably  insufficient
             consideration of the CG cases of AA and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds -
             internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212.

         5.   While seemingly a typographical error to allow the  appeal  on
             asylum grounds as opposed to humanitarian protection this does
             lead to a possible misunderstanding of the decision, the issue
             as to the  whereabouts  of  the  Appellant's  parents  however
             cannot arguably be deemed a new matter as the location of  his
             family was a factor to be considered and  had  been  an  issue
             before the Respondent."

14. Directions were given that there should be an oral hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. The judge did not err in proceeding with a hearing in the absence of  a
    Presenting  Officer.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  provide   a
    Presenting Officer but did not request that the hearing  be  adjourned.
    There is no merit in the Secretary of State's contention that the judge
    erred in failing to seek the permission of the Secretary  of  State  to
    consider a new matter.  The Secretary of State errs in contending  that
    the issue of the claimant's family being in Jordan  is  a  new  matter.
    That is not a new matter, as it was claimed in  the  claimant's  asylum
    interview that his family no longer lived in Mosul but lived in Jordan.



16. In my view the judge errs in law in allowing the appeal  on  the  basis
    that the claimant is entitled to asylum.  This contradicts the  finding
    made by the judge at paragraph 20, that it was not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant and his family had been involved in a blood feud.  The  basis
    of the claimant's asylum claim  was  the  blood  feud.   As  the  judge
    rejected this, and also rejected the claimant's claim that he  remained
    in Iraq until 2013, there was no basis to allow the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

17. The judge erred in law at paragraph 24 in  referring  to  the  claimant
    being unable to return to his home area in the KRI.  This  discloses  a
    material misunderstanding of the claimant's claim.  It  was  never  the
    claimant's case that he originated from within the KRI.  His  case,  as
    noted by the judge at paragraph 9 was that  he  originated  from  Mosul
    which is not within the KRI.

18. The judge also erred at paragraph 24  in  finding  that  the  Appellant



         "Does not have a CSID card and I am satisfied  he  has  no  way  of
         gaining access to it now.   It  was  the  claimant's  case,  as  he
         explained in his asylum interview that he had been  issued  with  a
         CSID card in Mosul but he had left the card behind when he left his
         home".

    The judge does not adequately explain why it is  found  that  he  would
    have no way of gaining access to a CSID card.  The judge does not refer
    to guidance given in country guidance case law,  on  obtaining  a  CSID
    while in the UK upon which guidance was given at paragraphs 173-177  of
    AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC), and obtaining a CSID  while  in  Iraq
    upon which guidance was given in the same case at paragraphs 178-187.

19. Further guidance was given by the same expert, Dr Fatah in AAH Iraq  CG
    UKUT 00212 (IAC) at paragraphs 100-107.   Dr  Fatah  confirmed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in AAH  that  the  guidance  given  in  AA  Iraq  [2015]
    remained valid but there were two caveats.   One  was  that  the  Iraqi
    civil registration system is in disarray, in that  ISIS,  between  2014
    and 2017 closed down all of the relevant offices  in  areas  under  its
    control, and  the  second  was  that  the  anecdotal  evidence  on  the
    willingness of officials to assist undocumented IDPs is not  promising.



20. However the judge does not demonstrate that any  of  the  guidance  has
    been considered.  In very brief summary the guidance is that  an  Iraqi
    national who has an expired or current Iraqi passport but no  CSID  may
    be able to obtain a CSID through the  consular  section  of  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in London.  This would be the case if the individual is able to
    produce a current or expired passport and/or the book and  page  number
    for their family registration details.  If the individual is unable  to
    produce  such  a  passport  or  cannot  produce  the  relevant   family
    registration details, a power of attorney can be provided to  a  friend
    or relative or lawyer in Iraq who can thereafter undertake the  process
    of obtaining the CSID from the Civil Status  Affairs  Office  in  their
    home governorate.  Dr Fatah confirmed that  the  process  of  giving  a
    power of attorney  to  a  lawyer  in  Iraq  to  act  "as  a  proxy"  is
    commonplace and the power of attorney could  be  obtained  through  the
    Iraq Embassy in London.

21. Guidance is given that the ability to obtain a CSID  is  likely  to  be
    severely hampered if the CSA office is in an area where  Article  15(c)
    serious harm is occurring.  As a result of  the  violence,  alternative
    CSA offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
    Baghdad and Kerbala.

22. The findings made by the judge at paragraph 25 are made  on  the  basis
    that the claimant has no CSID card nor access to a replacement.  As the
    judge has not considered  the  appropriate  country  guidance  on  this
    point, I find this to be a material error of law.

23. At paragraph 27 the judge makes  reference  to  unchallenged  evidence.
    While it is the case that the claimant's evidence was not challenged at
    the hearing, due to the absence of a  Presenting  Officer,  it  is  not
    accurate to conclude that the claimant's case was not challenged by the
    Secretary of State.  By way of example the judge finds, on unchallenged
    evidence, that the claimant has no family, contacts or other  "way  in"
    to Iraqi Kurdish society.  The Secretary of State  makes  it  clear  at
    paragraph 44 of the refusal decision that this  is  not  accepted.   In
    that paragraph the Secretary of State specifically  rejected  that  the
    claimant had lost contact with his family in Iraq, and  contended  that
    he would have family support on return, noting that he  had  not  shown
    that  he  would  not  have  been  able  to  obtain  the  necessary   ID
    documentation.  In addition the Appellant's own case, as  described  in
    his asylum interview was that he did have extended family in  Iraq,  as
    he confirmed that his aunt lives in Bardarash which is within the  KRI,
    and he also had distant relatives in Mosul.

24. For the reasons given above I conclude that there are  material  errors
    of law within the FtT decision which render the decision unsafe.  There
    are mistakes of fact, inadequacy of reasoning, and a failure  to  apply
    country guidance case law.  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

25. Having considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, I find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal  back  to
    the FtT to be heard again.  This is because of the nature and extent of
    judicial fact-finding that is going to be necessary.

26. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Holt.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT discloses a material error of law and is set  aside.
 The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the FtT with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.  This  direction
is made because the claimant has made a claim for international protection.


Signed                              Date 27th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 27th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
