









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13318/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 2 November 2017                 |On: 14 November 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                     I A
                       anonymity direction maintained

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Syed-Ali, counsel, instructed by Shahid Rahman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I maintain the anonymity order made. Unless and until  a  tribunal  or
      court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No report
      of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or any
      member of their family. This direction applies both to  the  appellant
      and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh,  born  on  [  ]  1986.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 6  July  2017,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse his claim for asylum.

   3. The Judge did not accept that the appellant is active in  the  BNP  as
      claimed or at all. He did not accept that he is the son  of  a  former
      BNP MP. Nor did he find that the appellant has ever  been  threatened,
      either in the UK or Bangladesh, by reason of his  political  opinions,
      activity or involvement with the  BNP.  He  would  be  of  no  adverse
      interest to any person or organisation in Bangladesh [37].

   4. In granting permission to appeal on 11 September 2017, Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Rintoul stated that it is arguable that the Judge erred  in  not
      addressing the evidence from passports and birth certificates that the
      appellant is related to Mr Khirul Anam, as  claimed.  There  was  also
      merit in the submission that  the  Judge  misunderstood  the  evidence
      about the BNP's structure.



     The appeal

   5. Mr Syed-Ali, who did not represent the appellant before the First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on the skeleton arguments presented.

   6. He referred to paragraphs [24-36] of the  decision.  The  Judge  noted
      that the appellant claimed to be the  son  of  Khairul  Anam,  and  he
      provided a number of  photographs  of  Mr  Anam  undertaking  official
      duties both as an MP and a leading member of the BNP.  He  managed  to
      assemble other evidence of the latter's political life. He was however
      unable to obtain or provide just one  family  photograph  showing  him
      with his claimed father [24].

   7. The Judge noted that the appellant claimed in his oral  evidence  that
      he had not been a formal member of BNP in  Bangladesh.  He  "formerly"
      joined the BNP within a few months of arriving in the UK.  He  gave  a
      different account in his asylum interview, claiming that he was not  a
      member of the BNP although he had been  active  in  the  student  unit
      [25].

   8. The appellant produced a number of letters from the UK branch  of  the
      BNP which attest to his involvement both now and  in  the  past  [27].
      None of  these  officers,  however,  attended  the  Tribunal  to  give
      evidence or to support the appellant. The appellant's explanations for
      their absence was 'evasive' and ultimately misleading [27].

   9. He had also relied upon letters reportedly written by the BNP and  the
      Bar Association Bangladesh. None of these  were  "formerly"  dated  or
      referenced although dates have been added to two of the signatures  to
      the letter [28].

  10. However, the documents he relied upon, even taken  at  their  highest,
      evidence political activity for the BNP in the  UK  only  during  2011
      (save one document which evidences activity in March 2012) [30].

  11. One of the reports relied  on  asserted  that  the  appellant  gave  a
      speech. If true, there was no evidence before  the  Judge  as  to  who
      attended the rallies or from  those  who  heard  him  speak.  Nor  did
      letters from UKBNP make reference to any  of  the  specific  occasions
      when the appellant spoke. The newspaper articles  referred  to  Imtiaz
      Anam Tanim, as a student leader [30]. The appellant had  claimed  that
      Imtiaz Anam Tanim is his nickname, used by his family,  close  friends
      and BNP associates.

  12. However none of the BNP in the UK or Bangladesh addressed him as  such
      in any of their letters. Nor does his father  make  reference  to  the
      family nickname in the statement that he purportedly provided. Nor was
      there any reference to the nickname in  the  appellant's  own  witness
      statement. These omissions did little to bolster  his  credibility  or
      the weight to be attached to the documents [31].

  13. The Judge noted that the appellant had claimed that  his  father  sent
      him to the UK in 2009 for his safety.  He  did  not  claim  asylum  on
      arrival. He visited Bangladesh in 2011 and when he returned to the  UK
      he did not claim asylum. His leave was curtailed in 2015. He  did  not
      claim asylum then but submitted an application  based  on  family  and
      private life in the UK. After that application was refused, some seven
      years after first arriving in the UK, he claimed asylum [33].

  14. His explanation for the delay in claiming  asylum  was  unsatisfactory
      [44]. The Judge found him not to be a credible witness.

  15. Mr Syed-Ali referred to paragraph [37.1] of  the  decision  where  the
      Judge stated that he did not accept that the appellant  is  active  in
      the BNP or that he is the son of the former MNP MP.  Mr Syed-Ali  then
      referred to paragraph 29 of the reasons for refusal where he submitted
      that it was not disputed that the appellant was the  son  of  the  man
      whom he claimed to be his father. All that was stated at paragraph  29
      of the refusal was that he failed to substantiate his claim  that  his
      father was a former MP for the BNP in Bangladesh.

  16. Mr Syed-Ali referred to the Judge's statement that there was a lack of
      photographic evidence. He referred  to  the  supplementary  bundle  at
      pages 69-70, which was before the First-tier Tribunal. This contains a
      statement from Advocate K A dated April 15, 2017. In it he claimed  to
      be the father of the appellant. He stated that his family members  are
      facing difficulties and agony  from  the  present  Awami  League,  the
      police and other government agencies/forces threatening them  to  stop
      the appellant doing anything against the Awami League  Government.  It
      was therefore not possible for his son to return to Bangladesh. If  he
      returns  he  will  face  various  types  of  torture/harassments   and
      assaults. He may even be kidnapped or killed on return.

  17. At page 71 of that bundle the appellant produced an identity  card  of
      Advocate K A in which he is stated to be a member  of  the  Bangladesh
      National Parliament. The serial  number,  photograph  and  attestation
      dated 18 December 2016 has  been  provided  by  a  notary  public,  an
      advocate of the Supreme Court of  Bangladesh.  The  original  of  that
      identity document is provided at page 74. It contains a photograph  of
      Advocate K A

  18. At page 76 Advocate K A's passport and photograph are  provided.  This
      is a passport issued by the  Bangladesh  authorities  on  11  December
      2014. There is also a visa document in Advocate K A's  name  with  his
      passport number and photograph attached, confirming his date of  birth
      as 21 July 1948.

  19. Finally, at page 93 Mr Syed-Ali referred to a birth certificate  which
      was registered on 20 December 2016 of Advocate K A whose date of birth
      is again given as 21 July 1948. His father's and  mother's  names  are
      set out.

  20. Notwithstanding the alleged  lack  of  "family  photographs,"  it  was
      submitted  that  the  Judge  made  no  reference  to  any  documentary
      evidence.

  21. The respondent in the circumstances should in any event have  made  an
      appropriate enquiry if the documents were in issue. He submitted  that
      as a matter of fact the findings are incorrect and as a matter of  law
      this amounts in the circumstances to a failure to assess  the  claimed
      identity of the appellant's father, which is the  core  basis  of  his
      claim.

  22. Mr Syed-Ali referred to question 100 of the appellant's interview. The
      appellant was being questioned about  his  father's  political  career
      which the appellant set out in reply to question 97.  He  stated  that
      his duties involved being an MP. By profession he is a lawyer.  He  is
      now an advisor of the District BNP. He submitted that the respondent's
      assertion in the reasons  for  refusal  that  the  appellant  had  not
      explained his father's activities when interviewed "permeated into the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision as well".

  23. He referred to the finding that the the authors of  the  letters  from
      the UK branch of the BNP who supported his claim, did not  attend  the
      hearing. The appellant's explanations for their absence  were  evasive
      and ultimately misleading. That is  because  the  appellant  confirmed
      that he had not actually asked any of them to attend, claiming that he
      expected them to attend without being asked [27].  That  affected  his
      credibility and the weight to be afforded to the  letters.  That  also
      applied to his failure to ask Mr Riblu to provide evidence  concerning
      a raft of documents  allegedly  made  by  him,  a  BNP  colleague.  It
      transpired that the appellant was "referenced in  the  documents".  He
      claimed to have been provided with the documents in May 2016. He could
      not explain why a witness statement had  not  been  obtained  from  Mr
      Riblu setting out the problems of the documents and how they came into
      the appellant's possession. He has had legal assistance.  This  raises
      further concerns about the appellant's credibility and the  weight  to
      be given to them.

  24. Mr Syed-Ali submitted that the Judge's finding that the appellant  has
      never been threatened either in the UK  or  Bangladesh  by  reason  of
      political opinions, activity or involvement with the BNP has not  been
      assessed in the context of various questions asked at  his  interview,
      which the Judge failed to refer to.

  25. At question 62 he was asked whether he is a member now of the BNP.  He
      said that he is not a member but is involved with all  the  activities
      of the BNP. He then set out his involvement with the BNP, stating that
      he attends all the meetings and demonstrations with the BNP in the UK.
      He has produced slogans against Sheikh Hassina when she  came  to  the
      UK. He protested against this. They threw raw eggs at her car. A  team
      called  DGFI  came  with  her  from  Bangladesh  and  they  took   his
      photograph. This happened on 14 September 2016 but had  been  repeated
      in the past. He said he went along  to  that  demonstration  with  his
      political leaders and colleagues. He referred to the UK BNP  president
      and secretary as well as  others.  He  identified  the  names  of  the
      President as well as the Secretary - q73.

  26. He had also stated when interviewed that he is a member of the Student
      Unit of the BNP (JCD). He was the joint secretary -Q61.

  27. This evidence was not disputed. It showed that he was an active member
      of the Student Wing, albeit not a member of the BNP,  even  though  he
      was involved in BNP activities in the UK.

  28. When he asserted in interview that DGFI came with her from  Bangladesh
      and took his photograph there was  no  further  question  asked  about
      that. Nor did the Judge make any reference to DGFI.

  29. Mr Syed-Ali  submitted  at  paragraph  5  of  his  skeleton  that  the
      appellant has adequately  explained  his  reasons  for  the  delay  in
      claiming asylum, at paragraph 22 of his statement dated January  2017.
      Like others, he deferred the making of the claim  notwithstanding  the
      validity of his fears. This is common.

  30. Accordingly the Judge should have weighed the reasons  for  any  delay
      'properly'. The appellant did not claim asylum as a deliberate  choice
      because he was planning to go back to Bangladesh.

  31. On behalf of the respondent Mr Avery submitted  that  the  Judge  made
      adequate findings of fact and has given adequate reasons as set out at
      paragraphs 14 to 34. He was entitled to find that he was not  credible
      based on the oral and documentary evidence before him.

  32. Mr Avery also submitted that the submissions went beyond  the  grounds
      granting permission, which were limited. However, the earlier  grounds
      dated 20 July 2017 did raise issues which were part of  Mr  Syed-Ali's
      submissions. When permission was sought from the Upper  Tribunal,  the
      appellant relied not only on the later grounds but also on the grounds
      submitted to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal and  the
      original grounds of appeal.

  33. In the grounds seeking permission dated 20 July 2017 there was express
      reference to the failure by the  Judge  to  consider  the  appellant's
      birth certificate and copies of the passports which  were  issued  and
      which were available. The last names of both  the  appellant  and  his
      father were identical.

  34. He submitted that the Judge's findings  relating  to  the  appellant's
      credibility were dealt with in some detail, including finding that the
      appellant had given vague answers and kept on changing his evidence.

  35. He submitted that this  was  a  balanced  determination.  At  [22]  he
      expressly referred to factors supportive of  the  appellant's  overall
      credibility including his consistency regarding his assertions that he
      is the son of a former BNP politician and has been involved  with  the
      party both there and in Bangladesh.

  36. He accepted that  the  Judge  did  not  deal  with  the  identity  and
      relationship with his father.

  37.  He  referred  in  that  respect  to  the  birth  certificate  in  the
      supplementary  bundle  at  pages  92-93.  The  birth  certificate  was
      registered in December 2016.  It  is  not  something  which  "will  be
      persuasive to a Judge." Why would it  only  have  been  registered  in
      2016? There has accordingly not been any material error.

  38. In reply Mr Syed-Ali submitted the registration of  birth  certificate
      only became compulsory in 2008. From that date you also had to have an
      ID card.

  39. He also submitted that in any event, the document is  of  significance
      and it should have been investigated. This did not  excuse  the  Judge
      from properly assessing the evidence.




      Assessment

  40. The Judge did not accept that the appellant was active in the  BNP  at
      all. Nor did he accept that he is the son of a former BNP MP. However,
      as already noted, the appellant had made these assertions  during  his
      substantive interview.  He  gave  detailed  answers  relating  to  his
      father, including the latter's active participation as a member of the
      BNP.

  41. Moreover, the appellant also gave evidence relating to his  activities
      and involvement with the BNP in the UK. He expressly  referred  to  an
      occasion where  his  photograph  was  taken  during  a  fairly  heated
      demonstration in the UK where he claimed that his photograph had  been
      taken. He also claimed to have been a member of the  DGFI.  The  Judge
      made no reference to that organisation either.

  42. Although the Judge was required to consider as a factor the failure of
      the appellant to make a claim for asylum much earlier, he should  have
      considered the appellant's explanation and evaluated it as part of the
      evidence as a whole.

  43. That included documentary evidence that he produced  relating  to  his
      father. The latter had provided a detailed statement relating  to  his
      son. There was also documentary evidence which was not challenged,  in
      which his father's passport as well as birth certificate and  identity
      documents as an MP were all produced.

  44. When considering the risk of return to Bangladesh, the  fact  that  he
      was the son of a former  BNP  MP  as  well  as  his  participation  in
      demonstrations in the UK informed the decision as to whether he  would
      be of adverse interest to any person or organisation in Bangladesh.

  45. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the
      decision.

  46. There will have to be a re-hearing requiring substantial fact finding,
      particularly with regard to the documentary evidence produced.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. I set  the  decision  aside.  The  appeal  is
      remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House)  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made before another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                             Date 10 November 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








