
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13467/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                            |Promulgated                  |
|On 29 April 2019                            |On 20 May 2019               |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                              Hafez Ahmed OSMAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sudan.  He appealed to a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  9
    November 2018 making a deportation order in respect of him.

2.   The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since  October  2000.   He
    made an asylum application on the day he arrived and that  was  refused
    in December  2000.   An  appeal  against  the  respondent's  subsequent
    decision to make  directions  for  his  removal  was  dismissed  by  an
    Immigration Judge in 2001.  His appeal  was  unsuccessful  and  he  was
    removed from the United Kingdom in November 2002 but claims to have re-
    entered the United Kingdom in July  2003.   He  was  encountered  while
    working illegally in November 2008 and again claimed  asylum  and  that
    application was again refused.  The refusal took place  on  29  October
    2010.  He did not appeal that decision.  He  absconded  on  8  November
    2010.  He was arrested on 14 May 2017, and on 6  October  2017  he  was
    convicted of sexual offences and sentenced to 30 months'  imprisonment.



3.   The judge acceded to a request that the Joint Presidential Guidance  on
    child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellants be applied in light of
    conclusions of an educational psychologist Mr Sellwood.  The judge made
    the requested adjustments as much as possible, as set out at  paragraph
    12 of his decision.

4.   In the decision letter it was said that the appellant did  not  have  a
    right to appeal against the decision  to  deport  him  or  against  the
    decision to refuse  his  protection  claim  but  he  could  appeal  the
    decision to refuse his human rights claim.  In the decision  letter  it
    was said that consideration had been given to his  further  submissions
    on the basis of the Refugee Convention and the ECHR but these  did  not
    amount to a fresh claim, because his previous asylum and  human  rights
    claims were refused on 4 December 2000 and 29 October 2010 and  he  did
    not have an appeal pending.  In  the  decision  letter  the  respondent
    noted what the appellant had said  in  his  previous  claim  concerning
    problems he had had with the Sudanese security forces, which included a
    period of two months' detention and ill-treatment, and  noted  what  he
    said in his claim of 4 November 2008 about his  arrest,  detention  and
    interrogation when he returned to Sudan  in  2002.   Consideration  was
    also given to what he now said about what  he  would  face  on  return,
    noting relevant country guidance  authorities  and  evidence  from  the
    British Embassy in Khartoum.  It was concluded that his submissions did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules and
    did not amount to a fresh claim.

5.   The respondent considered separately the appellant's Article  8  claim,
    noting that he had not provided any  evidence  in  that  respect.   His
    Article 8 rights were considered in the context of him being  a  person
    who had been convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced to
    a period of imprisonment of less than four years but of at least twelve
    months, and it was concluded that he did  not  meet  the  private  life
    exception  to  deportation  and  there   were   not   very   compelling
    circumstances precluding his deportation.  It was said that he did  not
    have a right to appeal the decision to refuse the protection claim  but
    that he could appeal the decision to refuse the human rights claim.

6.   The judge noted these  points  and  as  a  consequence  considered  the
    Article 8 human rights claim only, noting that the  appellant  was  not
    seeking to rely on Article 3 separately from his protection claim.

7.    The  judge  noted  the  report  of  Mr   Sellwood,   the   educational
    psychologist, and also the report of  Dr  Oette  which  was  an  expert
    report on country evidence respecting Sudan and also the medical report
    of  Dr  Cohen.   The  judge  had  noted  that   no   other   compelling
    circumstances beyond those which previously formed  the  basis  of  his
    protection claim which the appellant now relied on as  giving  rise  to
    very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Sudan  had  been
    identified.  The judge noted the findings of the Immigration  Judge  in
    2001.  The appellant's account in which he claimed the security  forces
    in Sudan had come to his house and he had broken  all  the  windows  on
    their car but they took no action other than to say they would be  back
    to arrest him later, was found to be implausible.  Nor  had  his  claim
    been accepted that he was detained for two months in an unofficial jail
    and mistreated, since it was found not to be credible that he would  be
    detained for such a long period simply to  persuade  him  to  join  the
    army, but he would simply have been handed over to the army or  allowed
    to be collected by the army.  It was accepted that  the  appellant  was
    not a member of a political party and  had  no  political  convictions.
    His account of his detention, given  the  significant  inconsistencies,
    unexplained facts and lack of detail of his  rough  treatment  and  any
    injuries was found to be wholly implausible.  Likewise his  account  of
    hiding after escaping detention and then visiting his mother was  found
    to be inconsistent and implausible and it was found to  be  implausible
    that the statements that he said were not made by him but made  by  the
    interpreter would have been invented by the interpreter.   The  account
    of  not  having  fulfilled  his  military  service  was  found  to   be
    implausible and it was not accepted that he had a well-founded fear  of
    persecution from the security forces or the army.

8.   The judge noted that the appellant had corrected various parts  of  his
    previous evidence, for example he now denied smashing the wingmirror of
    the security forces' car with a stick, and said that he had been  asked
    by the security forces who detained him why he did  not  go  and  fight
    like his brother and he said he disagreed with the war in South  Sudan,
    and this was again something that had not  been  mentioned  previously.
    Nor had he previously said that one of his sisters  was  married  to  a
    member of the security forces and it was his brother-in-law rather than
    his mother who bribed a guard to get him released from  detention.   He
    now claimed to have met a leader of the opposition while  hiding  after
    his escape from detention and to have been distributing leaflets.

9.   The judge noted that this was in the context of someone  who  had  been
    identified by Mr  Sellwood  as  having  significant  difficulties  with
    working memory and that his level was only to be found in the lowest 1%
    of the population.  Mr Sellwood also said that the appellant was highly
    suggestible.  The judge noted that the  witness  statement  might  have
    been prepared over some period but the appellant's representatives  had
    not written to explain any particular problems in preparing it.  He had
    produced a statement in January 2019, some  nineteen  years  after  the
    alleged  events,  despite  Mr  Sellwood's   conclusions.    The   judge
    considered that given the expert  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    cognitive ability and memory his witness statement of January 2019  was
    to be treated with some considerable caution.

10.  With regard to the plausibility of the appellant's  claim  of  previous
    detentions in 1998 and 2002/2003,  assessed  by  Dr  Oette,  the  judge
    considered that several of her conclusions were set in the  context  of
    significant issues with the appellant's evidence.  For example she said
    he was not known to belong to any political  opposition  or  an  ethnic
    group considered hostile and that in the absence of  further  available
    documentation and information it might have been somewhat  unusual  but
    possible that a person in his situation would be subject  to  detention
    by the security forces.  She considered it might have  been  considered
    to be a greater punishment to send him to fight in the war although she
    commented that this would have been speculation.  She concluded that it
    was plausible that the appellant  was  detained  and  tortured  in  the
    manner described by him.

11.  The judge considered that the appellant's evidence about his  treatment
    after his return in 2002 continued to  raise  plausibility  issues  and
    inconsistencies.  He had maintained that he had evaded military service
    but he made no reference to that being raised by the  authorities  when
    they detained him in 2002, and Dr Oette noted also that his evasion  of
    military service was not a factor in the 2002  detention  but  made  no
    comment about this  other  than  to  note  that  military  service  was
    compulsory between 1998 and 2003 and  that  a  statute  of  limitations
    meant that he could not be prosecuted after five  years.   In  2002  he
    would have been in the midst of the compulsory period and Dr Oette  had
    not  in  the  judge's  view  properly  addressed  that  issue  in   the
    appellant's claim.

12.  The appellant had said in his substantive  interview  that  the  family
    home in Sudan was sold after his mother's death and the money  used  to
    pay a bribe for his release at  the  end  of  2002,  but  in  the  same
    interview he said his father did not die until 2004 and the  house  was
    not sold when his mother died because she died in 2001 and  his  father
    was still alive.  He had not explained how the house was then  sold  in
    2002 despite his father still being alive then.  He maintained  in  his
    2019 witness statement that the proceeds of sale  of  the  family  home
    were used to pay for his release although he claimed that the home  was
    sold before his return and his family remained there  as  it  had  only
    recently been sold.   The  judge  considered  that  he  had  still  not
    addressed the position of his father and the clear inconsistency in his
    previous evidence.

13.  With regards to the expert report from Dr Cohen, this  concerns  scars,
    most of which were not attributed to torture  by  the  appellant.   The
    scar which the appellant said was being caused  by  being  hit  with  a
    broken glass bottle while in detention was  said  by  Dr  Cohen  to  be
    highly consistent with the appellant's attribution  but  it  was  noted
    that another possible cause would be an accidental  wound  from  broken
    glass.

14.  The judge considered that the appellant's claim taken  at  its  highest
    was that he was detained on the first occasion because he reacted badly
    when the security forces came to his home and told him his brother  had
    died while fighting the war and he did not claim any activity with  any
    political organisation previously  despite  being  legally  represented
    when he had the hearing before Immigration Judge  Wood.   In  the  2019
    witness statement he claimed  to  have  been  involved  in  helping  an
    opposition leader and distributing leaflets while in hiding  but  there
    was no explanation of his failure to mention such a significant element
    of his claim previously despite being legally represented in 2001.  The
    judge also considered that Dr Oette had not explained how she concluded
    that it was reasonable to decide that he had  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated if he had already been a perceived opponent of the  regime  but
    had reservations about  the  bribery  of  the  guard  as  being  rather
    uncommon.  The judge considered that  even  taken  at  its  highest  Dr
    Oette's conclusion about the 2002 detention was limited by  being  made
    on the assumption that the  appellant  had  already  been  a  perceived
    opponent of the regime and the judge was not satisfied  that  that  was
    the case.

15.  He had failed to claim asylum again when  he  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom and that was considered to be inconsistent with his claim  that
    he came here as the only safe country  for  him.   The  judge  did  not
    accept he had been detained  and  ill-treated  in  2002  and  that  the
    appellant had continued to fabricate problems in Sudan.  Dr Oette  said
    that the appellant was probably listed  in  security  records  held  by
    security agents though it was difficult  to  assume  this  without  any
    degree of certainty considering the date of the claimed detentions  and
    the judge considered that he had found that the detention did not  take
    place and therefore he would not be listed in the security records.  Dr
    Oette relied on the appellant's description of security  agents  asking
    his sister in Sudan about his whereabouts to conclude that he was on  a
    wanted list, but she provided no details  of  what  wanted  lists  were
    operated by the Sudanese authorities and the judge therefore found this
    statement to be inadequate to provide evidence of any real weight  that
    the appellant was on a wanted list.

16.  As regards the appellant's claimed involvement  with  the  Justice  and
    Equality Movement (JEM) taken at its highest this involved no more than
    him contacting them by telephone to find  out  what  was  happening  in
    Sudan.

17.  The judge noted what was said in the country  guidance  cases  and  the
    background evidence concerning risk on return and  concluded  that  the
    appellant had none of the political features which might give  rise  to
    risk on return.  The appellant had given little reason why he had  been
    unable to resume contact with his sister in Sudan with whom he had  had
    contact as recently as June 2018, and considered, noting his history of
    working as a farmer and as a trader and working illegally in the United
    Kingdom, that he had skills and work experience which he could  use  to
    seek employment in  Sudan.   As  regards  Dr  Cohen's  conclusion  that
    further assessment was needed and that although the appellant  did  not
    meet the full diagnostic criteria  for  specific  diagnosis  of  mental
    health problems, he had features of post-traumatic stress disorder with
    probable mild depression, it was noted that mental health treatment was
    available in Sudan both as an inpatient and as an outpatient.

18.  The judge noted also Dr Cohen's conclusion that in her opinion  removal
    to Sudan would significantly exacerbate the appellant's  mental  health
    condition since he had described great anxiety about that and had given
    his description of being detained and tortured a second time  in  2002.
    However the judge, having found that the appellant had not shown he was
    detained and tortured  in  2002,  concluded  that  this  undermined  Dr
    Cohen's conclusion.  In  sum  therefore  the  judge  decided  that  the
    appellant would not face very significant obstacles to reintegration in
    Sudan and going on to consider the matter under Article 8  outside  the
    Rules concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  proportionate,
    bearing in mind the considerations set out at section 117B and  section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and bearing in
    mind the appellant's criminal record.

19.  In his submissions Mr Gilbert argued that the judge had  erred  in  not
    considering the protection claim.  As a consequence he had  erred  with
    regard to the standard of proof employed in relation to the  Article  8
    claim since the relevant issues, although they had been considered, had
    been considered in the context of the balance of probabilities  as  set
    out at paragraph 27 of the decision, rather than  the  real  risk  test
    appropriate  to  protection  claims.   This  was  an  error  of   clear
    materiality.

20.  As regards how the judge  evaluated  the  evidence  subsequently,  with
    regard to the point  made  about  the  representatives  not  explaining
    problems in preparing the statement, this was procedurally  unfair  and
    should have been put to Counsel at the hearing to enable evidence to be
    produced.  The expert had noted difficulties in the production  of  the
    witness statement and it was clear from paragraph 12  of  the  evidence
    that when speaking to the interpreter the appellant had needed a lot of
    time to answer the question and it was hard to see  why  this  evidence
    was not regarded as  important.   There  was  no  Rule  requiring  such
    difficulties to be identified by the representatives and this  arguably
    strayed into speculation.

21.  With regard to the judge's findings at  paragraph  72,  the  judge  had
    drawn an adverse interest but the evidence had not been considered  and
    it was addressed at paragraph 21 of the appellant's  witness  statement
    that he had been told by the agent to say his father was deceased.   It
    was  clear  from  Dr  Sellwood's  evidence  that  the   appellant   was
    suggestible.  This was  clearly  material  to  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  Also it was illogical for the judge to say as he  did  about
    Dr Cohen not addressing the possibility of the scar having been  caused
    by previous work as a farmer in Sudan given that it was noted that  she
    had said that another possible cause of the scar would be an accidental
    wound from broken glass.  The judge had failed at paragraphs 75 and  76
    to take the appellant's statement at paragraph 21 into account and  had
    failed to take into account the  appellant's  suggestibility.   It  had
    been noted by Dr  Sellwood  that  he  would  be  likely  to  experience
    difficulties in giving evidence.  His evidence had not been  considered
    through the proper prism.

22.  With regard to what the judge said about the expert evidence, Dr  Oette
    had said that the appellant was plausible and not reasonable  and  that
    was arguably a lower threshold and the judge had failed  to  take  into
    account the expert's methodological approach as set out in her  report.
    The judge had failed to reason her  objections.   With  regard  to  the
    findings at paragraph 79, the appellant had said that he  feared  being
    returned and had no money to appeal and that explanation had  not  been
    considered.  With regard to the issue at paragraph 84, the Tribunal was
    referred to paragraph 80 of the expert  report  which  set  out  detail
    about the current procedures and that should  be  taken  alongside  the
    appellant's evidence as to  his  previous  treatment.   The  judge  had
    failed to take important aspects of the evidence into consideration and
    that these were arguably material.

23.  In his submissions Mr Kotas argued that the judge  had  been  right  to
    say that there was only a human  rights  appeal  before  him.   If  the
    appellant was entitled to run the protection elements as  a  matter  of
    fact or law that would rob paragraph 353 of its utility.  Reference was
    made to what had been said by the Supreme Court in Robinson [2019] UKSC
    11.

24.  As regards the substance of the  claim,  there  were  section  8  delay
    points which were not explained by  the  appellant's  vulnerability  or
    suggestibility.  He had come to the United Kingdom in 2001 and  had  an
    unsuccessful appeal and there was no appeal against the  later  refusal
    decision and then a delay until May 2017.  It changed the  fundamentals
    of his claim, as noted at paragraph 65 of the judge's decision.   There
    was no implied criticism of the representatives at paragraph 67 and the
    judge was simply entitled to note the point and identify  the  fact  of
    memory problems yet he was able to recall so much and  this  the  judge
    was entitled to find was surprising.  The criticisms  and  reservations
    about the expert evidence were fair and rationally open to  the  judge.
    The claim had been taken at its highest, for example at paragraph 75 it
    was necessary to be careful about evidence which had  not  been  before
    the judge in 2001 at a time when the appellant was legally represented.
     His instructing solicitors would have taken proper steps to ensure  he
    was understood and the medical issues made  clear.   Embellishment  was
    noted at paragraph 76 and  this  was  evidence  not  mentioned  before.
    There were ample reasons for rejecting the claim.

25.  By way of reply Mr Gilbert argued that Robinson was  concerned  with  a
    "pending appeal" and that was not so in this case.  Paragraph 353 was a
    bar on the ability to raise human rights issues before the judge  where
    there were no appeal rights but when appeal rights were available, that
    had no purchase.  There could not be a severance  from  the  appeal  or
    parts of the claim.

26.  The judge had noted points  which  went  to  risk  on  return  and  the
    appellant's vulnerabilities  including  the  expert  evidence  and  the
    country evidence and none of that had  been  before  the  Secretary  of
    State and in respect of which the Secretary of State had said there was
    not a fresh claim.  There was a duty on the judge to  consider  whether
    or not the deportation would be in accordance with the law.

27.  The section 8 point was not well-founded as the question of  errors  of
    law in the decision, did not involve rearguing the case and it was only
    relevant with regard to the failure to  consider  evidence  as  to  why
    there was delay in making an asylum claim.  As regards the point as  to
    whether or not the previous representatives were criticised,  that  was
    not  what  was  being  argued.   The  inherent   cognitive   disability
    identified subsequently had not been identified at the earlier hearing.
     That was not a criticism of the judge or the representatives  in  2001
    but the point was that it had not been considered previously  and  that
    was relevant to credibility and the failure to assess that.

28.  I reserved my determination.

29.  On the jurisdiction point, it is I think sufficiently  clear  from  the
    decision letter that the respondent did not accept  that  there  was  a
    fresh claim with regard to the protection issues  but  that  there  was
    with regard to the Article 8 issues.  The judge proceeded to assess the
    claim on that basis.

30.  No authority has been put before me to show or indicate that it is  not
    open to the Secretary of State to come to a decision which accepts part
    of a claim as being a fresh claim and another part as not.  I  can  see
    no sound basis for the Secretary of State being precluded  from  making
    such a distinction.  Considering the matter  purely  in  the  abstract,
    there might have been no Article 8 claim at all  at  a  time  when  the
    previous  application  was  made  which  may  have  focused  purely  on
    protection issues.  Alternatively it may be that though the  protection
    issues are not seen  as  having  changed  to  any  significant  degree,
    entirely fresh matters are raised in an Article 8  claim  subsequently,
    for example the existence of a family which did not exist at  the  time
    of the earlier claim.  I  can  see  no  reason  in  principle  why  the
    Secretary of State as a consequence is prevented from denying that part
    of the claim is a fresh claim while accepting that another part  of  it
    is.  The proper challenge to a decision that paragraph 353  applies  to
    preclude the claim or part of the claim being  a  fresh  claim  is  for
    there to be a judicial review of that part of the decision.   No  doubt
    that is still an avenue that the  appellant  can  pursue,  although  he
    would have to overcome the issue of delay.  But in my view it was fully
    open to the judge to conclude that as a consequence of the  application
    of paragraph 353 to the protection claim that all there was before  him
    was the Article 8  claim,  and  as  a  consequence  the  jurisdictional
    challenge and the challenge with regard to the standard of proof  both,
    in my judgment, fall away.

31.  The remaining issue is that of the judge's evaluation of the  claim  in
    light of the evidence before her.

32.  She accepted that the Joint Presidential Guidance on child,  vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellants should be applied, and was clearly aware
    of that throughout her consideration of the claim.  The  correct  legal
    tests were applied and the claim was considered in the context of those
    tests.  It was open to the judge to note at  paragraph  65  that  there
    were clear differences between the earlier  claim  and  the  claim  now
    being made.  I agree with Mr Kotas that the remark at paragraph  67  of
    the judge's decision  that  the  representatives  had  not  written  to
    explain any particular problems in preparing the statement is  no  more
    than a comment in passing and has to be seen in the context  of  noting
    at paragraph 68 that the  January  2019  witness  statement  is  to  be
    treated with some considerable caution.

33.  I do not think the judge has been shown to have erred  with  regard  to
    her assessment of Dr Oette's evidence.  It was no doubt a  careful  and
    thorough report, but it was open to the judge to contrast what Dr Oette
    said about the fact that it would be somewhat unusual but possible that
    a person in the appellant's situation would be subject to detention  by
    the security forces and yet conclude that it was plausible that he  was
    detained and tortured as described by him.  Clearly this was  a  matter
    that had to be and was assessed by the judge  in  the  context  of  the
    proper standard of proof before her.

34.  It was open to the judge to express the doubts  that  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 71 concerning the military service point, in that  there  was
    no addressing of the fact that military service was compulsory  at  the
    time of the second claimed arrest and yet that  was  a  time  when  the
    appellant was liable to military service.  There  is  however  a  point
    with regard to paragraph 72 concerning the explanation he gave of being
    told by the agent to say his father had died which is not a point  that
    was picked up on by the judge.  Also the final sentence of paragraph 73
    is redundant in light of the previous sentence where it is  clear  that
    Dr Cohen accepted that a possible cause would be  an  accidental  wound
    from broken glass.  There is however  the  contrast  between  what  the
    appellant said when the claim was taken at its highest at paragraph  75
    and the more recent statement  that  he  was  involved  in  helping  an
    opposition leader.  There was no explanation for the failure to mention
    that earlier, as  the  judge  noted,  and  that  was  relevant  to  the
    evaluation of the claim in light of the background evidence set out  at
    paragraph 74.  It was also open to the judge to have a concern about Dr
    Oette's evidence about the bribery issue in that  she  considered  that
    the ability of the family to bribe guards to secure his  release  could
    be regarded rather uncommon  and  yet  to  say  it  was  reasonable  to
    conclude that he was detained and ill-treated.  As the judge  noted  at
    paragraph 78, that conclusion was in any event limited by being made on
    the assumption that he was already a perceived opponent of  the  regime
    and it was open to the judge to find that he was not such a person.

35.  Again the point is made on the  appellant's  behalf  that  he  gave  an
    explanation for the failure to claim asylum when  he  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom which the judge did not specifically  address.   However
    the conclusion at paragraph 80 that he had not shown  he  was  detained
    and ill-treated in 2002 was open to her.  She  noted  at  paragraph  82
    that he had admitted lying in the original claim including  saying  his
    father was dead when he was not and  the  concerns  identified  by  the
    judge were properly considered  by  her  as  being  implausible  and/or
    inconsistent.  In light of the finding that the detentions did not take
    place the issue of whether his name would be on  the  list  as  such  a
    person falls away.  The claimed involvement with  JEM  was  of  such  a
    limited nature that it is of no materiality.

36.  The judge went on to note  the  country  guidance  and  the  background
    evidence and the fact that the appellant did not meet the  criteria  of
    people facing risk on return and noted also that he  has  a  sister  in
    Sudan with whom he has had relatively  recent  contact  and  he  has  a
    history of working both in  Sudan  and  in  the  United  Kingdom,  even
    bearing in mind the cognitive and  memory  issues  identified  and  the
    further health problems identified by Dr Cohen in respect of  which  it
    appears there is treatment available in Sudan.

37.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that taken as a  whole  the
    judge was entitled to find as she did that the appellant would not face
    very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Sudan.   Also  her
    evaluation of the Article 8  issues  outside  the  Rules  is  detailed,
    careful and sound and has not been shown to be wrong.  I consider  that
    her decision to dismiss the appeal was properly  open  to  her  and  no
    error of law in it has been identified.  Her  decision  is  accordingly
    upheld.

38.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 9 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 9 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
