
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA132632016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st June 2017                             |On 26th June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     m Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Mellon of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
     Solicitors (Bradmarsh Way)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in  relation  to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker promulgated on  2nd  February  2017  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross.  Both  parties  were  represented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The claim was made by an  Iranian  Appellant  who
    claimed to have converted from Islam to Christianity  in  Iran  and  to
    have come to the attention of the authorities necessitating his fleeing
    to the UK. After a fairly lengthy journey of some six months or so  and
    being fingerprinted in Calais on the way, he arrived in the UK.  Whilst
    in the UK he has been attending church and a fairly short time after he
    started he was baptised and attends the Baptist church.

 2. The judge made reasoned findings rejecting all parts of the claim  that
    related to what had taken place in Iran.  He did, however, having heard
    from the Appellant and a Pastor from the church accept that  he  was  a
    genuine convert.  On that basis he allowed the appeal.

 3. The Secretary of State's grounds argue that the judge erred in  failing
    to make findings as to how  he  would  behave  in  Iran  and  therefore
    whether he would be persecuted or not. The grounds rely on the  country
    guidance case of SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 82, now quite old, that found that people who act discreetly  and
    privately and do not evangelise are not at risk.

 4. However, things have moved on since  then,  not  in  terms  of  country
    guidance cases, but in terms of the  Supreme  Court's  Decision  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 which, although about homosexuality  rather  than
    religion applies to both.  A person's  religion  is  a  part  of  their
    identity; it determines the way they live their life and they cannot be
    expected to conceal it, and if they do conceal it and  the  reason  for
    their concealing it is fear of persecution then they  are  entitled  to
    asylum.  That is no doubt what led the judge to allow the appeal and  I
    suspect that that is why the country guidance case was  not  raised  by
    the representative for the Home Office before the First-tier  Tribunal.



 5. I note that the Letter of Refusal deals only with  the  credibility  of
    the claims of what occurred in Iran and the credibility of his  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.  No reference is  made  in  the  Letter  of
    Refusal to how the Appellant, if indeed he has converted, would  behave
    upon return.

 6. I have the benefit of a Record of Proceedings, typed contemporaneously.
     It is quite clear from that that the Appellant was not  cross-examined
    at all as to how he would behave on return.  He was only cross-examined
    on the basis of whether or not in truth he had converted and about what
    had taken place in Iran.  Similarly, the Record of Proceedings sets out
    the submissions and there were  no  submissions  other  than  that  the
    claimed events in Iran were not credible and it was not  credible  that
    he has converted to Christianity.

 7. I have also had the benefit of looking at  the  Home  Office's  Country
    Policy and Information Note on Christians and Christian  converts  from
    Iran which is dated February 2017.  While the general policy refers  to
    the country guidance case of SZ and JM it  also  indicates  that  cases
    must then be assessed in the light of HJ (Iran).  Further  on,  in  the
    more detailed part of the guidance, various reports are quoted and  all
    of them refer to the need to pray at home and not to openly discuss  or
    practise Christianity for a convert to avoid persecution.   In  the  UK
    this Appellant attends church weekly and on  the  basis  of  HJ  (Iran)
    cannot be expected to act differently when he returns in order to avoid
    persecution.

 8. Also in this Appellant's case he will not be, as some  people  referred
    to in the guidance are, simply slipping back home to Iran.  Rather,  he
    would be being returned from the United  Kingdom  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker. He would be questioned on return.  We are told that  he  cannot
    be expected to lie so he would say that he is a Christian convert.   He
    is  a  convert  into  the  Baptist  faith  which  is  to  a  degree  an
    evangelising church and for those reasons the  judge  was  entitled  to
    allow the appeal. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    falls to be dismissed.  In fairness Mr Bramble did not seek to persuade
    me otherwise.

Decision

     The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
