
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13823/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th September 2017                   |On 27th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     EM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Smith of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  Judge  Herwald  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) promulgated on 24th January 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  the
    Congo (the DRC), born [ ] 1987.

 3. She claimed asylum on the basis of her sur place activities in the  UK.
    Her application was refused on 25th November 2016 and she  appealed  to
    the FtT.

 4. The appeal was heard on 12th January 2017.   The  FtT  heard  from  the
    Appellant and one witness and dismissed the appeal.  The FtT noted that
    there had been a previous hearing in which the Appellant had  not  been
    found to be a truthful witness, and the FtT endorsed that finding.

 5. The FtT noted that the Respondent had conceded that the Appellant was a
    member of APARECO, but found that the authorities in the DRC would  not
    have any knowledge of the Appellant's low level activities in  the  UK.
    The FtT found that the Appellant  did  not  have  the  knowledge  about
    APARECO that would be expected of someone in her  claimed  position  in
    the organisation.

 6. Following dismissal of the appeal, the Appellant applied for permission
    to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  three
    Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly it was contended that the FtT had failed to
    accurately take a note of the evidence, and/or failed to  have  any  or
    any proper regard to the evidence and submissions.

 7. Secondly it was contended  that  the  FtT  had  failed  to  make  clear
    findings of fact as to what was accepted as to the Appellant's  claimed
    role in APARECO and her activities in the UK.

 8. Thirdly it was contended the FtT had failed to  properly  consider  and
    apply country guidance case law, and had failed  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Keane in the following terms;



         "The grounds disclosed an arguable error of law but for  which  the
         outcome of the appeal  might  have  been  different.   The  judge's
         handwritten note of the evidence given by the Appellant  and  by  a
         witness called in support of the appeal, Mr  Diatapakola,  accorded
         with the note of evidence taken by Counsel who appeared  on  behalf
         of  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing  which  was  appended  to  the
         application for permission.  Sadly,  in  the  precise  respects  to
         which the author  of  the  grounds  mentioned  the  judge  did  not
         accurately draw on his note of the  evidence  in  his  decision  at
         paragraph 12(e), (g), (i) and  (m)  of  the  decision  and  it  was
         accordingly arguable that the evidential foundation for the adverse
         findings of fact to which the judge came  was  not  laid.   Grounds
         disclosed arguable errors of law but for which the outcome  of  the
         appeal might have been different.  The application  for  permission
         is granted."

10. I should mention that the reference to paragraph 12 relates to  what  I
    understand to be an earlier version of the FtT  decision.   It  appears
    that the decision  may  have  been  corrected,  and  the  reference  to
    paragraph 12, now refers to paragraph 13 of the FtT decision.

11. The Respondent issued a response pursuant to rule 24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 indicating that  the  application
    was opposed, noting that Counsel's note of evidence referred to in  the
    application and grant of permission,  had  not  been  provided  to  the
    Respondent.

12. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr McVeety indicated that he had read Counsel's note of evidence and he
    agreed with the indication given in the grant of permission to  appeal.
    Mr McVeety stated that it was accepted that the FtT made  some  factual
    errors when setting out its findings,  which  amounted  to  a  material
    error of law as set out in the grounds at paragraph 6A-G.

14. Both representatives submitted that the  FtT  decision  should  be  set
    aside in its entirety and remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. As I indicated at the hearing, I found that the FtT materially erred in
    law and the decision  of  the  FtT  was  set  aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

16. I found an error of law as contended in the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  read
    together with the grant of permission.

17. I have taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice  Statements.   There  is  substantial  fact  finding   to   be
    undertaken, and it is appropriate for this to be undertaken by the FtT,
    rather than the Upper Tribunal.

18. The appeal is therefore remitted to the FtT, and the  parties  will  be
    advised of the time and date of the hearing in due course.  The  appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge Herwald.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection, and is made pursuant  to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 19th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 19th September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


