
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13501/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2019                                 |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   MR R T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3 June 1988, appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the refusal of the respondent dated  14
    November 2018 to refuse the appellant's protection claim  (there  being
    no reason or explanation for the  delay  in  that  decision  given  the
    appellant  claimed  asylum  on  22  October  2013).   In   a   decision
    promulgated in January 2019, following a hearing  on  3  January  2019,
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Geraint  Jones  QC  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal  primarily  on  grounds  of
    procedural fairness given that Judge Jones  QC  refused  to  admit  the
    appellant's, admittedly late, bundle.  Although  the  judge  relied  on
    Quah v Goldman Sachs [2015] EWHC 759 it was incumbent on the  judge  to
    consider whether  there  were  good  reasons  for  admitting  the  late
    evidence (see MD (Pakistan) [2004] UKIAT 00197) and such  good  reasons
    could include, for example,  that  the  evidence  is  highly  pertinent
    (which Judge Jones QC did not specifically state otherwise).

 3. There was also no indication that Judge  Jones  QC  correctly  directed
    himself in relation to the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, in particular
    the overriding objective at Rule 2(1) which is to enable  the  Tribunal
    to deal with the case fairly and justly and the case management  powers
    at Rule 4, which include the power to extend or shorten  the  time  for
    complying with any rule, practice direction or direction.

 4. Although Judge Jones QC stated repeatedly that the appellant should not
    be allowed to "ambush" the other side  and  that  it  would  have  been
    unjust to expect the respondent to deal with the case developed "on the
    hoof", such is  misconceived.   The  grounds  argue,  and  it  was  not
    disputed, that Judge Jones QC did not put  to  the  respondent  whether
    they objected to proceeding (and I note that Miss  Jegarajah  indicated
    before me that the respondent was "ready to go").  It is  difficult  to
    see in such circumstances, how the First-tier Tribunal could reach  the
    conclusion that the respondent was being ambushed.

 5. In addition, although Judge Jones QC criticised what he said was a last
    minute sur place claim, as already noted the appellant waited over five
    years for a decision on his asylum claim,  such  decision  being  taken
    less than two months  before  his  appeal  hearing  and  the  appellant
    clearly noted in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  at
    paragraph  4,  that  the  appellant  had  participated   in   political
    activities in the UK and would be seen as a  political  separatist  and
    had actively participated in LTTE meetings and protests.

 6. The requirement to ensure justice is done in appeals requiring the most
    anxious scrutiny will in most cases outweigh the understandable  desire
    on the part of Immigration Judges to ensure  that  its  directions  and
    provisions of the Procedure Rules are "not flouted with impunity"  (see
    including AK (Iran) [2004] UKAIT 00103).

 7. Miss Everett at the outset quite properly conceded the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  Due to the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  required
    and given that it is accepted by all parties that the appellant has not
    had the opportunity to have had a fair hearing, the appeal is  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, other than to Judge Jones QC.  No  findings
    are preserved

 9. I note that the appellant's representative  has  indicated  that  video
    evidence will be produced, by way of the  appellant's  representative's
    iPad, at the remitted hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 16 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 16 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
