
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13556/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th September 2017                   |  On 30th October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Respondent appeared in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent's appeal against refusal of  her  protection  claim  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow ("the judge") in a decision
    promulgated on 25th June 2017.  The judge allowed the appeal on  asylum
    grounds and dismissed it in relation to humanitarian protection.

2.   In grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision.  One paragraph contained the reasons  and  related  findings.
    The judge found the respondent to suffer from schizophrenia, which bore
    on her actions in 2004 and 2005 in making  asylum  claims  in  a  false
    identity.  It was contended that  the  finding  that  the  respondent's
    illness was responsible for the deception was not properly explained.

3.   Moreover, the judge gave no  proper  reasons  for  accepting  that  the
    respondent had suffered problems with the authorities in her country of
    origin, was under  house  arrest,  visited  by  the  police  daily  and
    required to report to a police station.   In  refusing  the  protection
    claim, the Secretary of State had not accepted the account,  not  least
    because the respondent claimed that although under house arrest and not
    allowed to leave the premises, she managed to sell her flat, employ  an
    agent and then leave the country, using her own passport.  There was  a
    failure to engage with these important aspects.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    24th July 2017, on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  erred
    in law in failing to take full account of the  appellant's  immigration
    history and in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  overall
    conclusion.

The Hearing

5.   The respondent  appeared  in  person.   There  was  some  delay  as  no
    interpreter in Russian was available.  In due  course,  an  interpreter
    was booked and attended.  I was satisfied that the respondent  and  the
    interpreter understood each other in Russian and they confirmed  to  me
    that this was the case.  I explained the procedure to  be  followed  to
    the respondent.  She confirmed that she understood that the  issue  for
    the Tribunal was whether the judge's decision  contained  an  error  of
    law, such that the decision should be set aside and remade.

6.   Mr Duffy relied upon the written  grounds.   At  paragraph  19  of  the
    decision, the judge had not given sufficient reasons for his  findings.



7.   In response, the respondent said that she remained at  risk  on  return
    as the same regime was in place, with the same president.  Paragraph 19
    of the judge's decision having  been  summarised  in  Russian  for  the
    respondent's benefit, she said  that  she  had  nothing  to  add.   The
    country was run the same way.

Conclusion on error of law

8.   I conclude that the decision contains  a  material  error  of  law,  as
    insufficient reasons have been given to show how the judge reached  his
    findings.  Overall, the decision is thorough, as one would expect  from
    the very experienced judge who heard  the  appeal.   In  paragraph  19,
    however, the respondent's core claims are accepted but without engaging
    with the Secretary of State's case, as it appeared in paragraphs 19  to
    22 of her decision letter dated 17th May 2016.

9.   The Secretary of State disbelieved  the  respondent's  account.   There
    was considerable delay in disclosing the basis of her claim.   She  was
    unable to explain whether she was detained in hospital on  her  own  or
    elsewhere or who sent her there.  She claims to have been in prison for
    six months and yet, on the other  hand,  having  been  prohibited  from
    leaving the area surrounding her home, and being required to report  to
    the authorities, she apparently managed to sell  her  flat,  employ  an
    agent and leave the country with her own passport.  Since  her  arrival
    here, she has on  occasions  expressed  a  wish  to  be  returned.   In
    relation to claimed problems with neighbours in her home  area  abroad,
    the respondent made no mention of seeking help from the authorities.

10.  The analysis contained in the decision does not  show  what  the  judge
    made of these adverse findings by the Secretary of State or explain how
    the overall conclusion that the appellant is  at  risk  on  return  was
    reached.

11.  The decision must be set aside and remade, as it  contains  a  material
    error of law.  Mr  Duffy  suggested  that  the  appropriate  venue  for
    remaking the decision is the First-tier Tribunal, in view of the extent
    of the fact-finding required, and the need to  fully  engage  with  the
    Secretary of State's case.  I agree with that  proposal,  having  first
    heard from the respondent, who said that she understood what was  being
    proposed.

12.  The decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal before  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callow.   A  Russian  interpreter
    will be required.  No findings of fact are preserved  and  the  hearing
    will be de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, before  a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Callow.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
