

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA135752016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2017                        |On 10 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Alban, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His  claims  for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection were refused by the  Respondent  on  21  November
   2016. He was granted discretionary leave to remain until he  reached  the
   age of 17.5. The Appellant appealed against the decision  to  refuse  him
   asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  under  section  82  (1)   of   the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (NIAA).  His  appeal  was
   dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly in a decision
   promulgated on 1 March 2017.  The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal
   against that decision and permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Froom.


2. The Appellant argues  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal erred in its assessment of risk of  persecution;  erred  in  its
   assessment of sufficiency of  protection;  erred  in  its  assessment  of
   internal relocation; erred in its assessment of Article 8 ECHR and failed
   to take into account the best interests of the child. It is  also  argued
   that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  assessment  of  the  country
   guidance case law.


3. The grant of permission is not limited  but  states  that  permission  is
   granted because it is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave
   insufficient  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Appellant   could   be
   reasonably expected to relocate to Kabul. In granting permission,  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Froom comments that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   relied on AK but that decision emphasised that the appellant's individual
   characteristics needed to be considered. On the basis of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's findings, the Appellant had no relatives to turn to  in  Kabul
   and would be an unaccompanied minor. Whilst the First-tier  Tribunal  was
   plainly aware of the Appellant's age on return, she did not  explain  how
   she considered the Appellant would be able to survive on his own.


   The Hearing


4. Ms Alban relied on her  grounds  of  appeal.  She  added  that  regarding
   internal relocation, the UNHCR guidelines were not considered. The  Judge
   failed to apply the case law of AA  (unattended children) Afghanistan  CG
   [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC)and LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan
   [2008] UKIAT 0005  and  failed  to  consider  that  the  case  should  be
   distinguished from AK (Article 15 (c) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00163.
   She argued that the persecution of the  Appellant  would  extend  to  the
   whole of Afghanistan and the Judge had erred in failing so  to  conclude.
   The Judge erred in the assessment of Article 8. The Appellant could speak
   English and as an orphan had a close relationship with his foster family.
   The First-tier Tribunal accepted that he was an orphan and the government
   killed his family, that he was at risk in home area and that  he  was  an
   IDP.  There was an error in relation to the Judge's conclusions regarding
   internal relocation and risk of persecution.  As an orphan minor he would
   be at risk.


5. Mr Kotas submitted that the risk of persecution was  dealt  with  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal  and  there  was  objective  evidence  summarised  at
   paragraph 62 of the decision that Hezbi Islami had formed  a  truce  with
   the government. The Appellant had never done anything  himself  but  just
   fled.  It was open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence  to  find  that  the
   government was not going to be looking  for  a  17.5  year  old.  He  was
   returning to Kabul so sufficiency of protection did not arise. It  was  a
   local problem that he feared.  The Appellant had been in  the  UK  for  a
   year and at paragraphs 94 and 95 his best interests had been  taken  into
   account. This appeal turned on internal relocation and was effectively  a
   perversity challenge. All self-directions were correct. The  Judge  noted
   all the relevant factors and noted the Appellant's  lack  of  familiarity
   with Kabul. The Judge dealt with language and found  that  the  Appellant
   was  mentally  and  physically  well.   At   paragraph   81   the   Judge
   differentiated AK and noted the expert's report and dealt with it on  the
   basis that it  was  generic  and  not  prepared  for  the  Appellant.  At
   paragraph 86 undue hardship was considered. It was not arguable that  the
   relevant factors had not been taken into account.  It  was  not  perverse
   because all the factors had been considered.  The  findings  on  internal
   relocation should stand.


6. Ms Alban replied that although a truce was in place, Hezbi  Islami  would
   still be viewed with  suspicion.  The  Judge  did  not  explain  how  the
   Appellant would be able to survive. Findings of fact did not need  to  be
   made to re-make the decision. The Appellant  was  still  a  minor  as  of
   today's date.


7. Both parties agreed that I could re-make the decision  on  the  basis  of
   evidence before the First-tier tribunal.


Discussion

8.  The grounds assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  her
   assessment of the risk of persecution, limiting  it  to  the  Appellant's
   home area. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
   account was true. She accepted that he was a credible witness. She  found
   at paragraph 60 that one of his uncles was involved with Hezbi Islami and
   the attack on the Appellant's family home which led to the death  of  all
   of those with whom the Appellant had lived since shortly after his  birth
   was due to involvement with this group coupled with  problems  over  non-
   payment at the family shop. She accepted that the Appellant fled in  fear
   of his life as this attack happened.


9. In considering the risk of persecution,  she  accepted  that  the  police
   force targeted the Appellant in his  home  village  in  Afghanistan.  She
   found that because the problems existed with a local commander it was not
   possible for the Appellant to seek recourse from the authorities  in  his
   local area. She did not accept that there  would  be  problems  with  the
   police outside his local area. On his evidence he was not wanted  by  the
   police and had never lived outside the village.


10.  The Judge further found, at paragraph 53 and  61  that  the  government
   had reached an agreement with Hezbi Islami. The basis of her finding that
   the Appellant would not be at risk outside his home  area  was  that  the
   Appellant had said that he was not wanted by the authorities and that the
   problem with the police was a localised one. I have not been directed  to
   any evidence that shows and the grounds do not aver to any evidence  that
   the Judge failed to take into account to show that  problems  with  local
   police or a local commander would cause a risk of persecution outside the
   Appellant's home area. In the circumstances I find  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge's conclusions in this regard were adequately reasoned.


11. The Appellant also contends that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its
   assessment of internal relocation. The Appellant was 17.5  years  old  at
   the date of the hearing.  In  AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
   [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that when considering the
   question of whether  children  are  disproportionately  affected  by  the
   consequences of the armed conflict in Afghanistan, a distinction  has  to
   be drawn between children who were living with a family and those who are
   not.  The  background  evidence  demonstrates  that  unattached  children
   returned to Afghanistan, depending upon  their  individual  circumstances
   and the location to which they are returned, may be exposed  to  risk  of
   serious  harm,  inter   alia   from   indiscriminate   violence,   forced
   recruitment,  sexual  violence,  trafficking  and  a  lack  of   adequate
   arrangements for child protection.  Such risks will have to be taken into
   account when addressing the question  of  whether  a  return  is  in  the
   child's best interests, a primary consideration when determining a  claim
   to humanitarian protection. In AA  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
   appellant would be at real risk of persecution  as  an  unattached  child
   from his particular home are who had lost all contact with his family, so
   that family protection would not be available to him.


12. The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  internal  flight  option  at
   paragraphs 67 to 87 of the decision. She accepted that he had not been to
   Kabul and that he had no contact with his mother's family and that he was
   not in contact with any family in Afghanistan. She accepted that he would
   be returning as an internally displaced person. She  found  that  he  was
   mentally and physically well. She did not consider  that  there  was  any
   risk other than the general risk attracting to a male  of  his  age.  She
   considered the case of HK and others (minors - indiscriminate violence  -
   forced recruitment by Taliban - contact with family members)  Afghanistan
   CG [2010] UKUT 378 and concluded that Kabul  was  not  an  area  of  high
   militant  activity  or  militant  control.  She  identified   the   UNHCR
   Guidelines from 2016 and  addressed  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
   security situation and employment. She found at paragraphs 86 and 87 that
   the risk factor in relation to the Appellant was that he was a young male
   of fighting age. She accepted that relocation would not be easy  for  him
   and would involve a degree of hardship but having weighed all the factors
   including his ability to travel to the UK with an  agent  concluded  that
   internal relocation to Kabul was a viable alternative and  would  not  be
   unreasonably harsh.


13. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge notes that she is urged  to  take
   account of the risks in AA and consider the case of  LQ  (Age:  immutable
   characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKIAT 0005  at  paragraph  32  of  the
   decision, the ratio of those cases is not referred to  or  recognized  in
   the body of the decision. The UNHCR Guidelines set out at page 351 of the
   Appellant's bundle state that:


       "In  the  case  of  unaccompanied   and   separated   children   from
       Afghanistan, UNHCR considers that in addition to the  requirement  of
       meaningful support of the child's own  (extended)  family  or  larger
       ethnic community in the area of prospective relocation,  it  must  be
       established that relocation is in the best interest of the child."


14. Further, the UNHCR considers that internal  flight  is  only  reasonable
   where the individual has access to (i) shelter, (ii)  essential  services
   such as sanitation, health  care  and  education;  and  (iii)  livelihood
   opportunities. Moreover, the UNHCHR considers  that  internal  flight  is
   only reasonable where the individual has access to a  larger  traditional
   support network of members of his or her (extended) family or members  of
   his or her larger ethnic community in the area of prospective relocation,
   who have been assessed to be willing and able to provide genuine  support
   to the applicant in practice. The UNHCR considers that the only exception
   to the requirement of external support are  single  able-bodied  men  and
   married   couples   of   working   age   without   identified    specific
   vulnerabilities.


15. The Upper Tribunal noted in AA at paragraph 26 that:


       "The proper approach to an application for asylum or for humanitarian
       protection by a child was  addressed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
       (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, [2011]  2  WLR  148.  It  held  that
       international law placed a binding  obligation  upon  public  bodies,
       including the immigration authorities and the Secretary of State,  to
       discharge their functions having regard to the need to safeguard  and
       promote the welfare of children; that the obligation applied not only
       to how children were looked after in the United Kingdom but  also  to
       decisions made about asylum, deportation and removal from the  United
       Kingdom; that any such decision which was taken without having regard
       to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of  any  child
       involved would not be "in accordance with law" for  the  purposes  of
       Article 8.2 of  the  Convention;  that,  further,  in  all  decisions
       directly  or  indirectly  affecting  a  child's  upbringing  national
       authorities were required to treat the best interest of the child  as
       a primary consideration, by first identifying what the best  interest
       of the child required and then assessing whether the strength of  any
       other  considerations,  or   the   accumulative   effect   of   other
       considerations, outweighed the child's best interests."

16. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge  referred  the  UNHCR  guidelines
   the decision, she did not, in my judgement, give adequate reasons for the
   finding that internal relocation would not be unduly harsh  by  reference
   to the country  guidance  case  law  specifically  dealing  with  minors,
   orphans and unattached children, nor were adequate reasons  given  as  to
   how the Appellant would survive in  Kabul  in  the  absence  of  external
   support. Nor is  there  an  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
   Appellant either in the context of  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection.
   Although the First-tier Tribunal referred to HK in the context of  forced
   recruitment, HK did not concern  unaccompanied  children  and  the  Upper
   Tribunal noted at paragraph 48 of the decision that the  material  before
   it "... presents a  bleak  picture  for  children  who  are  returned  to
   Afghanistan and who do not have  a  family  that  will  care  for  them."
   Further, although the First-tier Tribunal referred to the case of AK  she
   did not have regard to the conclusion, at paragraph 247, that  there  was
   no reason or evidential basis to depart from the child-specific  guidance
   in AA.


17. In the  circumstances,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in
   failing to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant  could
   reasonably relocate to Kabul.








   The Re-making of the decision


18. Both parties agreed that I could re-make the decision in this appeal  on
   the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  In the light of the limited
   fact-finding required, I concluded that the matter should be retained  in
   the Upper Tribunal. The findings of fact summarised above  are  preserved
   as they have not been infected  by  any  error  of  law  (DK  (Serbia)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] 1 WLR 1246).


19. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  of
   persecution in his home area. She made no finding in relation to  whether
   that persecution would be for a Convention reason. The  Appellant  argued
   that he was at risk due to imputed political opinion and on the basis  of
   his age. In LQ the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  a  person's  age  is  an
   immutable characteristic. Although it changes constantly, one can oneself
   do nothing to change what it is at any particular time.  I accept that as
   an orphan and minor the Appellant is a member of a social group.


20. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others 2007 UKHL the House of Lords  held  that
   the decision maker should decide whether, taking account of all  relevant
   circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his or her country it  would
   be reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be
   unduly harsh to expect him or her  to  do  so.    In  applying  the  test
   enquiry had to be directed to the situation of the  particular  claimant;
   very little was excluded from consideration other than  the  standard  of
   rights protection which a claimant  would  enjoy  in  the  country  where
   refuge was sought.  All the circumstances of the case have to be assessed
   holistically, with specific reference to personal circumstances including
   past persecution or fear thereof,  psychological  or  health  conditions,
   family and social situations, and survival capacities, in the context  of
   the conditions in the place of relocation, including basic human  rights,
   security and  socio  economic  conditions,  and  access  to  health  care
   facilities: all with a view to determining the impact on the claimant  of
   settling in the proposed place of relocation  and  whether  the  claimant
   could live a relatively normal life without undue hardship.


21. In AK (Article 15  (c)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  the  Upper
   Tribunal considered internal flight in the context of Article 15 (c)  and
   that conditions in  Kabul  did  not  make  relocation  there  in  general
   unreasonable, however, there needed to be an inquiry into  the  applicant
   individual's circumstances which would often  depend  on  the  nature  of
   specific findings about the credibility of an appellant and in respect of
   such matters as whether they had family ties in Kabul.


22. According to the  Home  Office,  Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
   Afghanistan, July 2016 there was an 18  per  cent  increase  in  civilian
   casualties in 2015  compared  to  2014.  According  to  the  same  report
   intensified  fighting  and  growing  fear  caused   by   insecurity   and
   intimidation have displaced thousands of people  throughout  Afghanistan.
   The UNHCR noted that the city of Kabul has seen  the  biggest  population
   increase of Afghan cities, receiving close to 40  per  cent  of  all  new
   conflict-induced IDPs in Afghanistan since 2002.


23. The Appellant remains a minor. He has no family in Kabul and  has  never
   been there. He has no health problems. However, he has no  experience  of
   living alone, having lived  with  his  family  in  a  village  in  Kapisa
   province in Afghanistan and then having been in foster care in the United
   Kingdom. The fact that he was able to travel to the UK with an agent,  in
   my judgement, is not evidence of his ability to live  independently.  The
   Appellant has no access to an external support network in Afghanistan and
   in the absence of any support in Kabul, on the evidence before me, as  an
   orphan, he would not have access to shelter, essential services  such  as
   sanitation, health care and education; and livelihood  opportunities.  It
   is acknowledged in  the  case  law  that  the  situation  for  unattached
   children remains bleak, and the evidence does not suggest an  improvement
   in the situation since the  country  guidance  was  promulgated.  In  the
   circumstances I find that  it  would  not  be  in  the  Appellant's  best
   interests to be returned to Kabul and internal relocation  to  that  city
   would be unduly harsh.


24. Given that I have found that he  is  entitled  to  be  recognised  as  a
   refugee, I do not address the claim for humanitarian protection  save  to
   say that had he not succeeded in his claim to be a refugee he would  have
   been entitled to humanitarian protection.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum and Article  3
ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 5 JULY 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


