
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/13802/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 July 2019                         |On 08 August 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                   MR SPKA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by ABN
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.  This direction
    applies to both the Appellant and to the Respondent and a failure to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony in which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen
    of Sri Lanka, against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum.

 3. The application under appeal was  refused  on  15  November  2018.  The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The
    appeal came before Judge Anthony on 4 April 2019 and was dismissed. The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
    application was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 14  May  2019  in
    the following terms

        The grounds challenge the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  psychiatric
        evidence and of the Appellant's credibility. The expert  psychiatric
        report from Dr Raj Persaud may be open to criticism on a  number  of
        grounds as identified by the Judge, save that an expert has in  most
        cases to rely to a greater or lesser extent upon what the subject of
        the  report  states.  It  is  not  the  expert's  duty   to   assess
        credibility. Nevertheless, it is arguable the Judge's  consideration
        of  the  report  and  the  Appellant's  credibility  is  flawed   in
        particular because at paragraphs 40 and 46 of her decision the Judge
        has arguably fallen into the  "M'banga"  trap  by  reaching  adverse
        credibility findings before considering the expert report,  whatever
        its technical failings may be.

Background

 4. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka of the Buddhist faith born on 18  June  1989.   He
    arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2011  as  a  family  visitor  and
    subsequently made applications to remain on  family  and  compassionate
    grounds. These applications were refused  and  on  16  April  2018  the
    Appellant made the claim for asylum which is the basis of this  appeal.
    The basis of claim was that firstly his father was involved in  a  land
    dispute with Douglas Devananda a politician and  leader  of  the  Eelam
    People's Democratic Party (EPDP) and secondly that he  had  engaged  in
    sur place activities in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Respondent refused the application because it was not accepted that
    the Appellant was telling the truth either about the  land  dispute  or
    about his activities in the United Kingdom.

 6. At the appeal hearing the Appellant did not give oral evidence and  the
    decision notes that Mr Paramjorthy as  the  Appellant's  representative
    decided not to call the Appellant  in  the  light  of  the  psychiatric
    report from Dr Raj Persaud (paragraph 13). In dismissing the protection
    appeal the Judge rejected the credibility of the Appellant's account of
    the land dispute and further rejected his  claim  that  he  attended  a
    demonstration against the Sri Lankan government whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom. In rejecting his account, the Judge found,  inter  alia,  that
    the provenance of documents from Sri Lanka and a  letter  submitted  in
    support of his claim had not been established because "It will need the
    support of the appellant's testimony" (paragraph 22 and 23).  Referring
    to the psychiatric evidence the Judge found (at paragraph 45)  "I  find
    that the coherency of the Appellant's account has nothing  to  do  with
    his  poor  mental  health  and  everything  to  do  with  the  lack  of
    credibility of his account".

Submissions


 7. For the Appellant Mr Paramjorthy referred to page  154  of  the  appeal
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal. This is a letter from his GP;  a
    letter particularising his  mental  health  issues.  Cross  referencing
    paragraph 16 of the decision the  Judge,  criticising  the  psychiatric
    report of Dr Persaud, says the letter of 19 March from the GP  referred
    to in Dr Persaud's report was not before the Tribunal. It was,  so  the
    Judge is clearly wrong in this respect. It is clear that the Judge  did
    not think much of the psychiatric evidence.  However,  her  reason  for
    criticising  this  evidence  at  the  beginning  of  her  decision   is
    misplaced. The Respondent's rule  24  letter  is  also  wrong  in  this
    regard.


 8. The letter from the GP showed that the Appellant had symptoms of severe
    depression, that he had been referred to the CRISIS team, that  he  was
    under the care of the Community Mental Health Team and that he had been
    registered for counselling. Despite this the Judge,  again  criticising
    Dr Persaud's report, says (at paragraph 18) that referral to the CRISIS
    team is the usual step. The GP's letter, missed by the Judge,  confirms
    the referral. As the Appellant was not  called  to  give  evidence  the
    Judge assesses the psychiatric evidence and  finds  (at  paragraph  46)
    that she can attach little weight to Dr Persaud's report. That is where
    it become material.
    The Judge finds that the  Appellant  has  depression  symptoms  and  is
    receiving treatment  from  his  GP  but  does  not  find  Dr  Persaud's
    conclusions as to deeper mental health problems made out. Assessment of
    credibility is then made on this basis and the rationale at  paragraphs
    45 and 46 is troubling. The Judge is concerned that the presentation of
    Appellant is inconsistent with clinical findings  and  so  attaches  no
    weight to a document from a JP in Sri Lanka referring to the  terrorist
    investigation department.


 9. For the Respondent Mr Howells said, on the M'banga  point,  it  is  not
    clear that the psychiatric report was relied on as a factor relating to
    credibility. M'banga was about considering a scarring  report  after  a
    credibility assessment. Mr Paramjorthy interjected to agree  that  this
    was not a M'banga issue.


10. Mr Howells accepted that the Judge erred in finding that the GP  letter
    was not before her but the Judge proceeded on her acceptance  that  the
    Appellant suffered from depression and was receiving treatment from the
    GP. She also considered suicide risk at  paragraphs  53-54  considering
    risk in UK and on return. The  Judge  made  several  criticisms  of  Dr
    Persaud's report not all of which are challenged in grounds.  Paragraph
    16 incorrectly states that the letter was not before her but at end  of
    the paragraph the Judge also assessed risk on return. The Judge reached
    her adverse credibility finding at paragraph 39. This was not based  on
    the report, so it had no material  effect  on  her  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the claim. However, Mr Howells agreed that to the extent
    that the Judge had reached findings on the  report  before  turning  to
    credibility there was an material error.




11. I agreed that the decision would be set aside.  My  reasons  are  given
    below.

Decision

12. As detailed above this is an appellant who claims to  fear  persecution
    in Sri Lanka for two reasons the first being a family  dispute  with  a
    senior politician and the second being his  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The  Respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  basis  of
    credibility and this was the only  real  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Where credibility is in issue the Tribunal will usually  hear
    oral evidence from an appellant before reaching  a  decision.  In  this
    case the Appellant did not give oral  evidence.  The  decision  records
    that Mr Paramjorthy made a decision not to call the Appellant  to  give
    evidence in the light of the report from Dr Raj Persaud.

13. Before making any findings or examining any of the evidence put forward
    on the Appellant's behalf the Judge deals with the report of Dr Persaud
    at paragraphs 15 to 20 of her decision. At paragraph 16 the judge notes
    that Dr Persaud refers to a letter from the  Appellant's  GP  and  adds
    that this letter was not before the Tribunal. This is wrong; the letter
    appears at page 154 of the Appellant's  bundle.  Having  wrongly  noted
    that the letter was not before the Tribunal the Judge  quotes  from  Dr
    Persaud's report "I believe that once properly  referred  the  referred
    agency will regard him as seriously  psychiatrically  unwell  and  that
    this is secondary to the life events I have outlined". The Judge  finds
    that Dr Persaud has attempted to pre-empt a conclusion to the cause  of
    the Appellant's depressive symptoms even before  he  has  received  any
    treatment from secondary mental health services.  The  Judge  therefore
    places little weight on the statement. In fact the letter from  the  GP
    shows a referral to  the  CRISIS  team  and  a  previous  treatment  by
    counselling.

14. The Judge goes on to note that Dr Persaud concludes that the  Appellant
    is unfit to give evidence but finds that no  mental  state  examination
    appears to have been carried out and  that  the  symptoms  forming  the
    basis of Dr Persaud's conclusions were based  on  the  Appellant's  own
    reports of symptomology. She notes  "I  find  that  the  cause  of  the
    depressive symptoms were very much dependent on whether  I  accept  the
    appellant's account regarding the land dispute  and  the  claimed  risk
    from the Sri Lankan authorities".

15. It is clear from the above that  the  Judge  has  certain  reservations
    about Dr Persaud's report particularly in so far as his conclusions  as
    to the  Appellant's  symptoms  and  condition  are  dependent  upon  Dr
    Persaud's acceptance of the Appellant's credibility. Nevertheless,  the
    Judge does not, overtly at least, take issue with  the  expert  opinion
    that the Appellant is unfit to give  evidence.  However,  when  dealing
    with the documentary evidence the Judge notes firstly relating  to  the
    email documentation and secondly in relation to  the  JPs  letter  that
    their provenance will need the support of the Appellant's testimony. It
    is not said but it is clear that  the  Judge  means  'oral  testimony'.
    Having then separately examined  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account at pages 25 to 39 and  finding  this  account  not  capable  of
    belief the Judge returns to the Appellant's mental health and concludes
    "I find that the coherency of the appellant's account has nothing to do
    with his poor mental health and everything  to  do  with  the  lack  of
    credibility of his  account".  Indeed  before  reaching  this  ultimate
    conclusion the Judge refers back to the report of  Dr  Persaud  finding
    that the Appellant is mentally capable of  making  important  decisions
    and that this is wholly inconsistent with Dr Persaud's conclusions.

16. There is in my judgement a significant difficulty in the way  that  the
    Judge has dealt with the psychiatric evidence and  this  amounts  to  a
    material error of law. Having noted that the Appellant is not going  to
    give oral evidence the Judge embarks on a  critical  assessment  of  Dr
    Persaud's report and in doing so fails to take account  of  a  document
    referred to in that report wrongly saying that it was  not  before  the
    Tribunal. The rest of the decision gives the impression that it is made
    in the light of the Judge's disagreement with the report's conclusions.
    In particular in assessing the documentary  evidence  the  Judge  makes
    implicit criticism of the Appellant's failure to  give  oral  evidence.
    The circle is completed when  at  paragraph  45  the  judge  finds,  in
    effect, that Dr Persaud's report is wrong because  it  is  inconsistent
    with the Appellant's actions. In my judgement the Judge  has  conflated
    the clinical assessment with Dr Persaud's  seeming  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's  credibility.  She  finds  in  effect  that  the   clinical
    assessment, that the Appellant is unfit to give evidence, is wrong  and
    holds against the Appellant's credibility  his  failure  to  give  oral
    evidence.

17. In my judgement this is an error of law which goes to the root  of  the
    adverse credibility finding and in these circumstances the appeal  must
    be allowed and the decision to dismiss the appeal must be set aside  to
    be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Summary of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law and for that reason the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appeal is set aside.

19. Having regard to the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  required  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to remake the decision with no findings preserved.




Signed                                  Date: 30 July 2019
[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
