
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 June 2019                      |On 17 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              EMAD HASAN FATAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of a  panel  of  the
       First-Tier Tribunal composed of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  and
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge Forster ('the  Panel')  promulgated  on  31
       January 2019 in which the Panel dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
       protection and human rights grounds.



Background

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born  on  6  September  1990.  The
       Panel set out the core of the appellant's case between [3 - 9] of the
       decision under challenge. It is noted the appellant left Iraq at  the
       end of December 2017/early 2018 and flew using his  own  passport  to
       Turkey from where he travelled to Greece. The appellant remained  for
       four months before  travelling  across  Europe  by  lorry  to  arrive
       clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 4 May 2018; where  he  claimed
       asylum.

    3. The Panel set out their primary findings of  fact  from  [19]  noting
       that as the appellant's account was accepted by  the  respondent  who
       did not challenge the factual basis of the claim they were  bound  to
       do likewise. At [26] having considered the appellant's case the Panel
       find that applying the standard of a reasonable degree of  likelihood
       they find the appellant does not establish any Convention ground that
       warrants a claim for asylum or that he faced any real risk of serious
       harm  in  Iraq.  Thereafter  the  Panel  went  on  to  consider   the
       feasibility of return between [27 - 31] in which they find:

           "27.    Given  our  above  findings,  the  appellant  would   be
                returning to  the  IKR  as  a  young,  single  man  with  no
                children,  relatively  well  educated,  who  has  previously
                worked is able to speak  some  Arabic  in  addition  to  his
                native language of Kurdish Sorani. He will  reasonably  have
                acquired skills which are transferable.  We  find  that  the
                appellant has maintained a relationship with some members of
                his family, in particularly  one  of  his  sisters  and  his
                brother-in-law who took him in and helped him to leave Iraq.
                He will be able to contact those members of his family  more
                easily from the IKR and he will find it easier to arrange to
                see them or obtain any further documentation or  support  he
                may need. He has shown himself to be resourceful  in  making
                his way to the UK.  His  ability  to  secure  employment  is
                reasonably good, and this will enable him to  find  and  pay
                for accommodation.

           28.    We refer ourselves to the relevant Country Guidance in AA
                (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWAC Civ (944): which is that "the  IKR
                is virtually violence free. There is no Article 15 (c)  risk
                to  an  ordinary  citizen  in   the   IKR".   In   all   the
                circumstances, we find that the  Appellant  can  safely  and
                reasonably be expected to return to the IKR.  We  must  next
                consider whether  the  Appellant's  return  to  the  IKR  is
                feasible.

           29.    The Court of Appeal in AA found that "the respondent will
                only return P to the IKR if P originates from  the  IKR  and
                P's  identity  has   been   "pre-cleared"   with   the   IKR
                authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P  to
                have an expired or current passport, or laisse-passer".  The
                appellant is from the IKR and can be returned there directly
                by the preclearance procedure referred  to  in  the  Country
                Guidance, but he  will  have  to  be  returned  via  Baghdad
                because current guidance is that there are no direct flights
                to Erbil. We need to consider what, if any difficulties, the
                appellant would have in making his way to the IKR.

           30.    The key document is a CSID. The appellant was clear  that
                he had a CSID, but it had been burned by  his  father  after
                they fell out. The appellant did not seek a replacement card
                whilst he was living and working in Darbandikhan because  he
                said the he did not need one. That goes against the accepted
                wisdom that the card provides access to services and  it  is
                also a gateway  to  obtaining  other  documents  such  as  a
                passport.  The  appellant  flew  from  Iraq  using  his  own
                passport, but he handed it over to the agent when he arrived
                in Turkey. The appellant needs to renew  rather  than  apply
                for a CSID and passport. In all  likelihood,  the  appellant
                can reasonably apply for a replacement CSID and passport and
                any relevant travel documents prior to leaving  the  UK.  He
                can contact the Iraqi embassy, which he has  not  yet  done.
                The appellant will have the assistance  of  his  sister  and
                brother in law in Darbandikhan, who will be able to help him
                to obtain the documents from the  relevant  authorities.  On
                the facts of this case return to Iraq is feasible.

           31.    With a CSID, the Appellant will be able to make  his  way
                to the IKR from Baghdad as that document will allow  him  to
                board a plane from Baghdad to the IKR. He does not  need  to
                undertake a land crossing to  the  IKR.  There  are  flights
                between Baghdad and Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah.  The  appellant
                will be no more than a transit passenger at Baghdad Airport.
                On the Country Guidance, for an Iraqi National  returnee  of
                Kurdish origin in possession of a CSID  or  Iraqi  passport,
                the journey from Baghdad  to  the  IKR,  is  affordable  and
                practical and can  be  made  without  a  real  risk  of  the
                claimant suffering persecution, serious harm, or  Article  3
                ill-treatment. Nor would any  difficulties  on  the  journey
                make  the  relocation  unduly   harsh.   In   making   these
                conclusions, we adopt and follow the findings in AAH  (Iraqi
                Kurds - internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC)."

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially refused
       by another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal but granted on a  renewed
       application by a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal who considered it
       arguable that the First-Tier Tribunal erred  in  the  conclusion  the
       appellant will be able to  obtain  a  CSID  and  had  misapplied  the
       guidance in AAH (Iraq).

    5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 reply, dated 15 May 2019, the material
       part of which is in the following terms:

           "4.    The respondent will submit that  these  grounds  are  not
                made out. The FtTJ properly  considered  the  objective  and
                subjective  evidence  before  him   and   given   that   the
                Appellant's evidence was that he has contact with family  in
                Iraq (namely his sister and brother-in-law) it was  properly
                open  to  the  FtTJ  to  find  that  as  the  Appellant  was
                previously in possession of a passport (taken by agent)  and
                an CSID document (burned by his  father  over  an  argument)
                that his sister or brother in law could help him  to  obtain
                relevant information regarding his identification  documents
                to make his return feasible (Paragraph 30 - 31).  Indeed  it
                was properly open to the FtTJ applying the principles in AAH
                (Iraq) to find in the  absence  of  evidence  to  the  lower
                standard of proof that the Appellant would be able to obtain
                a replacement CSID and Passport in  the  UK  from  the  Iraq
                Consulate to make his return to Iraq feasible.

           5. The respondent will submit that the grounds  advanced  failed
                to disclose a material arguable  error  of  law  capable  of
                vitiating the appeal outcome."

Error of law

    6. The appellant originates from Darbandikhan, a town in the province of
       Sulaymaniyah, Kurdistan in the IKR.

    7. Relevant cases considered by the Panel  included  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
       [2017] EWCA Civ 944, as amended, in which the Court of  Appeal  found
       that a CSID was not simply a return document, and AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
       internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 in which section C  of  the  AA
       guidance is supplemented with guidance about the factors to  consider
       when considering whether it is possible for the returnee to obtain  a
       CSID or obtain it within a reasonable time frame.  Section E  of  the
       country guidance is replaced - the new guidance explaining  that  all
       returns are currently to Baghdad but a returnee of Kurdish origin  in
       possession of a valid CSID or passport can journey  by  land  or  air
       practically and affordably without real risk and  without  relocation
       being unduly harsh.  Domestic flights to the IKR  cannot  be  boarded
       without either a CSID or a valid passport and  if  the  returnee  has
       neither there is a real risk of his being detained at a checkpoint if
       he travels by land (other ways of verifying identity  at  checkpoints
       such as calling upon "connections" were discussed).

    8. Regardless of the feasibility of return, the Panel recognised it  was
       necessary to decide whether appellant would  either  be  returned  to
       Iraq with a CSID or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after
       arrival in Iraq.

    9. In AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 section C
       of the AA guidance is supplemented with guidance about the factors to
       consider when considering whether it is possible for the returnee  to
       obtain a CSID or obtain it within a reasonable time  frame.   Factors
       to be considered include whether the returnee has any other  form  of
       documentation or information about the location of his entry  in  the
       civil register.  If someone is in possession  of  an  INC,  passport,
       birth/marriage certificate or  an  expired  CSID  this  would  be  of
       substantial assistance and the process should be straightforward.   A
       simple laissez-passer however is taken on  arrival  in  Baghdad.   It
       needs to be considered if  the  relevant  civil  registry  office  is
       operational and whether there are male family members  who  would  be
       able and willing to attend the civil registry with the returnee.   As
       the registration  system  is  patrilineal  it  will  be  relevant  to
       consider whether the relatives are from the father's or the  mother's
       side.  A maternal uncle would be able to provide  details  to  locate
       the mother's registration and from there the trail would have  to  be
       followed  to  where  the  mother's  records  were  transferred   upon
       marriage.  Undocumented IDPs are themselves unable to  be  likely  to
       help and a woman without a male relative  to  assist  may  face  very
       significant obstacles in that officials may refuse to deal  with  her
       case at all.

           "26.   If applying through a consulate abroad  the  requirements
                are different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and
                checked on the website of the Iraqi embassy  in  Sweden,  Dr
                Fatah states that the authorities will require the applicant
                to first make a statement explaining why he needs a CSID and
                attach  this   to   his   application   form,   which   must
                countersigned by the head  of  the  applicant's  family  and
                stamped by the consulate or embassy; he  must  then  produce
                his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the country  where
                he is applying, the name  of  a  representative  (proxy)  in
                Iraq, an additional  form  completed  by  the  head  of  the
                applicant's  family  verifying  that  the  contents  of  his
                application form were true, four colour copies of  his  INC,
                and 10 colour photographs.    Crucially the  applicant  must
                be  able  to  produce  something  which  can  establish  the
                location of his family's details in the civil register. This
                should be a CSID, an INC or birth certificate.  If  none  of
                these are available to the  applicant  he  must  supply  the
                identity documents  of  his  parents.  This  evidence  again
                accords with that of Landinfo (December 2017)  who  conclude
                that it can be difficult to obtain replacement ID  documents
                from an embassy abroad for the individual who is  unable  to
                verify his or her identity.

           27.    If you  are  in  Iraq,  and  have  all  of  the  required
                documents,  in   normal   circumstances   the   process   is
                straightforward and quick and should take no more than three
                days. Dr Fatah's own daughter was born in the United Kingdom
                and he managed to obtain her a CSID  in  one  day  from  the
                office in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment of a small  fee.     Dr
                Fatah was  less  optimistic  about  the  efficiency  of  the
                process if in the United Kingdom. He  has  regular  dealings
                with the consulate in London and he is  not  impressed.   He
                said that staff there are generally very unhelpful.

           28.    If some of the documents were missing it might  generally
                take you up to a month to collate and replace them all.   In
                his live evidence,  when  pressed  by  Mr  Singh,  Dr  Fatah
                acknowledged that it may be possible, when dealing with some
                officials, to obtain a CSID even if one does not have all of
                the documents listed above. He  conceded  that  an  official
                might be 'persuaded' to overlook the official  requirements,
                and that there may be some degree of flexibility  about  the
                process in some governates. He maintained  however  that  it
                would normally be the case that  these  documents  would  be
                required. The key piece of information that  the  individual
                would however have to have would be his family's volume  and
                page reference number in the civil register.  Without  that,
                the individual "is in trouble".   He could only obtain a new
                CSID if the Registrar was prepared to trawl  through  volume
                after volume looking for the family record. In his  evidence
                before the Tribunal in AA (Iraq) Dr Fatah wondered  if  such
                an official would be willing to undertake such  a  task,  or
                could be "made willing". The Tribunal  concluded  that  this
                was not likely. The only way  that  a  totally  undocumented
                Iraqi could realistically hope to obtain a new CSID would be
                the attendance at the civil registry of a male family member
                prepared to vouch for him or her. The production of  a  CSID
                from, for instance, an uncle, would enable the Registrar  to
                trace back through  the  record  to  find  the  individual's
                father, and in turn him.

           29.    As to whether one would need to attend the office of  the
                civil registrar in person, Dr Fatah reiterated the  evidence
                he gave in AA (Iraq). One  could  delegate  the  task  to  a
                relative or trusted friend, assuming of course that  he  was
                in possession of the relevant documents and/or  information.
                Alternatively, Dr Fatah agreed  that  it  was  theoretically
                possible that one could engage a lawyer and grant him or her
                power of attorney.   He had however never  known  of  anyone
                who had actually done that,  but  like  everything  else  in
                Iraq, it depended on whether you had contacts whom you could
                trust. Dr Fatah was asked about the possibility of attending
                alternative offices, such as the Central Archive in Baghdad,
                discussed at paragraphs  180  to  187  of  AA  (Iraq).    He
                maintained the evidence that he gave in that  case:  he  has
                never heard of anyone obtaining  a  CSID  from  the  Central
                Archive.  In his main report Dr Fatah cites the research  of
                NGO 'Ceasefire Centre for Civilian  Rights'  to  the  effect
                that IDPs attempting to recover lost documents are being met
                with indifference, corruption, incompetence and even sarcasm
                by the authorities.

           30.    Dr Fatah explained  that  this  complex  bureaucracy  has
                existed in Iraq for  many  years.  The  family  registration
                books, and their contents reflected on  the  CSID,  are  the
                foundation of  the  state's  control.    Iraq  is  presently
                facing significant challenges in maintaining the  system  in
                the north of the country, however. Under  ISIL  control  all
                recording of official events  was  banned,  and  some  civil
                register offices, such as that in  Mosul,  were  damaged  or
                destroyed. The effect is that there is now  a  huge  backlog
                for the bureaucrats to catch up on. Between 2014 and 2017 no
                marriages, births or deaths were recorded. Catching up  will
                be a mammoth task.  In Mosul alone  there  are  1.5  million
                Iraqis who will need their records updated. In  addition  to
                recording the names of those who have died in  the  conflict
                there will be tens of thousands  of  children  whose  births
                have not been registered, or who were not entered  into  the
                record before  ISIL  took  power.  Their  families  are  now
                desperate to have their existence recorded, because  without
                that, they cannot obtain CSID cards; without CSID cards  the
                children are not entitled to PDS cards;  without  PDS  cards
                they cannot receive food rations.   In addition many  people
                lost their documents during the  conflict  when  homes  were
                destroyed or when fighting broke out, causing people to flee
                at short notice  without  them.    In  light  of  this,  the
                problems of one individual returnee are likely to  be  given
                short shrift. No procedures have been implemented to  assist
                the re-documentation of returnees and  in  the  view  of  Dr
                Fatah this is because their  issues  are  considered  to  be
                trivial compared to the position  of  IDPs  already  on  the
                ground.  These  returnees  are  a   "totally   insignificant
                problem" for the  authorities,  whose  efforts  are  further
                hampered by the fact that many of the more experienced civil
                servants, whose skills could be helpful at this point,  were
                sacked  in   the   "de-Ba'athification"   programme.     The
                likelihood of persuading an official to spend precious  time
                trying to find an  individual's  records  are  even  further
                diminished."

   10. Miss Pickering in her submissions asserted there were two issues  one
       of which related to the ease by which the appellant will be  able  to
       obtain a CSID. It was submitted the Panels determination focused only
       upon an ability to obtain this document in the United Kingdom, but it
       was accepted the appellant had not approached the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
       the United Kingdom  to  see  whether  a  replacement  CSID  could  be
       obtained, despite the burden of proof being upon the appellant.

   11. Miss Pickering asserted  the  Panel  did  not  look  at  whether  the
       appellant could obtain the document on return to  Iraq  and  that  if
       this was feasible the Panel  would  have  said  so.  In  response  to
       questions from the Bench  Miss  Pickering  also  submitted  that  the
       requirement for male family members to assist is 'familial' and  that
       it was not made out the fact the appellant had  a  brother-in-law  in
       the IKR meant there was a person capable of obtaining  the  documents
       on his behalf.

   12. A further issue that arose during the course of  the  hearing  flowed
       from a submission made by Mr Diwnycz regarding the October 2018  CPIN
       and documents annexed thereto by way of copy letters from  the  Iraqi
       Embassy in the United Kingdom dated 5 September 2018  and  2  October
       2018, scanned copies of which appear at Annex A and B of the  report.
       It was submitted by Miss Pickering that this was not evidence  before
       the First-Tier Tribunal and that there had been  some  discussion  at
       the  hearing  regarding  the  documentary  evidence  that  had   been
       provided. It is not disputed, however, that  within  the  appellant's
       appeal bundle at [58 -104] is a copy of the October  2018  CPIN.  The
       two letters referred to by Mr Diwnycz are specifically referred to by
       reference to Annex A and Annex B at [94] of  the  appellant's  appeal
       bundle. The difficulty that arose is that it  does  not  appear  that
       whoever prepared the bundle  copied  the  letters  or  included  them
       within the evidence submitted.

   13. Miss Pickering submitted there was no evidence this was a  deliberate
       act undertaken with the intention of suppressing  evidence,  or  that
       what occurred was the deliberate  provision  of  incomplete  evidence
       ignoring  a  significant  portion  of  related  evidence   that   may
       contradict the appellant's position. Whilst some may argue  that  the
       omission of such documents clearly indicates an intention to suppress
       evidence that could lead to a complete picture, in which all  reasons
       opposing the appellant's case  are  omitted,  no  evidence  has  been
       provided to suggest that Miss Pickering's submission  of  mere  error
       does not provide a plausible explanation.

   14. The October 2018 CPIN is not a document in relation to which only the
       respondent had exclusive access as it is a  document  in  the  public
       domain to which all parties have access. It is also a  document  that
       was before the Panel of which they too would have been aware.

   15. I do not find it made out that  the  Panel  concluded  the  appellant
       would not be able to obtain the necessary documents on return to Iraq
       and reject as unfounded Miss Pickering's submission, on the facts  of
       this case, that just because this issue was not mentioned in the body
       of the determination the  Panel  must  be  taken  to  have  concluded
       accordingly. The primary finding of the Panel is that  the  necessary
       documents could be obtained before the appellant left for Iraq,  i.e.
       within the United Kingdom.

   16. The letters from the Iraqi Embassy in the following terms:

           'Annex A

           5 September 2018

           Re: Visit of the Iraqi Migration and Human Rights  Committee  to
           the United Kingdom:

           29 July - 2 August 2018

           Dear [ ]

           In reference to your letter dated 4th of September, I would like
           to assure you that all the  returnees'  papers  are  checked  on
           arrival  and  they  are  received  with  courtesy   at   Baghdad
           International Airport and may be provided with  a  certification
           letter.

           The arriving returnees can  continue  their  onward  journey  to
           their final destination in Iraq  by  domestic  flights  or  road
           using their Laissez Passer or letter (if  provided)  which  help
           them to pass through other designated checkpoints.  Please  note
           that most of them may  be  in  possession  of  copies  of  their
           national IDs which may have not been disclosed previously.

           The returnees can re-document  themselves  and  apply  to  their
           local Civil Status Department for a national ID card on  arrival
           using copies from his/her old documents or family  records  with
           reference to the page and register number holding the returnee's
           information or that of their family.

           We can confirm that all the Civil Status Records  are  preserved
           and held ... each Governorate of Civil Status  Affairs  and  are
           accessible to assist in determining a returnee's  identity  with
           reference to the register and page.

           Sincerely

           Dr Salih Husain Ali

           Ambassador of the Republic of Iraq to the United Kingdom.




           Annex B

           02/10/2018

           Dear [ ]

           In addition to  our  clarification  outlined  in  our  letter  5
           September, please note that same procedures are applied  to  all
           the returnees onward to travel from Baghdad to KRG or  any  city
           in Iraq. The certification letter is issued  on  a  case-by-case
           and  depending  on   availability/unavailability   documentation
           (sometimes requested by the returnee), the letter is  issued  by
           Baghdad International Airport Police, and  contains  information
           about  the  returnees  including  name,  date   of   birth   and
           clarification that the returnee landed with a Laissez Passer and
           his repatriation procedure is completed  at  the  Airport,  this
           letter is sufficient to pass  through  checkpoints  in  case  of
           enquiry,  please  note  that  in  rare  occasions  they  may  be
           questioned at checkpoints. This letter usually not always issued
           for all the cases,  but  individually  case-by-case.  All  Civil
           Status Records have been preserved nationally  and  there  is  a
           central register backup in Baghdad that includes all  the  civil
           records of all the provinces in the event of any form of damages
           or  destruction.  This  civil  registration  backup  (microfilm)
           covers all records from 1957.

           Representatives  from  the  repatriation   committee   will   be
           available in Baghdad International Airport and ready to  receive
           a returnee even at the weekends if we are  informed  in  advance
           that the returnee is on board of  a  flight.  The  officers  are
           fully qualified dealing with the repatriation process  and  they
           can deal with it with the last minute notes.

           Kind regards

           Councillor

           Embassy of Iraq - London'

   17. The weight to be given to a document from  a  diplomatic  source  was
       considered extensively in the case of NA v the United Kingdom  [2008]
       ECHR 616 which found that such evidence should  not  be  accepted  or
       rejected because it comes from diplomatic sources but  it  should  be
       considered with and related to the evidence as a whole. The weight to
       be given to this evidence is a matter for the Tribunal.  Taking  such
       evidence in combination with the country guidance decisions and  CPIN
       I find it is appropriate in  all  the  circumstances  to  attach  the
       weight to the same and accept the evidence from the Iraqi Embassy  as
       a reliable country information upon which the weight may be given.

   18. The appellant's date of birth of 6 September 1990  which  means  that
       the evidence required to obtain the necessary documentation will have
       been included in the central database in Baghdad  as  well  as  being
       available to him in the IKR. As the appellant has not approached  the
       Iraqi authorities in the United  Kingdom  it  is  not  made  out  the
       Panel's  conclusions  he  will  be  able  to  obtain  the   necessary
       documentation is infected by arguable legal error although,  even  if
       this was so, the country information clearly supports a finding  that
       the appellant will be able to obtain  a  replacement  CSID  within  a
       reasonable period of returning to Iraq with  the  assistance  of  his
       family members in the IKR if required. The  Panel's  conclusions  the
       appellant will be able to travel to the IKR  from  Baghdad  have  not
       been shown to be outside the range of  findings  reasonably  open  to
       them on the evidence. Accordingly the  conclusion  the  appellant  is
       both returnable, and that such a return will not  engage  the  United
       Kingdom's international protection obligations, have not  been  shown
       to be findings outside the range of those reasonably available to the
       Panel on the evidence.

   19. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal is made out sufficient to warrant a  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



Decision

   20. There is no material error of law in the Panel's decision which shall
       stand.

   Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th June 2019

