
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL/FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2020                           |On 06 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                     BS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow office)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the rehearing of the appeal of  BS  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  of  5 November  2018  refusing   his   claim   for
    international protection and human rights.

2.   He had appealed that decision to a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    who allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 25 June 2019.   The
    Secretary of State sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision, and following a hearing on 13 November 2019  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen found that the judge  had  erred  in  law  and  directed  a
    rehearing of the appeal, the Article 3 asylum  and  Article  8  issues,
    though preserving credibility findings that the judge had  made  as  to
    the evidence of the appellant, his partner and her mother on Article  8
    matters and as regards his partner as to her political activity.

3.   The appellant gave evidence.  He had  provided  three  statements,  the
    most recent in 2020 and said the contents were all true and  they  were
    adopted as his evidence-in-chief.

4.   When cross-examined  by  Mr  Tufan  the  appellant  accepted  that  his
    appeals in 2002 and 2016 had been dismissed.  He was asked why he would
    be at risk on return now, having been found not to be previously and he
    said it was on account of his sur place activities.  It was put to  him
    that there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  he  had  any  position  of
    leadership and he said that he was the deputy secretary  of  the  south
    east district of the MDC for UK and Ireland.   He  was  asked  why  the
    leader was not present and he said that it was a mix of  four  branches
    and the leader was not able to  come  and  give  evidence,  though  the
    London branch secretary had.  He had not been able to attend because he
    was suffering from COVID-19 and had been on the list of  witnesses  and
    had been due to attend.  He had put in a statement.

5.   The appellant was asked about the fact that for several  years  he  had
    claimed to be Belgian, including while he was in prison.  He said  that
    when he converted to Islam they asked if he wanted to change  his  name
    and he had done so.  It was something he had said when  in  the  prison
    system.

6.   He had seen a psychiatrist on two occasions and told him how  he  felt.
    He believed that the psychiatrist had diagnosed severe  depression  and
    symptoms of PTSD.  He was asked how he did his job with  the  MDC  with
    these problems and said that taking minutes was his job and it was  not
    mentally challenging.  He was able to cope with his position.  Part  of
    what he did also as a deputy secretary was to take minutes  at  monthly
    meetings but also he organised and people told him what to arrange  for
    the next meeting.

7.   He was asked why, since the MDC was a legal party in Zimbabwe he  would
    be at risk as the deputy secretary of the branch.  He said that anybody
    was at risk and people were arrested for no reason.  He had  a  profile
    in the MDC and had written articles criticising the  government.   They
    had supported sanctions against Zimbabwe.  He had been  threatened  and
    he referred to e-mails in this  regard  in  the  bundle.   He  had  not
    reported these to the police.  He did not know whether they  were  from
    the UK or Zimbabwe and had no way of knowing who they  were  from.   He
    would be in danger as he had campaigned  against  Zimbabwean  officials
    who came to the United Kingdom and had appeared on videos where ZANU-PF
    threatened them.  The Home Office had enabled Zimbabwean  officials  to
    interview him in 2015 while he was in  detention  and  they  were  then
    unaware of him.  His MP had responded and had been told it  was  to  do
    with redocumentation but could not  confirm  what  questions  had  been
    asked.

8.   He was asked about the 2018 elections and which parties formed the  MDC
    Alliance and he referred to the MDC-T and MDC Alliance and MDC-M.  That
    was it as far as he knew.

9.   He did not live with his mother-in-law but he saw  her  every  day  and
    helped her with cleaning.   She  had  arthritis.   He  cooked  for  her
    sometimes and did the shopping.

10.  There was no re-examination.

11.  The next witness was CQ who is the appellant's mother-in-law.  She  had
    provided two statements.  She remembered  writing  the  statements  and
    they were true.

12.  She was asked by Ms Solanki how often she and the  appellant  saw  each
    other and she said it was every day and they  would  telephone  two  or
    three times a day.  She had put him down as  her  next  of  kin.   They
    supported each other since she was all alone in her house.  He did what
    she needed.

13.  Mr Tufan had no questions for the witness.

14.  In his submissions Mr Tufan referred to  the  two  previous  decisions,
    the most recent in 2016 and the need to apply the Devaseelan guidelines
    to the findings of the judge in those decisions.   The  respondent  did
    not challenge the section 72 finding.  The findings  at  paragraphs  90
    and 91 of the judge in 2016 were relevant.  The appellant's explanation
    for  his  claim  to  have  been  a  Belgian  national  previously   was
    unsatisfactory.  The judge had come to  adverse  credibility  findings.
    He was not found to be a member of a political party and  that  finding
    was not disturbed.  He now claimed to be a member of  the  MDC.   There
    was documentary evidence to corroborate that, but again no one had come
    to give oral evidence today in his support.  The appellant had said  he
    was merely a secretary taking notes and referred  to  organising,  etc.
    also but this was not credible  evidence.   In  this  regard  Mr  Tufan
    referred to paragraph 4.4.1 of the CPIN on Zimbabwe: Opposition to  the
    Government of February 2019.  That set out  the  various  parties  that
    made up the MDC Alliance formed in 2017.  The appellant had referred to
    MDC-C and MDC-M and that was all he knew but there  were  a  number  of
    factions and parties involved and MDC-M was not listed there.   He  had
    quite limited involvement in the MDC in the United Kingdom.   He  would
    not be of interest on return.  The MDC was a legal  party  in  Zimbabwe
    anyway.  The expert said in her report that members of the  party  were
    hassled and referred to the police activity in Bulawayo and journalists
    being hassled,  but  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  a  designed  and
    systematic persecution of those  involved  with  the  MDC.   There  was
    nothing concerning people of the appellant's profile being of interest.
     He had had no political involvement in Zimbabwe before he left.

15.  As regards the threats the appellant said had been made it was  unclear
    where they came from and how they found his e-mail.  ZHRO was  said  to
    have been threatened and again it was unclear by whom.

16.  The appellant was from Bulawayo.  None  of  the  evidence  he  provided
    suggested that the ratio in the country guidance in CM [2013]  UKUT  59
    (IAC) had changed.  In general people could return to Bulawayo even  if
    they had a significant MDC profile, and he did not  have  that  anyway.
    He could therefore not succeed on asylum or Article 3 grounds.

17.  As regards the medical issues, there were two  reports  prepared  by  a
    psychiatrist.  It could be seen from the CPIN that there was  treatment
    available for the appellant.  He had referred to  the  psychiatrist  to
    torture in Zimbabwe but he had been found not to  be  credible  by  the
    judge.  Despite the reference to other  cases  by  Ms  Solanki  in  her
    skeleton, in the end the guidance  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2020]  UKSC  17
    applied.  Although the decision there had lowered the threshold set out
    previously in N [2005] UKHL 31, it was still a high  threshold.   There
    had to be substantial grounds of a real risk of a  serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline leading to intense suffering and that was not  the
    case here.

18.  As regards Article 8, the  appellant  was  a  criminal  and  there  was
    nothing to suggest that paragraph (b) applied.  There had  to  be  very
    compelling circumstances and there were none.  The test was a very high
    one.  Ms Solanki had referred to the decision in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ
    813 with regard to very significant obstacles to integration,  but  the
    appellant was a "insider", having lived in Zimbabwe  for  most  of  his
    life.  He knew how the system functioned.  As regards his  relationship
    with his mother-in-law, it seemed that they met  daily  and  he  helped
    her.  As had been held by the Court of Appeal, the court  was  entitled
    to assume that Social Services would do their duty.   The  claim  could
    not succeed.

19.  We asked Mr Tufan about  what  was  said  in  the  CPIN  (published  in
    February 2019) concerning the  use  and  monitoring  of  the  internet.
    Paragraph 10.1.2 referred to online journalists and  ICT  users  facing
    regular  harassment,  intimidation  and  violence  for   their   online
    activities in the past  year.   In  addition  there  was  reference  at
    paragraph 7.4.6 to the authorities shutting down the internet  service,
    subsequently restoring it.  With regard to the appellant and his use of
    the internet, Mr Tufan said that  social  media  seemed  widespread  in
    Zimbabwe and the authorities prevented the system  working  when  there
    were protests.  The appellant was not a journalist.   It  was  not  the
    same as the situation that had been considered in the country  guidance
    concerning Iran.  There did not seem to be a manhunt  on  the  uses  of
    social media.

20.  In her submissions Ms Solanki relied on and developed  points  made  in
    her skeleton and also responded to the  arguments  put  forward  by  Mr
    Tufan.  With regard to the earlier findings, a  number  were  positive,
    such as the appellant being a member of the dance and music  troop  and
    the travel he carried out and attendance at  rallies  in  Zimbabwe  and
    occasional attendance by ZANU-PF.  This was significant, as the  expert
    said there would be intelligence about that.   Other  matters  had  not
    been accepted, but the evidence was different since then.

21.  With regard to the MDC he was listed on  the  website  as  a  committee
    member and secretary.  In the bundle could be found minutes which  were
    posted online.  That evidence  also  included  a  Google  search  which
    showed his name as a member of the MDC.  This was post-2016 evidence.

22.  As regards the use of  a  false  name  and  ID  he  had  given  a  good
    explanation that he had been high on amphetamines  when  he  gave  that
    name and did not change it until he came out of the prison system.   As
    concerned the truth about his siblings, it  was  relevant  to  consider
    what was said at pages 186 to 191 of the bundle which referred  to  the
    witness Mr N's awareness of the appellant's sister passing away.  There
    was mention there also of  the  appellant  living  on  the  streets  in
    Zimbabwe and that should be considered against the  objective  evidence
    and the fact that he had not been in Zimbabwe for  nineteen  years  and
    that was relevant to the possibility of family support.

23.  With regard to  the  points  made  about  the  lack  of  evidence,  the
    explanation was because of the pandemic and members being at high risk.
     As regards other organisations, despite the lack of  attendance  there
    was consistent support and documentation, for example the  minutes  and
    photographs and articles he had written referring  to  his  activities.
    In respect of those activities he was credible,  given  the  volume  of
    material and the length of time during which it had been made.  He  had
    been affected by his wife's illness and the pandemic.  Contrary to what
    Mr Tufan said the appellant did  not  only  take  notes  but  had  also
    referred to  other  activities  and  the  bundle  showed  that  he  was
    organising and handing out fliers and  encouraging  people  to  attend.
    The e-mails at pages 192 and page 196 should be noted.  There were also
    tweets from Facebook activity as set out in the bundle and  the  number
    of people who were engaging in retweeting.

24.  His  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  MDC  Alliance  partners  had  to  be
    considered against the medical evidence and how he would  be  perceived
    on return.  It was not relevant to risk on return.  The  CPIN  referred
    to risk on account of absence after a significant  period  and  it  was
    also noted at headnote 2 in CM.  The appellant would  not  be  able  to
    demonstrate loyalty, having been in the  United  Kingdom  for  nineteen
    years.  Also with regard to headnote 5 in CM and paragraph 2.4.4 of the
    CPIN, this referred to rural areas and the fact that he could not  show
    connections and would be at risk.  He would be returned to  Harare  and
    would have to travel  via  rural  areas  to  Bulawayo  and  there  were
    checkpoints throughout the country and it could be seen from  paragraph
    12.1.3 of the CPIN how people in those circumstances were  treated  and
    that he would be questioned about  his activities in the United Kingdom
    and his history in Zimbabwe would come out.

25.  He would be at risk in Harare.  He had a significant  MDC  profile  and
    so what was said in headnote 5 in SM was relevant.  The expert  in  her
    evidence said that there would be questions  at  the  airport  and  his
    mental health was relevant to how he would withstand  an  interrogation
    and he would be held for some time and this would put him at real risk.



26.  What was said in the country guidance about Bulawayo  could  not  stand
    in light of the more recent evidence but in any event he  would  be  at
    risk on return within Zimbabwe.  The CPIN  showed  incidents  involving
    MDC members in Bulawayo since the decision in CM.  The expert  referred
    to this at paragraphs 88 to 89 of her first report and paragraph 59  of
    her  second  report.   The  evidence   showed   a   quite   significant
    deterioration in the situation in Zimbabwe generally.  With  regard  to
    what Mr Tufan said about the political landscape being much the same as
    in 2013, Ms Solanki referred to paragraphs in the CPIN  from  7.1.4  to
    7.3.6.  There were numerous attacks  on  opposition  members  and  also
    evidence at pages 1,772 to 1,785 in the bundle.  This met the test  for
    departure from the country guidance.

27.  The persecution did not have to be systemic.  As regards  the  threats,
    the expert had looked at the e-mails and  concluded  it  was  plausible
    that they were genuine.  There  had  been  no  criticism  made  of  her
    qualifications at any stage.  The appellant was properly to  be  viewed
    as a journalist bearing in mind the points summarised at  paragraph  17
    of the skeleton.  There was a schedule to  the  evidence  which  showed
    where his articles were circulated and their reach.  There were  Google
    searches for his name.  As to how his activity would be detected by the
    Zimbabwean state, the expert addressed this in particular in her second
    report.  He would be at risk on  account  of  his  Twitter  and  online
    activity.  The CPIN at  paragraph  4.9.2  was  relevant  as  quoted  at
    paragraph 25 of Ms Solanki's skeleton argument.   The  claim  was  made
    out.

28.  As regards health grounds, there was clear  medical  evidence  that  he
    would deteriorate if removed.  He was receiving bereavement counselling
    and had been referred to  a  psychiatrist  and  was  receiving  ongoing
    support.  It had been concluded that he  needed  trauma  focus  therapy
    when his immigration status was resolved.

29.  In the expert's evidence it was suggested that the appellant would  not
    be able to receive the necessary  treatment.   The  CPIN  at  paragraph
    11.1.1 to 11.1.7 was relevant with regard to  the  available  treatment
    and medication.   As  the  expert  made  clear  at  paragraph  130  the
    situation was worse since the CPIN was produced, bearing  in  mind  the
    pandemic.  There was also reference to suicide risk  and  the  lack  of
    support.  He had a clear plan for suicide if he were  returned.   Asked
    whether there were effective means in place on return, the expert  said
    no as there would be no counselling  in  Zimbabwe  for  that.   He  had
    professional support and the support of his mother-in-law in the United
    Kingdom and also from friends  but  no  realistic  support  network  on
    return, having been away for so long.  The GP records showed a  low  to
    moderate risk, at pages 336 to 337.   He  had  a  history  of  torture.
    There was a psychiatrist and the Rule 35 reports.  The  judge  had  not
    had that evidence.

30.  With regard to Article 8, it was not useful to compare  cases,  as  had
    been said  in  HA  (Iraq)  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176.   There  were  very
    compelling circumstances given the depth of  his  integration  and  the
    quality of his relationships and his behaviour  after  the  deportation
    decision and the likely obstacles to integration.  There was no risk of
    reoffending.  There were significant obstacles to integration,  bearing
    in mind his political activities, the time away and his mental  health.
    There was no real challenge to the evidence of  his  relationship  with
    his mother-in-law.  That could not  be  replaced  by  modern  means  of
    communication.  He was integrated into the  United  Kingdom  and  there
    were his health issues and his support issues and he was  rehabilitated
    which was relevant, according to HA (Iraq),  and  also  there  was  the
    delay on the part of the Secretary of State between April 2009 and June
    2015 making a decision on his case.  This according  to  MT  (Colombia)
    was a relevant issue.  He faced a real risk of destitution in  Zimbabwe
    where there was food insecurity and he  had  a  subjective  fear  also.
    According to the test in Kamara he had no reasonable opportunity to  be
    accepted in Zimbabwe.  He was not enough of an insider.  The  test  was
    met.  Eleven years had passed since  the  deportation  order  had  been
    made.

31.  We reserved our decision.

Discussion

(1)  The International Protection Claim

32.  The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since August 2001,  having
    been granted leave to enter for two months as  part  of  a  traditional
    performance troop known in Zimbabwe.  He claimed asylum on  21  January
    2002 and having been refused a subsequent appeal was  dismissed  by  an
    Adjudicator in March of that year.

33.  On 16 August 2004 he was sentenced to  six  years  and  six  months  in
    prison for unlawful wounding and GBH.  A deportation order  was  signed
    on 28 May 2009.  He appealed but that appeal was struck out.   He  made
    an international protection claim in April 2009,  and  that  claim  was
    refused in a decision letter in June 2015.  He appealed  that  decision
    and his appeal was heard in March 2016 and dismissed by a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

34.  The judge did not accept that the appellant was a  member  of  the  MDC
    during his time in Zimbabwe.  He accepted there  was  evidence  of  sur
    place activities, but found that there was nothing  to  show  that  the
    regime monitored those who merely demonstrated in  London  against  it.
    The judge took into account the country guidance in CM and also applied
    the  Devaseelan  guidance  to  the  earlier  decision,  in  which   the
    Adjudicator did not find the appellant to be telling the  truth  mainly
    on the basis that he failed to claim asylum until after he was arrested
    in the United Kingdom.

35.  The appeal against the most recent decision was  set  aside,  as  noted
    above, in December 2019, with only limited  findings  being  preserved.
    Accordingly the Devaseelan guidance is relevant to  our  assessment  of
    the issues in this case, bearing in mind in particular the findings  of
    the judge in 2016.

36.   It  is  argued  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  there  have   been
    significant changes and there is a good deal of documentary evidence to
    support that contention.

37.  In the country guidance in CM the Tribunal found that a person  without
    ZANU-PF  connections  returning  from  the  United  Kingdom   after   a
    significant  absence  from  a  rural  area  in  Zimbabwe   other   than
    Matabeleland north or Matabeleland south may find it difficult to avoid
    ill-treatment from ZANU-PF authority figures and  those  they  control.
    However the Tribunal found that in general  those  returning  to  rural
    areas of Matabeleland north  or  Matabeleland  south  would  be  highly
    unlikely  to  face  significant  ill-treatment  from  ZANU-PF  and  its
    proxies, including the security forces, even if the returnee is an  MDC
    member or supporter.  A person from Matabeleland may however be able to
    show that his or her village or area is one that unusually is under the
    influence of a ZANU-PF chief.  Those returning to all other rural areas
    after a significant absence and without a ZANU-PF connection would face
    a real risk of persecution.

38.  With regard to urban areas, primarily Harare and Bulawayo,  in  CM  the
    Tribunal found that  a  returnee  to  Harare  will  face  socioeconomic
    difficulties living in high density areas not faced by persons  in  the
    other urban areas, and persons perceived to be active in  MDC  politics
    may face the risk of targeted reprisals.  A returnee to  Bulawayo  will
    in general not suffer the adverse attention of ZANU-PF,  including  the
    security forces even if he or she does have a significant MDC  profile.
    The appellant is from Bulawayo.

39.  The respondent's CPIN in February  2019,  to  which  we  have  referred
    above, accepts that the political landscape in Zimbabwe had  seen  some
    change since CM was promulgated in 2013, noting the removal  of  Robert
    Mugabe and the inauguration of Emmerson Mnangagwa in November 2017.  It
    is noted that in August 2017 a new opposition coalition,  the  Movement
    for Democratic Change Alliance  (MDC  Alliance)  formed  consisting  of
    seven  opposition  parties.   It  said  that  the  political  space  is
    controlled by the ruling ZANU-PF Party which uses  the  state  security
    apparatus to harass and intimidate those in opposition  to  it.   There
    has been a decline in levels  of  politically  motivated  violence  and
    human rights violations committed by the security  forces  and  ZANU-PF
    supporters  against  opposition  party  members   since   2008,   these
    fluctuate, with recent peaks being seen in the 2018 postelection period
    and in response to the current economic  situation.   It  is  necessary
    also to bear in mind the guidance in SG (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  that
    decision makers and  Tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take  country
    guidance determinations into account and follow them unless very strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced justifying  their  not
    doing so.  In general as is noted at paragraph 2.4.16 of  the  CPIN,  a
    person who is or is perceived to be a supporter  of  the  MDC-T  is  in
    general not likely to be at risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  in
    Bulawayo.

40.  As noted above, the appellant's claim to have been  politically  active
    in Zimbabwe was disbelieved, and his claim is based essentially on  sur
    place activities, and it was accepted in the judge's decision  in  2016
    that he was engaged in sur place activities.  According to the evidence
    provided on his behalf he is a member of the London branch  of  MDC  UK
    and  Ireland  and  participates  in  protests  against  the  Zimbabwean
    government and takes part in fundraising  events  in  the  MDC  UK  and
    Ireland province.  He is secretary which involves  taking  minutes  for
    meetings and also has an organisational role.  His evidence is that  he
    organised and participated in numerous demonstrations against  ZANU-PF,
    including organising a demonstration against  the  President,  in  July
    2018.  He is also a member of  the  Restoration  of  Human  Rights  for
    Zimbabweans, Zimbabweans  Human  Rights  Organisation  (ZHRO)  and  the
    Zimbabwe Association, and was a chairman  of  Zimbabwean  Human  Rights
    Organisation.

41.  There is also evidence that  he  campaigns  on  Twitter,  Facebook  and
    writes articles on the situation in Zimbabwe.

42.  Though there was no oral evidence on the appellant's behalf other  than
    his own, there is a good deal of documentary evidence.   There  is  for
    example a letter from the MDC London branch manager, Hasani Hasani  who
    confirms that he knows the appellant from monthly meetings and that  he
    is an activist who is passionate and advocates for the  recognition  of
    human rights and actively participates in and organises  demonstrations
    raising awareness of human  rights  abuses  by  ZANU-PF,  that  he  has
    organised demonstrations at Zimbabwe House and  sent  e-mails  inviting
    individuals (with examples of those e-mails) and that his commitment to
    the  democratic  struggle  is  unquestionable.   The  appellant  is   a
    committee member and deputy secretary and is active in both  positions.
    There are also letters from the MDC London branch, chairperson and  the
    secretary over a period between October 2018 and August 2020 confirming
    that the appellant participates in protests against the government  and
    fundraising for the MDC, stating that the appellant was  elected  as  a
    committee member in March 2019 and vice secretary subsequently.   There
    are letters from other MDC members making similar points, including the
    fact that the appellant has played a big part in fundraising,  plays  a
    big part in ZHRO and at the vigil he is named for manning the table and
    handing out fliers and getting people to sign  petitions.   MDC  London
    branch monthly meeting minutes confirm his name in  attendance  and  as
    vice secretary and a committee member and also the MDC UK website shows
    his name as a member and a Google search  also  shows  his  name  as  a
    member.  There is also  evidence  from  the  Zimbabwe  Vigil  Coalition
    confirming that he is a political activist and regular  attendee  since
    2011.  There is further evidence  in  support  from  ZHRO  showing  his
    attendance and attesting to his activities and also from ROHR.

43.  There is also evidence of the appellant's  activism  on  the  internet,
    including a number of  internet  articles  written  by  him  concerning
    oppression in the regime and criticising the President,  making  points
    about a number of problems in Zimbabwe, including the healthcare system
    and human rights  violations  and  extreme  poverty.   There  are  also
    internet  press  articles  in  which  the  appellant   is   named   and
    photographed as being involved in antiregime  activities  and  speaking
    out against the regime and also showing him at antiregime  protests  at
    the Zimbabwe Embassy and  showing  him  quoted  in  The  Zimbabwean  as
    criticising the President.  There are a number of his antiregime tweets
    on Twitter  provided  in  the  bundle  and  also  antiregime  posts  on
    Facebook. One example of the government  activity  shows  a  Zimbabwean
    government social media account asking for information on a  photograph
    of an anti-regime protest. The appellant was in  that  photograph  with
    others. The clear intention of that request was to find those who  were
    protesting against the regime and keep a record of their activities, if
    not prosecute them.

44.  In January 2019 he received  threatening  e-mails/tweets  from  unknown
    individuals.

45.  In June 2018 the Home Office arranged an interview  for  the  appellant
    with Zimbabwean officials.  He said that the officials had a file  with
    his photograph in it and asked him information about his background and
    he was told he was lying about his reason for being here and  spreading
    lies about the Zimbabwe government.  He was  very  concerned  that  the
    officials knew about his  asylum  claim  and  he  rang  the  Zimbabwean
    Embassy following this and they said they had not sent  the  officials.
    His MP asked the Home Office for details as to why the authorities  had
    visited him but they refused to disclose this and he  believed  he  had
    been placed at greater risk through this and that the  authorities  are
    aware of his activities.

46.  It is necessary for us to assess the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claim as to his sur place activities.  We do this bearing  in  mind  on
    the one hand the adverse credibility findings  made  by  the  judge  in
    other respects of his claim, in the hearing at 2016,  but  noting  also
    that the judge did accept that he was engaged in sur place  activities.
    We also bear in mind the fact that none of the  witnesses  attended  to
    provide oral evidence and  therefore  were  not  available  for  cross-
    examination by Mr Tufan.  That must weaken the force of their evidence.
     We also bear in mind that the appellant, given his problems of extreme
    depression and PTSD as it has been found in the  medical  evidence,  to
    which we shall return later, is properly to be regarded as a vulnerable
    witness and that is relevant to  such  matters  as  the  hesitation  he
    expressed in describing his role, in cross-examination, and also on the
    lack of clarity in his evidence about the various parties making up the
    MDC Alliance.

47.  Taking these matters together and bearing in  mind  in  particular  the
    cumulative effect of the evidence as to sur place activities, we accept
    that he has been engaged and is engaged  as  his  claim  as  an  active
    member of a number of organisations, with a formal role in  several  of
    them, in criticising the  Zimbabwean  regime  and  attending  meetings,
    organising demonstrations and being active on  the  internet  in  those
    criticisms.  He can properly be regarded as having  a  significant  MDC
    profile, and that is relevant to headnote 5 of CM.  As to how he  would
    be perceived, the main relevant provisions in  the  CPIN  to  which  Ms
    Solanki drew  our  attention  were  in  the  context  of  treatment  of
    journalists, and we agree with Mr Tufan that it  is  difficult  to  see
    that the appellant can properly be described as a  journalist.   He  is
    certainly a person who is active on the internet and  on  Twitter  with
    regard to the expression of his views about the regime, but  that  does
    not seem to us to amount to him being  a  journalist.   It  is  however
    relevant to note from the Freedom House Report from which there  is  an
    excerpt at paragraph 10.1.2 of the CPIN that online journalists and ICT
    users faced regular harassment, intimidation  and  violence  for  their
    ongoing activities in the past year,  and  it  seems  to  us  that  the
    appellant can properly be regarded as coming within this category.

48.  In addition there is a section in the second report of  the  expert  Dr
    Cameron which describes first  of  all  the  Cyber  Security  and  Data
    Protection Bill published in May 2020.  It is said that the  definition
    of crimes is described in such poor terms that the bill will allow  the
    government to arrest people because  they  have  said  something  on  a
    social media platform to criticise the government or say something that
    is unfair to government.  We note however that this appears still to be
    in bill form only.  However Dr Cameron goes on to observe that Zimbabwe
    has long maintained close relations with the Chinese  who  are  already
    helping the Zimbabwe government keep a  closer  eye  on  its  citizens,
    including partnership with a  Chinese  facial  recognition  company  to
    create a surveillance network similar to the one  deployed  to  monitor
    the Uighurs in Xinjiang.  It is said at paragraph 75 that it has been a
    recognised strategy of ZANU-PF for  many  years  to  send  intelligence
    agents to infiltrate expatriate communities within the UK.  She  is  of
    the opinion that the public profile of the appellant, established while
    residing in the UK, is at such  a  level  whereby  he  will  have  been
    identified by Zimbabwean intelligence agents as  a  person  engaged  in
    political descent from within the UK and that  his  activities  between
    April 2019 and July  2020  will  have  further  underscored  him  as  a
    defender of human rights in Zimbabwe, a supporter of  the  MDC  and  an
    outspoken criticism of the Zimbabwean government.

49.  It is also relevant to note the points  made  at  paragraph  25  of  Ms
    Solanki's skeleton, including  that  during  protests  WhatsApp  became
    inaccessible  suggesting  government  interference,  a  pastor   posted
    critical comments on social media and  this  led  to  his  arrest,  the
    Ministry for Cyber Security was established in 2017 and the  government
    said it needed to respond to threats against the state by  the  use  of
    social media, physical violence continued and people were  arrested  by
    security forces during protests.

50.  We have read the expert report with care.  It is suggested  there  that
    the country guidance is now out of date and that the evidence which  is
    set out in detail of  the  nature  and  activities  of  the  regime  in
    Zimbabwe is that political opposition  continues  to  be  subjected  to
    intimidation and harassment by the authorities with impunity.  She  was
    of the view that the appellant's profile ensured that he would  attract
    the negative attention of the authorities on  return  to  Zimbabwe  and
    would be at high risk of state persecution and harm on return.  She  is
    also of the view that  his  significant  online  and  public  political
    profile will have come to the attention of the Zimbabwean  intelligence
    authorities within the UK who will continue to monitor  his  activities
    and he will be identified by the CIO at the  airport  in  Harare  as  a
    failed asylum seeker, an overt critic of the government of Zimbabwe and
    a member of the MDC political opposition.

51.  These two reports of Dr Cameron's are detailed and fully sourced.   She
    cites a range of sources to support the evidence that she  provides  of
    the situation in Zimbabwe.  We find this a credible and helpful  report
    and we read it of course together with the CPIN which itself  paints  a
    rather gloomy view of the situation in Zimbabwe.

52.  It is not a case where we consider we need to contemplate going as  far
    as considering whether we have to apply the SG (Iraq) guidance and  not
    follow the country guidance in CM.  It is relevant to note that CM  had
    nothing to say about internet activity and risk on that account, and it
    is not departing from CM for us to take into account the evidence which
    we accept of the risk of surveillance by the authorities in respect  of
    the  appellant  and  the  likelihood  of  their  being  aware  of   his
    activities.   We  take  that  together  with  the  profile  he  has  of
    significant involvement in the  MDC  and  opposition  parties  and  the
    wealth of evidence to show what the  nature  and  the  extent  of  that
    opposition is, as giving rise to a sufficient degree of  likelihood  to
    put him at real risk of this coming to the authorities'  attention.   A
    simple Google search on his return would reveal a range  of  activities
    which would cause him to be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Zimbabwean
    state.  Accordingly we find that on the particular facts of  this  case
    and in accordance with the country guidance in CM and bearing  in  mind
    the evidence as set  out  in  the  CPIN  and  the  expert  report,  the
    appellant is a person who faces a real risk on return to  Zimbabwe  and
    as  accordingly  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   international
    protection succeeds.

Medical Issues

53.  The appellant has provided medico-legal  reports  from  Dr  Burman-Roy,
    the first dated January 2019 and the second dated July 2020.

54.  In the first report Dr Burman-Roy diagnoses PTSD and severe  depressive
    episode.  She considers that it  would  not  be  sensible  to  commence
    trauma focused therapy  while  the  appellant's  situation  and  future
    remain uncertain.  He needs trauma focused psychological treatment  and
    this would involve a combination of  antidepressant  medication  and  a
    high intensity psychological intervention.  Dr  Burman-Roy  is  of  the
    view that  the  appellant's  prior  detention  had  caused  significant
    detriment to his mental health and caused  his  symptoms  of  PTSD  and
    depression and his sense of hopelessness  is  ongoing  if  he  has  not
    reached a point of safety.  The appellant  reported  difficulties  with
    memory and concentration.  Dr Burman-Roy recommended that he be treated
    as a vulnerable witness, and that is a point that  as  noted  above  we
    have borne in mind.  If separated from his family  this  would  have  a
    detrimental effect on him.

55.  In the second report of Dr Burman-Roy the appellant  had  reported  two
    separate incidents during which he came close to suicide, the first was
    two weeks prior to the sad death of his wife and the  second  time  was
    after his wife died.  On a former occasion his wife opposed the idea of
    them both ending their lives together and on  the  second  occasion  he
    called his counsellor and with her help was able to stop  himself  from
    taking his life.  Testing and examination showed  that  his  depression
    was severe and he  continued  to  fulfil  the  ICD-10  criteria  for  a
    diagnosis of PTSD and severe depressive episode.  He would continue  to
    benefit from the treatment options as highlighted in the earlier report
    but due to his significant social stresses Dr Burman-Roy believed  that
    he might see limited benefit from those treatments at the moment.   His
    recent bereavement and increased alcohol use would also  make  it  more
    difficult for him to appreciate fully the benefits of treatment and the
    main priority at the time should be to help him  stop  regular  alcohol
    consumption and grieve appropriately the death of his wife.  Once those
    elements have been addressed it would  be  important  that  he  receive
    treatment for his underlying mental  health  conditions  and  hopefully
    with social stability and adequate treatment his  mental  health  might
    improve significantly.   Without  treatment  his  mental  health  would
    deteriorate and the importance of professional care and treatment would
    be more significant.  Dr Burman-Roy noted that bereavements can  result
    in substantial and long lasting  damage  and  the  appellant's  chronic
    instability and fears might have a long lasting impact on prognosis and
    ability to recover.  He  has  intermittent  suicidal  ideation  and  is
    receiving professional support and intends to end his life if  forcibly
    removed.

56.  The CPIN refers  to  a  critical  shortage  of  psychiatrists  and  the
    absence of government provision of psychological treatment  in  primary
    care in Zimbabwe, shortages of food and fuel and drugs and the lack  of
    personnel, serious health gaps in psychiatric care and  a  shortage  of
    psychotropic drugs and human resources.  Mirtazapine is unavailable and
    people with mental disabilities are  not  properly  diagnosed  and  not
    receiving adequate therapy.   There  are  few  certified  psychiatrists
    working in public and private clinics and teaching in the  country  and
    getting access to mental health service is reported by  NGOs  as  being
    slow and frustrating.  People with mental  disabilities  suffered  from
    extremely poor living conditions due in part  to  shortages  of  water,
    clothing, food and sanitation.

57.  It is argued on the appellant's behalf that bearing in mind  the  shift
    in the legal test as set out in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17  he  would
    not receive appropriate treatment and on the evidence there would be  a
    lack of access to treatment which would  result  in  a  risk  of  being
    exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  state  of
    health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction  in
    life expectancy.  In the alternative Ms Solanki draws our attention  to
    the tests set out in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  There among  other  things
    it is said that an Article 3  claim  can  in  principle  succeed  in  a
    suicide case and where the applicant's fear  of  ill-treatment  in  the
    receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be  based  is
    not objectively well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh  against  there
    being a real risk that removal will be in breach  of  Article  3.   The
    decision maker is required to  have  regard  to  whether  the  removing
    and/or the receiving state have effective mechanisms to reduce the risk
    of suicide and again if there are effective mechanisms that will  weigh
    heavily against a claim that removal will violate the Article 3  rights
    of the claimant.  Reference is also made to what was  said  in  Y  (Sri
    Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362, as to whether there  is  any  genuine  fear
    which  the  appellant  may  establish  albeit  without   an   objective
    foundation is such as to create a  risk  of  suicide  if  there  is  an
    enforced return.

58.  In our view this case is not one which meets the  AM  (Zimbabwe)  test.
    We accept that there would be difficulties for the appellant on  return
    to Zimbabwe in terms of the mental health problems that he has and  the
    relative lack of treatment and medication.  But the test remains a very
    high one, being that of having to show a real risk of being exposed  to
    a serious, rapid and  irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy.  It is relevant that though he thought of  suicide  on  two
    previous occasions, on neither occasion did he go ahead.  The existence
    of a suicide risk, as we accept there is, is not sufficient in our view
    for the tests set out in cases such as J and Y to  be  satisfied.   The
    claim to be unremovable on health grounds is not made out.

59.  The third issue is that of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

60.  Initially much weight was understandably attached to the argument  that
    the appellant had established an Article 8 claim on the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his wife.  Tragically that claim  can  no  longer  be
    maintained in light of her death earlier this year.  It is argued  that
    there are nevertheless very  compelling  reasons  for  the  deportation
    order to be revoked, bearing in mind as provided in section 117C(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that in the case of  a
    foreign criminal such as the appellant who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those  described  in  exceptions  1  and  2.   The  very
    exceptional circumstances argued in this case relate to such matters as
    the appellant's inability to integrate into Zimbabwe in line  with  the
    guidance in Kamara bearing in mind the amount of time he has been  away
    from Zimbabwe and the health problems that he  experiences.   Reference
    is also made to the caring role he has in the life of his wife's mother
    who has health problems, including having suffered a stroke in 2017 and
    suffering with low mood, osteoarthritis/pain and other conditions.   We
    accept the evidence that they see each  other  every  day  and  are  in
    regular telephone contact, that he helps her  with  shopping,  cleaning
    and other support.  We bear in mind also the point made by  Ms  Solanki
    concerning delay on behalf of the respondent between 2009 and 2014  and
    the absence of family or network in Zimbabwe for the appellant and  the
    risk of destitution.  Nevertheless again we do not  consider  that  the
    claim in this regard is made out.  The appellant  has  been  away  from
    Zimbabwe for a long time, he has a private life we accept in the United
    Kingdom and in particular with regard to the care he provides  for  Mrs
    Quartey, his wife's mother.  We accept that there would be difficulties
    in reintegration bearing in mind his health problems  and  his  lengthy
    absence from Zimbabwe, but he did spend a number of his  earlier  years
    there and cannot be said to be somebody who was not able  to  integrate
    into that country.  Accordingly the appeal is dismissed in this  regard
    also.

61.  We therefore allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention but  dismiss
    it in respect of the medical claim under Article 3 and  the  Article  8
    claim.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 23 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

