
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13964/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 May 2019                        |On 15 May 2019                       |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [J]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M McHardy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 September  1991.  He
      appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cohen
      sitting at Taylor  House  on  18  January  2019  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
      dated 5 December 2018. That  decision  was  to  refuse  to  grant  the
      Appellant asylum and humanitarian protection.


   2. The Appellant applied for a tier 4 student visa to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom on 18 June 2012. This was granted with an expiry  date  of  30
      November 2013. Further leave to remain was extended until 30 July 2015
      but the Appellant's leave to remain was curtailed after the licence of
      his sponsor college was revoked. Leave was reinstated on 18  September
      2014 but curtailed again with no right of appeal on 24 November  2014.
      After the  curtailment  the  Appellant  made  no  further  attempt  to
      regularise his immigration status and he was marked as an absconder by
      the Respondent on 9 March 2017 for failing to  comply  with  reporting
      restrictions. The Appellant claimed asylum on 7 June 2018.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's claim was based on his sexual  orientation.  He  first
      had thoughts about his sexuality when he was  approximately  16  years
      old having sexual feelings towards boys. He did not  have  any  sexual
      relations whilst in Pakistan. He accepted his sexuality at the age  of
      22 whilst he was in the United Kingdom when he met a boy in Manchester
      and developed a relationship with that person which lasted  until  May
      2013. The Appellant did not participate in any LGBT activities or join
      any support groups or attend LGBT pride events. The Appellant went  on
      the Grindr website at the beginning of 2018 when he  moved  to  London
      and had the app on his mobile phone. He spoke to people  on  this  app
      for one-night stands. In May 2018 he informed his family that  he  was
      bisexual after they had asked him to return to  Pakistan.  His  family
      reacted very badly and were aggressive towards him,  he  was  verbally
      abused, and they said they would not accept him  back.  The  Appellant
      feared his brothers, general society and the government upon return to
      Pakistan as he  was  bisexual.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  the
      Appellant's credibility.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   At [44] the Judge found that if the Appellant had come from a  country,
    Pakistan, where he was unable to freely live any kind of open  bisexual
    life to the United Kingdom which was a free and open society, he  would
    take that opportunity to  investigate  the  possibilities  of  claiming
    political asylum shortly after arrival. Failure to do so for almost six
    years damaged the Appellant's credibility. The Appellant had failed  to
    produce any witnesses in support of his claim with whom he  had  had  a
    relationship. That the  Appellant  had  been  unable  to  produce  such
    witnesses  despite  claiming  to  be  sexually  active  undermined  the
    Appellant's credibility. The supporting witnesses he  had  called  gave
    poor evidence which contained  discrepancies  when  compared  with  the
    Appellant's evidence. The Appellant had said he was in  a  relationship
    with a man called [I] in 2012/2013 but one of the Appellant's witnesses
    Mr [Q] indicated that he had  met  [I]  in  2018  but  then  sought  to
    backtrack  from  this  evidence.  The  Appellant's   account   of   the
    realisation of his sexuality was vague and lacking in cohesive detail.

5.   There was no supporting  evidence  of  the  alleged  threats  from  the
    Appellant's family. The Appellant was aware his family would disapprove
    of his sexuality yet chose to  tell  them  anyway.  The  Appellant  had
    claimed to be in contact with someone on the Grindr website 2 or 3 days
    before the appeal  and  yet  the  Appellant's  phone  demonstrated  the
    Appellant not been in contact with anyone since December. There were no
    screenshots of conversations from the beginning of the  year  2019.  He
    was unable to show any conversations which led to a sexual hook  up  or
    meeting when asked to provide this. The Appellant had given  discrepant
    evidence about whether he did or  did  not  go  to  gay  nightclubs  in
    Manchester.

6.   The Appellant was working in the United Kingdom and had  sought  asylum
    for  reasons  of  economic  benefit  rather  than  a  genuine  fear  of
    persecution. The Appellant had been encountered by the  police  working
    illegally as a pizza delivery driver.  The Appellant's  depression  had
    arisen due to the uncertainty about his immigration status rather  than
    any reason connected with the core  of  his  asylum  claim.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  his   findings.   [69]   of   the
    determination stated that the Judge was satisfied the Appellant  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a convention reason  and  yet  had
    gone on to dismiss the appeal. Throughout that paragraph the Judge  had
    maintained the Appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution.

8.   At [42] the Judge had applied the wrong standard of proof stating  that
    the Appellant had to show  that  there  were  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the Appellant met the requirements of the  qualification
    regulations. Rather the test was to the lower standard.

9.   The Judge had started his credibility findings at [44] by referring  to
    the delay in claiming asylum but that should not have been the starting
    point of the assessment process. The  delay  in  claiming  was  due  to
    having valid leave and later a fear of being detained. The Respondent's
    own guidance said this could amount to a reasonable explanation.

10.  The Appellant had clarified his position about the witness  statements.
    His most recent partner had failed to provide the  Appellant  with  any
    support as they  were  no  longer  on  good  terms.  [I]  had  his  own
    immigration matter pending and did not  wish  to  co-operate  with  the
    Appellant.  The  discrepancies  pointed  to  by  the  Judge  were   not
    materially significant. One of the witnesses Mr [N] confirmed  that  he
    was aware of the Appellant's sexuality  and  had  seen  him  intimately
    involved with other men. The witness Mr [Q] had  not  stated  that  the
    Appellant was in a relationship with [I] in 2018 when he, the  witness,
    came to London. The Appellant had confirmed he was still in touch  with
    [I] as they were still friends.
11.  The Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  working  when  he  was
    encountered  in  November  2018  was   insufficiently   reasoned.   The
    Appellant's  representatives  had  asked  the   Respondent   for   full
    disclosure  of  this  allegation  which  had  not  been  provided.   It
    transpired that the Appellant had  been  stopped  by  the  Metropolitan
    police but there was no  evidence  of  any  action  taken  against  the
    alleged employer  and  the  Appellant  was  left  free  to  go  without
    repercussions. That suggested the Appellant was not engaged in unlawful
    employment.

12.  That the Appellant had been unable to name  any  nightclubs  in  London
    applied too high  a  threshold.  The  Respondent's  own  asylum  policy
    instructions indicated that ignorance of commonly known meeting  places
    and activities for LGBT groups was not necessarily  indicative  of  the
    claimant's  lack  of  credibility.  The  Appellant  had   provided   an
    explanation why  he  had  not  taken  part  in  LGBT  activities.  This
    explanation had been overlooked by the  Judge.  A  heterosexual  person
    would not be required to provide evidence in the form of attendance  at
    particular places and events and requiring this level of evidence  from
    a bisexual person was unreasonable and  discriminatory.  The  Appellant
    claimed asylum after he was aware of the threats to his life due to his
    disclosure to his family.  He  would  not  have  qualified  for  asylum
    earlier as the Respondent's policy stated that  being  a  member  of  a
    particular social group as an LGBT person was insufficient by itself to
    be recognised as a refugee.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson on 4 April  2019.  He  found
    some  arguable  merit  in  the  grounds   despite   the   well-reasoned
    credibility findings because the Judge had allowed the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant which was inconsistent with his findings and the decision  at
    [70] and at the end of the determination on page 15. It was likely that
    although permission was granted at this stage the Upper Tribunal  might
    find that error did not amount to a material error of law  because  the
    rest of the decision made it clear that the Judge's  intention  was  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds and the Judge had simply failed to
    amend his standard template.

14.  There was little arguable merit in the rest of the grounds because  the
    standard of proof used by the Judge was that set out  by  Lord  Justice
    Templeton in the leading case of Sivakuraman. An Appellant had to  show
    a real and substantial danger upon return. It was open to the Judge  to
    find the significant delay in claiming was damaging to the  Appellant's
    credibility. The Judge had not started his  credibility  findings  with
    this point, he had not made any section 8 findings until  [65]  of  the
    determination.

15.  It was open to the  Judge  to  take  into  account  that  none  of  the
    Appellant's  partners  were  present  to  give  evidence  despite   the
    Appellant's evidence  that  he  was  still  in  touch  with  them.  The
    submission  about  the  discrepancy  between  the  witnesses  and   the
    Appellant was no more than a disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings
    which were open to him on the evidence and were not unreasonable.  This
    was  also  true  of  the  Judge's   findings   in   relation   to   the
    nonparticipation by the Appellant in  LGBT  activities.  There  was  no
    evidence beyond the Appellant's  own  assertion  that  his  family  had
    threatened him.

The Hearing Before Me

16. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was a material error of  law
    such that the determination fell  to  be  set  aside,  and  the  appeal
    reheard. If there was not, then the decision at  first  instance  would
    stand.


17. For the Appellant  counsel  argued  that  the  Judge  had  contradicted
    himself in the course  of  the  determination.  He  did  not  find  the
    Appellant credible and yet found that the Appellant had a  well-founded
    fear of persecution and that the Appellant's removal would  breach  the
    provisions of the qualification directive. The Respondent  might  argue
    that what had happened at [69] was a typing error but that would be  to
    make an assumption and it would be equally valid to argue that  it  was
    not a typing error. The Judge found that the threshold had been met and
    yet  had  dismissed  the  appeal.  As  a  result  it  was  not  a  safe
    determination. This was a material error of law and the correct  course
    of action would be to remit the appeal back to  the  First-tier  to  be
    reheard. The Judge's error went to the very heart of the case.

18. In terms of the other grounds, the Appellant would argue  there  was  a
    general lack of scrutiny. It was  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  was
    bisexual whereas the Judge referred to him as a homosexual. If that was
    just once it might be acceptable, but it was repeated in [66] to  [68].
    At [49] the Judge characterised the Appellant's evidence as  vague  and
    lacking in detail but did not say against what standard that conclusion
    was measured. The  nature  of  sexuality  was  that  there  was  not  a
    lightbulb moment  when  one  realised  one's  sexuality,  it  was  more
    complicated than that. That the Appellant had said he  was  happy  with
    his sexual identity did not mean that he could then tell his family  as
    he knew what his parents view would be of his bisexuality.

19. At [50] the Judge had criticised the Appellant for  failing  to  submit
    evidence from his family of the threats but that  was  asking  for  the
    impossible. At [57] it was the Appellant's explanation that he and [BA]
    had met on the Grindr app,  that  was  the  explanation  given  by  the
    Appellant at the time. At [59] the Judge stated  that  the  photographs
    produced were not of an intimate nature  but  had  not  explained  what
    intimate nature meant. There was no requirement on the Appellant to put
    in intimate evidence and the Judge had set the bar too high. Similarly,
    at [62] where the Judge criticised the Appellant for  failing  to  join
    any LGBT groups, there was no requirement on an Appellant that they had
    to join such organisations and again the bar was set too high. When all
    the errors were taken into account it demonstrated a lack of scrutiny.

20.   There  was  one  further  point  concerning  the  reference  in   the
    determination to the Appellant being encountered  by  the  police.  All
    there was, was a hearsay email in support of the  allegation  that  the
    Appellant was working and yet the Judge had  placed  a  great  deal  of
    weight on that whereas little weight should have been  placed  thereon.
    The appropriate thing to do in the event of a  material  error  of  law
    being found was to remit the appeal to the First-tier.

21. In reply the Presenting Officer argued  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    preceding paragraphs to [69] and the following paragraphs after it that
    the Judge had rejected the homosexual element of the Appellant's claim.
    The Judge had  made  a  vast  array  of  permissible  findings  on  the
    Appellant's  core  claim.  The  other  complaints  made   against   the
    determination were no more than disagreements.  The  relevant  partners
    had not attended to give evidence, there had been a delay in  claiming,
    there was a discrepancy over the timing of when the Appellant  accepted
    his sexuality and no  reasonable  explanation  why  the  Appellant  had
    waited six years to inform his family. This was not a binary  decision.
    At [51] to [54] the Appellant had used the Grindr app  to  fabricate  a
    gay identity. The Judge was not elevating the standard  of  proof.  The
    adverse findings were strong, the appeal should be dismissed.

22. In conclusion counsel argued that it was not  an  answer  to  the  core
    claim to  say  the  Appellant  was  not  homosexual.  The  photographic
    evidence referred to at [59] described as showing  the  Appellant  with
    other men and groups of men in various locations including  restaurants
    had to be considered in the round.

Findings

23. The challenge in this case falls into two parts. The first is the error
    at [69] of the determination where the Judge states that  applying  the
    lower standard of proof he was satisfied: "that  the  Appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of being persecuted for a Convention reason if he had
    to return to Pakistan. Accordingly, I find that to return the Appellant
    to Pakistan would be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under
    the qualification regulations. Therefore, I find that the  decision  of
    the Respondent was not in accordance with the law and  the  immigration
    rules".

24. Had the determination stopped there, there might be more force  in  the
    Appellant's argument that it was not possible to see what  the  Judge's
    decision in this case was from the wording of that paragraph.  However,
    it is important to point out that the paragraph did not stop say at the
    point where the Judge said the decision of the Respondent  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because the Judge went on in the same  sentence
    to conclude that paragraph by saying: "I dismiss the asylum  aspect  of
    the appeal". There then followed in bold a subheading: "The Appellant's
    appeal (on asylum grounds) is dismissed."

25. The test of whether adequate reasons have been given in arriving  at  a
    decision is whether the losing party can reasonably understand why they
    have lost. The Judge had given extensive reasons why he  did  not  find
    the Appellant's account to be credible and why he  was  dismissing  the
    claim. The aberration at [69] indicated  an  element  of  muddle  which
    strongly suggested that the Judge had inserted wording from a  template
    which in the circumstances of this case was inappropriate. At  the  end
    of the determination under the heading "Decision" the Judge  had  again
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  as  well  as  humanitarian
    protection  and  human  rights  grounds.  The  extensive  reference  to
    discrepancies and implausibilities in the Appellant's account  and  the
    clear wording at [68] where the  Judge  rejected  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant was homosexual could have left a  fair-minded  reader  in  no
    doubt that this was an appeal which the Judge intended to dismiss.

26.  During  the  course  of  argument,  I  raised  with  the  parties  the
    jurisprudence which is to the effect that it is not possible to utilise
    the slip rule to amend the wording of a determination if the effect  is
    to  change  the  decision  in  the  case.  When   one   considers   the
    determination in this case the utilisation of the slip rule  would  not
    in fact have resulted in a change of the decision  since  the  decision
    was that the appeal should be dismissed and that  was  undoubtedly  the
    intention of the Judge when one looks at the determination as a  whole.
    The slip rule if used in this case would have been to  have  deleted  a
    paragraph that had crept into the determination  perhaps  from  another
    precedent or template.

27. By contrast it would not have been appropriate to set the determination
    aside under rule 35 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules since  the  overall
    intention of Judge Cohen was clear and Judge Robertson was correct  not
    to do that. The latter was of the view that the Judge had given  cogent
    reasons for the decision that the Appellant's claim should be dismissed
    but in all the circumstances it was appropriate that the Upper Tribunal
    should rule on the anomaly at [69]. I have some sympathy for that view,
    but one has to read the determination as a whole and it is  clear  from
    the tenor of the determination and those parts of the determination  in
    bold giving the actual decision that in this case the Judge intended to
    dismiss this appeal.

28. As for the remainder  of  the  grounds,  these  are  in  truth  a  mere
    disagreement with the decision. The argument as to  whether  the  Judge
    had used the correct standard of proof quite rightly  was  not  pursued
    before me. Nor, again rightly, was the argument made that the Judge had
    begun his credibility findings with the section 8 delay point. It was a
    matter for the Judge to assess the factors in the  case  including  the
    delay  in  claiming  and  the  absence  of  potential  witnesses.   The
    assessment of those witnesses who did give  evidence,  the  Appellant's
    lack of involvement with LGBT groups and the fact  that  the  Appellant
    put forward evidence in the form photographs which  did  not  take  the
    case any further at all as the Judge  pointed  out  at  [59]  were  all
    matters which the Judge could and did assess. The Appellant provided no
    evidence beyond his own assertion that his family had  threatened  him.
    At the very least the Appellant could have indicated  what  efforts  at
    contact with other family members  he  had  made  to  confirm  what  he
    claimed were threats against him.

29. The Appellant claimed to be using the Grindr  app  but  when  this  was
    scrutinised in the course of the  Appellant's  oral  testimony  it  was
    evident that the Appellant was unable to show any  conversations  which
    had led to a hook up or meeting or indeed anything  recent  to  support
    his claim of recent activity. It was open to the  Judge  to  find  that
    this further  damaged  the  Appellant's  credibility.  Judge  Robertson
    characterised Judge Cohen's findings as reasonable. I would go  further
    and say they were cogent and well argued.

30. The Appellant makes one further point which is that the finding that he
    was working illegally when encountered by the police on 7 November 2018
    was not a finding open to the Judge. It is accepted that  this  finding
    does not bear directly on the merits of the  Appellant's  asylum  claim
    but for the sake  of  completeness  I  will  deal  with  it  here.  The
    Appellant was encountered riding a moped marked in  the  colours  of  a
    delivery company (Basil Woodfired Pizzeria) and carrying a  pizza.  The
    Appellant's explanation was that he had  borrowed  the  moped  and  was
    collecting not delivering a pizza but he  was  unable  to  provide  any
    supporting evidence for example from the claimed owner of the moped. In
    those circumstances it was open to the Judge to find as he did at  [60]
    that the Appellant was  working  illegally  and  that  the  surrounding
    circumstances strongly indicated that. The Appellant's argument appears
    to be a mere denial of  the  allegation.  It  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected the Appellant to have provided something more to  support  his
    claim of innocence, but he did not do that.

31. This issue does  not  directly  impact  on  whether  the  Appellant  is
    entitled to apply for international protection on the grounds of sexual
    orientation, but it was the Appellant who wished to  raise  the  matter
    during the course of the hearing before me. To the extent that [69]  of
    the determination is an error, I do not find that it is a material  one
    for the reasons I have given (and Judge  Robertson  has  given)  and  I
    dismiss the appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15 May 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.

Signed this 15 May 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







