
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On September 26, 2018                        |On October 5, 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 KHUSHAL [K]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity direction is made.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  The  appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on February 5, 2010 on a Tier 4 (Gen) Student  Visa  and
    his leave was extended until September 29, 2015. Applications to extend
    his leave further were refused on a number of occasions and  challenges
    to the court against these decisions also failed. On April 4, 2017  the
    appellant applied to voluntarily leave the United  Kingdom  but  before
    removal he made  an  application  on  May  31,  2017  for  asylum.  The
    respondent  refused  his  application  on  November  29,   2017   under
    paragraphs 336 and 339M HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 14, 2017.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chana  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on January 22, 2018 and in a  decision  promulgated
    on February 7, 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision. Permission to appeal was  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Davies  on  March  6,  2018.  The
    appellant renewed his grounds of appeal on March  20,  2018  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey found it arguable, on August 6,  2018,  that  the
    Judge had failed to take proper account of the expert evidence not only
    as regards the appellant's account of the raid by officers of  the  ISI
    and Frontier Corps but also the appellant's claim to come from  one  of
    the leading families in the region. Permission to appeal was  given  on
    all other grounds.

 5. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

    SUBMISSIONS


 6. Mr Gayle adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge had
    failed to consider the expert report especially the fact that the
    expert stated that the appellant did come from a prominent family and
    there was also evidence in the form of a letter from the ANP, Pakistan,
    which also confirmed that the appellant's family were at the forefront
    of a struggle. The Judge failed to take proper account of that letter
    or an additional letter from ANP UK which again confirmed the
    appellant's family were a prominent family. The expert also provided an
    opinion as to why low-level members would be at risk and the Judge
    overlooked that evidence.


 7. Mr Tufan invited the Tribunal to reject the application. Even if the
    appellant's family was a prominent Pashtun family he submitted it
    lacked credibility the appellant's family home would have been targeted
    so long after he had left the country. There is a difference between an
    account being plausible and an account being credible and both the ANP
    letters and the letter from the appellant's father took the matter no
    further.

    FINDINGS

 8. The appellant's fear of persecution centred on a raid which  he  stated
    had taken place at his family home whilst he was in the United Kingdom.
    I accept that the Judge noted the basis of the appellant's claim but  I
    am satisfied that there were deficiencies  in  the  decision  and  that
    those deficiencies amounted to an error in law.

 9. In assessing the evidence, the Judge  referred  to  the  principles  of
    Tanveer Ahmed but I am satisfied the Judge did not demonstrate  he  had
    engaged with both the expert report and ANP letters  on  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant's family were prominent. The letters from the ANP
    described how the appellant's family were a prominent family and whilst
    these letters on their own could have been  rejected  they  had  to  be
    considered alongside the evidence of the  expert  witness.  The  expert
    report and ANP letters and to a lesser extent the father's  letter  all
    needed to be properly considered and I am satisfied that in looking  at
    the evidence the Judge failed to give adequate reasons in his rejection
    of this evidence and in places failed to  demonstrate  engagement  with
    those documents.

10. Findings were needed specifically on those matters which the  appellant
    argued he would be at risk if he was  returned.  The  expert  indicated
    that low level members were at risk and the Judge should therefore have
    engaged with that finding at the very least.

11. This was an appeal based on both credibility and risk on return  and  I
    accept the submissions advanced by Mr Gayle that there  is  a  material
    error in law.

12. I therefore set aside the Judge's decision. I have  considered  whether
    any of the findings can be retained but as this  is  a  case  based  on
    credibility and the assessment  was  flawed  I  am  satisfied  that  no
    findings can be preserved.

13. I have also considered whether this is a matter that should be retained
    in the Upper Tribunal or remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    rehearing. I am satisfied that as full evidence will be needed a  fresh
    hearing will be required and the best place for that will be the First-
    tier Tribunal.

    DECISION

14. There is an error in law I set aside the original decision and I  remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal under Section 12 (1) of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Signed                              Date     29/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
