
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13826/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Cardiff   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 August 2019                        |On 24 September 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                     PW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Shepard, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national  of  Botswana.   She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom for studies in 2011.  She was unable to pay her  second  year's
    fees and her visa was curtailed in 2013.   She  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her private life.  That was  refused.   She  did
    not leave.  In 2014 she claimed asylum.  That application was  refused,
    and the claim was certified, so carried no right of appeal.  She made a
    subsequent further claim which was refused on 28 November 2016, with  a
    right of appeal.  The appeal has been heard by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on two occasions and  comes  for  the  second  time  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal now.


 2. The basis of the appellant's claim is and always has been that  she  is
    fearful of her brother who she says is a drug dealer, from whom she has
    received abuse in the past and whom she now fears; she also claims that
    she is unable to obtain protection  from  the  authorities  if  she  is
    returned to Botswana.


 3. The present appeal is against the decision of  Judge  Seelhoff  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, following a hearing on 16  November  2018.   Judge
    Seelhoff considered a considerable amount of evidence  dating  back  to
    the appellant's first claim.   His  overall  conclusion  was  that  the
    appellant's account of her own history before she came  to  the  United
    Kingdom was not worthy of credit.  The reasons for that conclusion  are
    given in the judge's extensive examination of the appellant's evidence,
    running from [54] to [85] of his judgment, and it is I  think  fair  to
    say that taking those on their own merits alone, no complaint  is  made
    on  the  appellant's  behalf  about  them.   Rightly  so:  they  are  a
    painstaking account of the way in which the appellant's story has  been
    amplified at various stages in order to meet perceived defects  in  it,
    and the conclusion, amply open to the judge on the basis he  gives,  is
    that the truth of the matter is that the appellant's current account is
    not to be believed.


 4. The grounds of appeal relate principally to  procedural  matters.   The
    circumstances upon which they are based is as follows.   So far as  the
    present appeal is concerned the matter was remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal following a hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  in  January  2018.
    There was an adjournment request to obtain  further  country  material.
    That report was in fact served very late, not until 12 November  2018.
    The hearing was listed on 16 November.  On 15 November the  appellant's
    solicitors Duncan Lewis &  Co  wrote  to  the  respondent  and  to  the
    tribunal giving notice, as they put it, that they were going to seek an
    adjournment for live evidence from two relatives of  the  appellant  in
    Botswana.  Witness statements from both of the proposed witnesses  were
    attached to that letter.  It was said that it had not been possible  to
    deal with the matter more promptly.  The judge was therefore  asked  at
    the hearing to grant an  adjournment  to  enable  the  witnesses  whose
    witness statements had been adduced to give  live  evidence  by  video-
    link.


 5. The application was resisted by the respondent.  The  judge  considered
    the material before him.  At [37] and following there is this:


         "37. I refused the adjournment request noting that the tribunal  is
             obliged to ensure that both parties have a  fair  hearing.   I
             noted that the need for  these  two  witnesses  to  be  called
             coming to light so late in the day appeared  to  be  something
             which  was  the  responsibility  of  the  Appellant  and   her
             representatives.   I  noted  that  there   was   no   adequate
             explanation for the delay  in  either  the  Appellant  or  her
             representatives in informing the tribunal of the need for  the
             witness evidence.  I noted in particular that the  matter  had
             been adjourned on multiple occasions before and  that  on  the
             last occasion the Appellant and her representatives  had  been
             provided nearly 10 months to prepare for the  appeal  and  had
             still served the expert report significantly later  than  they
             had been directed to do.


         38.  I bore in mind the duty to ensure that  the  Appellant  had  a
             fair hearing, but reminded myself that the Respondent is  also
             entitled to fair treatment.  The position in respect of  legal
             aid  is  different  now  as  the  Appellant  has   long   been
             represented by the same firm of solicitors who have had  legal
             aid funding available throughout  and  have  had  considerable
             time to prepare for the hearing before me."


 6. The judge therefore refused the adjournment; but the witness statements
    were before him and despite what is said in the grounds  of  appeal  to
    this tribunal, to which I shall refer shortly, it appears clear that he
    took them into account, as indeed he was  probably  bound  to  do.   He
    refers to the contents  of  the  witness  statements  in  [57]  of  his
    decision.  There is however  a  further  matter  that  relates  to  the
    application for an adjournment which appears in [55] of his decision:


         "55. I wish to start by commenting further on the issues in respect
             of  the  adjournment.   It  was  apparent  after  hearing  the
             Appellant give evidence that there were discrepancies  between
             what she told me and what  her  representatives  had  told  me
             about when it had become apparent that  her  cousin  could  be
             called to give evidence.  The Appellant told me that she  knew
             her cousin could give evidence about  her  brother's  position
             two weeks before the hearing.  The Appellant's explanation for
             this not being detailed in her most recent statement  dated  9
             November 2018 is that she and her solicitors had  agreed  that
             it would be in statements  obtained  from  the  cousin.   This
             would  indicate  that  the  solicitors  were  aware   of   the
             possibility of getting evidence from the  cousin  at  least  a
             week before they  notified  the  tribunal.   Counsel  who  was
             accompanied at court by a  representative  of  the  solicitors
             told me that this had come to light just two days earlier.


         56.  The key issue in respect  of  adjourning  hearings  is  always
             fairness, and ensuring that the parties have  a  fair  hearing
             and a fair  opportunity  to  make  their  case.   This  is  an
             Appellant who has had an extraordinary amount of time  to  get
             all of the  evidence  together  for  her  case.   This  is  an
             Appellant who clearly has been in  regular  contact  with  her
             solicitors over the 10 months since the last adjournment.  The
             Appellant has clearly had time with her solicitors to  produce
             a statement which is three pages longer than that provided  to
             the tribunal on the last occasion.   The  Appellant  was  also
             clearly in a position for statements to  be  drafted  for  her
             witnesses in a format consistent with that expected by the  UK
             immigration tribunal by 14 November.  I am satisfied that  the
             Appellant and her representatives had every opportunity to get
             this evidence together sooner and get it to the  tribunal  and
             indeed to the Respondent faster."


 7. That comment on what amounts to the frankness of Duncan Lewis &  Co  is
    not the subject of any further evidence or comment before me  today  as
    Mr Shepard, who is instructed by them, has indicated.  I can of  course
    say no more about it, but it remains on the record.  As  I  have  said,
    the judge concluded that the appellant's account of her own history was
    not to be  believed,  and  part  of  the  procedural  history  of  that
    conclusion is the refusal to adjourn to allow the two cousins  to  give
    oral evidence.


 8. The grounds of appeal on the basis on which permission was granted  are
    as follows.


         "Ground 1 - Procedural unfairness


         It is arguable that the FtT acted unfairly  by  refusing  to  admit
         into evidence, as  part  of  its  global  assessment,  two  written
         statements  from  A's  cousins  who  were  (and  are)  resident  in
         Botswana.  Both  said  in  their  respective  statements  that  A's
         brother "was currently in Botswana and that he is currently one  of
         the major drug dealers in Botswana who  had  significant  influence
         with the public and was looking for the Appellant" [33]


    There is  further  elaboration  of  that  ground  but  that  gives  the
    substance of it.


         "Ground 2 - No reasons


         10.  In refusing to admit the evidence, the  FtT  provided  no,  or
             legally inadequate reasons.


         Ground 3 - Procedural unfairness


         10.  Further or in the alternative  to  grounds  1  and  2,  it  is
             arguable that the FtT acted unfairly at [35]  by  refusing  to
             adjourn and/or transfer the appeal to a  hearing  centre  with
             available  video  facilities  to  allow  the  authors  of  the
             statements,  who  are  resident  in  Botswana  to  give   live
             evidence."


 9. Ground 4 asserts that the  judge  ought  to  have  taken  into  account
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules and ground 5 is  that  the  FtT
    was obliged to explain why the Botswana  police  would  be  willing  to
    provide protection to the appellant.  Mr Shepard has  indicated  during
    the course of the hearing that he does not pursue grounds 4 and 5.


10. The problem with  grounds  1  and  2  is  that  they  are  based  on  a
    misapprehension.   The  judge  did  not  give  the  appellant  and  her
    solicitors everything they wanted, which  was  a  further  adjournment.
    What he did do was to receive  into  evidence  the  written  statements
    which were provided by the solicitors shortly before the hearing.  That
    is apparent from [57] of his  decision.   Grounds  1  and  2  are  with
    respect unrelated to the facts  of  the  case.   They  assert  that  he
    excluded the evidence the evidence.  He did not; he included  it.   The
    only ground therefore which can have any impact on the outcome of  this
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is ground 3.  That  is  to  say  that  the
    judge acted unfairly in refusing to adjourn to allow the authors of the
    witness statements to give oral evidence by video-link.


11. In order to assess the impact of his decision  to  that  effect  it  is
    necessary to look at two things.  The first is the history of the case.
     It is absolutely clear that the judge took the  history  of  the  case
    into full account.  Indeed in doing so he  discovered  matters  I  have
    indicated, which went rather further than had been  put  by  those  who
    promoted the evidence.  Secondly, there is the  issue  of  whether  the
    evidence, that is say the further oral evidence which might  have  been
    given, presumably in line with  the  witness  statements,  if  admitted
    would have had any impact upon the case.


12. In assessing the written evidence before him the judge noted  that  one
    of the witness statements was from a cousin of the  appellant  who  had
    been removed from the United Kingdom having overstayed; and  the  judge
    reached a rather summary conclusion that he would have been unlikely to
    have regarded a person who had been removed by the  United  Kingdom  as
    credible.  It is, I think, impossible for the Upper Tribunal to endorse
    that view, but that is not the  point.   What  the  judge  did  was  to
    indicate at [57]  that  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  personal
    credibility about her own experiences in the period before she came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2011 was something which was  separate  from  the
    assistance which the cousins' evidence might give her. That is  because
    as the  judge  concluded,  the  evidence  deriving  from  the  cousins'
    evidence about circumstances in Botswana today would be relevant to the
    appellant's case only on the hypothesis that the appellant's  story  of
    what had happened to her before 2001 was  the  truth.   I  specifically
    asked Mr Shepard during the course of the hearing whether he  was  able
    to identify anything in the written evidence of the cousins  which  had
    an  impact  on  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  story  of   her
    experiences before 2011 and he frankly conceded that there was nothing.
     It follows that the judge was entitled  to  take  the  view  that  the
    assessment of the appellant's own credibility about her own history was
    a matter unaffected by anything that the cousins say in  their  witness
    statements or, by extension, would have said in any oral evidence.


13. In those circumstances the judge's approach to the evidence before  him
    appears to me to be unassailable.  The long examination to which I have
    already referred demonstrated that the appellant's account of  her  own
    history is not to be believed, and in those circumstances the level  of
    protection that might be available to her if her story  was  the  truth
    simply does not arise for determination.  On the one ground  of  appeal
    which is both applicable to the facts of the case and is pressed on the
    appellant's behalf therefore, it seems to me that the appeal fails, and
    I need say no more about the others.


14. I therefore dismiss this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  order  that
    the decision of Judge Seelhoff stands.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 19 September 2019


