
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13525/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 17th June 2019                   |On: 20th June 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  LS (Iraq)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  in  1963.  He  appeals  with
    permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Jessica
    Pacey) to dismiss his protection appeal.


    Anonymity


 2. This is a protection claim.  Having  had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Background


 3. The outline summary of the Appellant's claim is as  follows.  He  is  a
    research scientist from Najaf.  Between 1986 and 2003 he  worked  as  a
    bacterial analyst for the Iraqi Army.  He  was  based  in  Al  Diwaniya
    Hospital.   This position necessarily required him to be  a  member  of
    the Ba'ath party.  He was an officer.  After the fall of Saddam he lost
    his position. He got a job with a tour company selling tickets. He  and
    his  family  intended  to  remain  in  Najaf.  Najaf   is   however   a
    predominantly Shi'a city and people there  were  very  hostile  towards
    anyone who had been complicit in Saddam's regime.  In August  2004  the
    Appellant and his brother were at the Al Mahdi mosque when Moqtada  al-
    Sadr's forces arrived to occupy it. Some of these  fighters  threatened
    them and said that they were Ba'athists. They managed to get away but a
    lot  of  people  were   subsequently   killed   there.    This   public
    identification made the Appellant fearful and he decided to leave Iraq.
    He subsequently spent much of  the  following  years  studying  abroad,
    first in Jordan and then India. Although he did periodically return  to
    Iraq in order to renew visas etc he never stayed  for  very  long.  The
    reason that he claimed asylum in 2015 is because  elements  within  the
    government aligned with the al-Sadr brigade have issued a  warrant  for
    his arrest. The reason that he has claimed asylum in the United Kingdom
    is because his wife is currently undertaking a PhD here.  The  couple's
    three children are dependents to their father's claim.


 4. The Respondent refused to grant protection. The claim was  rejected  on
    credibility grounds but even if it were true, the  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant would face  a  real  risk  of  persecution
    today. That is because he was simply an 'ordinary member' of the Ba'ath
    party, and because the government today are making  efforts  to  remove
    the stigma of association with the former regime.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal did not find the  claim  to  be  credible,  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant filed grounds of appeal which he had drafted himself.  In
    granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan rightly observed  that
    the grounds largely amounted to a disagreement with the findings of the
    Tribunal. She was however prepared to grant permission on the  Robinson
    obvious point that it may have been an error of law for the Tribunal to
    dismiss the significance of the  documentary  evidence  -  some  of  it
    purporting to emanate from the Iraqi government - on  the  sole  ground
    that one arrest warrant was not produced in the original.

 7. The Appellant is now represented by TRP Solicitors, who have instructed
    Ms Wilkins of Counsel. With her  customary  diligence  Ms  Wilkins  has
    prepared a detailed skeleton to  supplement  the  grounds  and  address
    Judge Canavan's Robinson  obvious  point.  Therein  she  makes  various
    submissions about the individual credibility findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal but maintains that regardless of the merits thereof,  the
    determination must be set aside for two clear errors: a failure to make
    findings on the extensive documentary evidence, and a failure to assess
    the  overall  plausibility  of  the  claim  in  light  of  the  country
    background material.

    Ground 1: The Corroborative Evidence

 8. I take this summary of the documentary evidence  that  was  before  the
    Respondent at the date of decision, and before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on appeal, from Ms Wilkins' skeleton argument:

          a. a letter and an email from his lawyer in  Iraq,  from  January
             2018, enclosing information (pp. 21 - 24)


          b.  applications  made  by  his  lawyer  in  Iraq  to  the  Najaf
             Investigation Court requesting (the right to review) documents
             and information, from December 2017 (pp. 26 - 27, 38 - 39,  42
             - 43)


          c. warrants for his arrest dated 25 October 2017 (pp.  28  -  29)
             and 11 and 12 August 2015 (pp. 44 - 47)


          d. police and court documents, including a police report filed by
             a complainant alleging that the Appellant had defamed  Muqtada
             al-Sadr and other figures in the Al Sadr party and a record of
             the complainant's statement being  filed  with  the  court  in
             Najaf following which the judge decided, on 10 August 2015, to
             issue an arrest warrant (pp. 40 - 43)


          e. the 2 September 2015 threat letter (pp. 48 - 49)


          f. a letter from Badr Organization enclosing kill list  of  Baath
             Party members and Saddam-era military officers, on  which  the
             Appellant is no 14 (pp. 52 - 55)


          g. photos of demonstrations the Appellant had attended (pp. 69  -
             84) and online posts/ comments he had written (pp. 58 - 66)


          h. a letter,  dated  2  July  2014,  from  the  Supreme  National
             Commission for Accountability and Justice to the  Ministry  of
             Higher Education and  Scientific  Research,  saying  that  the
             Appellant is included in the procedures of the  Accountability
             and Justice Law No 10 of 2008 (pp. 50 - 51)


          i. documentary evidence corroborating his military  service  (pp.
             30 - 37, 56 - 57), with an email from his  brother,  dated  13
             January 2018, enclosing some of it (p. 25)


          j. documentary evidence corroborating his studies in  India  (pp.
             67 - 68)

 9. Apart from a reference to an arrest warrant, the determination contains
    no findings on any of this evidence. Before me Ms Wilkins  argued  that
    these documents were important not just individually, but collectively.
    They offered support for the Appellant's account  is  several  material
    respects. It was therefore a fundamental error for the Tribunal not  to
    have addressed them.


10. Mr Bates drew my attention to paragraph 43 of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision: "I do not accept as credible the Appellant's explanation that
    he had not provided the original arrest  warrant  because  he  had  not
    thought it necessary or required".  He submitted that the Tribunal  was
    entitled to place less weight on a copied document than it might on  an
    original,  particularly  where  the  original  was  available,  as   it
    apparently could have  been  here,  had  the  Appellant  contacted  his
    brother and asked for it to be sent.

11. I accept that as a matter of principle, a copied document is likely  to
    carry less weight than an original that has been properly verified.  As
    such the reasoning at paragraph  43  was  open  to  the  Tribunal.   It
    remains the case that there were a good number of other documents,  all
    translated and in the bundle, that were highly relevant to the disposal
    of this appeal.   I am unable to 'read in' to paragraph 43 the holistic
    assessment that these documents required; I can find no other  analysis
    of any documentary evidence in the determination.  It was an  error  of
    law to fail to address this material evidence.


    Ground (ii): Country Background Material

12. I fully accept Mr Bates' point that the First-tier  Tribunal  obviously
    does have regard to some of the country background material. Particular
    attention is given, for instance, to the objective  material  cited  by
    the Respondent in respect of the occupation  of  the  Najaf  mosque  in
    2004.


13. Ms Wilkins' complaint here is twofold. First, there is no evaluation of
    whether, in the context of what has been happening  in  Iraq  over  the
    past two decades, this claim is plausible. I accept that this criticism
    has been  made  out.    The  country  background  material  could  have
    informed the Tribunal about the plausibility of a scientist  being  co-
    opted into the Iraqi army and consequently the  Ba'ath  party,  on  the
    post-Saddam balance of power in the various competing  Shi'a  factions,
    and ultimately informed its risk assessment. Further it  is  not  clear
    from the determination whether the Tribunal actually saw  or  read  the
    evidence cited in the  refusal  letter:  at  least  one  of  the  'url'
    references given in the letter leads nowhere.  It is at least  arguable
    that  the  Tribunal  has  simply  adopted  the  Secretary  of   State's
    interpretation of the information cited without actually evaluating  it
    for itself.

    Decisions


14. For the reasons set out above I find the grounds to be made  out.   The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.




15. I am unable to  preserve  any  finding  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, since the failure to weigh all of the  relevant  evidence  in
    the round taints the credibility findings that there are. I  would  add
    that on material issues - for instance whether the Appellant was in the
    army at all - the  determination  contains  no  findings  at  all.  The
    parties were therefore in agreement that the decision should be  remade
    de novo. I am satisfied that in the particular  circumstances  of  this
    case, where fundamentally material evidence has been omitted  from  the
    assessment and where extensive findings of fact are required, it  would
    be appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.


16. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          Dated 17th June
                                    2019
