
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13333/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th January 2019                       |On 24th January 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m s k
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Patel, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. In a decision promulgated on the 24th April 2018, I  held  that  whilst
    her primary findings of fact were  unimpeachable,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mensah had erred in law by allowing the appeal against refusal of
    the appellant's Protection Claim without adequately explaining why  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Pakistan if he were to relocate
    with his wife and children to an area away from  Lahore,  where  family
    members of his wife continue to reside and wish to seek revenge for the
     shame and dishonour they perceive his marriage has brought upon  them.
    Having made that decision, I concluded that it was  necessary  to  hear
    further  argument  and  (if  the  parties  wished)   further   evidence
    concerning the issue of the feasibility of relocation. The delay in re-
    making the First-tier Tribunal's decision is due in  large  measure  to
    the fact that a hearing listed on the 25th September  2018  had  to  be
    abandoned due to lack of an Urdu interpreter.

 2. As before, I shall refer to the parties in accordance with their status
    in the First-tier Tribunal, that is to say, to MSK as  "the  appellant"
    and to the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 3. I hereby extend the anonymity direction that was made in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Primary Facts

 4. The relevant facts are now accepted to be as follows.

 5. The appellant first entered the  UK  on  the  29th  November  2009.  He
    returned to Pakistan between May and June 2010  where  he  married  his
    wife in secret before  returning  to  the  United  Kingdom  alone.  The
    marriage had been against the wishes of his  wife's  family.  His  wife
    therefore ran away from home and  the  appellant  brought  her  to  the
    United Kingdom in  November  2010.  Her  father  immediately  told  the
    Pakistani police that  she  had  been  kidnapped  and  put  up  posters
    offering a substantial reward for information leading  to  her  return.
    The appellant's wife returned to Pakistan on the 17th May 2012 to visit
    her ailing mother. However, upon doing so, she was locked  up,  beaten,
    and raped. She nevertheless managed to escape and return to the UK. The
    appellant's wife has a cousin (Kashif Butt) who is a  local  councillor
    for the Pakistan Muslim League. The appellant thus fears  that  he  and
    his wife will be harmed by her father upon  returning  to  Pakistan  as
    revenge for bringing  perceived  shame  and  dishonour  on  his  wife's
    family.

The appellant's case at the hearing on the 9th January 2019

 6. The appellant's case at the hearing before me on the 9th  January  2018
    may conveniently be summarised as follows.

 7. The appellant no longer  has  contact  with  his  family  in  Pakistan.
    However, in September 2018, he spoke by telephone to  his  friend,  RM,
    who continues to reside in Lahore. RM told him that he  had  spoken  to
    the appellant's sister, SK, and  she  had  said  that  the  appellant's
    father-in-law was still looking for him and wants to kill him.

 8. The appellant's wife has told him that on the last  occasion  that  she
    was in Pakistan (2012), she discovered that her cousin,  KB,  had  been
    elected as a local councillor for the Pakistan Muslim League.

 9. There is a national online digital database  in  Pakistan.  Details  of
    every purchase of a house, motor vehicle and SIM card  is  recorded  on
    that database. Given the political connections  of  his  wife's  family
    (above) his father-in-law would be able to gain access to this database
    and thus discover his whereabouts were he to relocate within Pakistan.

The hearing

10. In addition to the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal,  I
    had a supplementary witness statement from  the  appellant  (dated  the
    20th September 2018) upon which he was cross-examined by Mrs  Pettersen
    through the medium of an Urdu interpreter. The appellant's wife did not
    give  evidence.  I  thereafter  heard  helpful  submissions  from  both
    representatives before reserving my decision.

11. I am bound to be selective  in  my  references  to  the  evidence  when
    explaining the reasons for my factual  findings.  However,  I  wish  to
    emphasise that I considered all the evidence in the round  in  arriving
    at my conclusions.

Findings

12. I adopt the uncontentious  facts  that  are  set  out  at  paragraph  5
    (above). I make the following further findings in respect of  the  oral
    testimony that the appellant gave at the hearing before me on  the  9th
    January 2019.

13. I attach little weight to the appellant's oral  testimony  because  (a)
    Judge Mensah found that he was not a credible witness for  the  reasons
    she gave in her decision promulgated on  the  26th  October  2017  (the
    judge based her positive findings on the testimony of  the  appellant's
    wife, who did not give evidence before me); (b) he fails to provide any
    explanation for why (as he claims) he no longer has  contact  with  his
    own family and/or why he  could  not  have  requested  (through  RM  if
    necessary) a written statement from his sister speaking directly to his
    father-in-law's supposed continued interest in him, rather than relying
    upon the double-hearsay statement of what she supposedly  told  RM  and
    what RM supposedly passed on to him;     and (c) there is  no  evidence
    to explain why the appellant's sister  is  said  to  believe  that  the
    appellant's  father-in-law  continues  to  seek  him  beyond  a   vague
    reference to the fact that they reside in  the  same  area.  I  am  not
    therefore satisfied - even to the standard of a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood  -  that  the  appellant's  father-in-law  continues  to  be
    strongly motivated to find the appellant and kill him  some  six  years
    after he married his daughter.

14. Given that the source of the information is the appellant's  wife  (who
    Judge Mensah found to be a credible witness) I accept  the  appellant's
    claim that her cousin was elected as a local councillor in 2012.  I  am
    not however satisfied that he continues  to  hold  that  or  any  other
    political position some six years' later. In any  event,  the  Pakistan
    Muslim League no longer holds power in Pakistan.  Moreover,  I  do  not
    have any evidence to suggest that a local councillor who is a member of
    the  national  governing  party  would  have  the  power  or  influence
    necessary to gain access to the national database for  the  purpose  of
    pursing a private vendetta. I am fortified in reaching this  conclusion
    by the vagueness of the appellant's reply when  he  was  asked  by  Mrs
    Pettersen as to how his wife's family might be able gain access to  the
    national database. He replied:

    "I only know the procedure, which is you have to hand in your  national
    identity card, which in turn gets into the  police  national  database.
    Because they [his wife's family] are well connected they will  be  able
    to get access to it through the police".

15. I accept that it is increasingly necessary in  Pakistan  to  possess  a
    Computerised National Identity Card (CNIC) in order to gain  access  to
    public  services  such  as  education.  I  also  accept  that  relevant
    information, such  as  a  person's  photograph,  name,  parentage,  and
    address, is kept  on  a  central  database  operated  by  the  National
    Database and Registration Authority (NADRA). This much  is  clear  from
    the EASO Country of Information Report, beginning at page  106  of  the
    appellant's bundle of documents. I have not however been provided  with
    any evidence of  instances  of  the  security  of  the  database  being
    compromised,  whether  by  corrupt  officials  or  otherwise.  On   the
    contrary, the EASO report states that the  core  of  the  system  is  a
    "highly secure and intelligent National Data Warehouse"  [page  106  of
    the appellant's bundle]. I interpret this to mean that it will only  be
    possible to access an individual's personal information via  the  NADRA
    website if one is in possession  of  that  person's  login  details.  I
    cannot see how the appellant's father-in-law could possibly  come  into
    possession of such details save in the extremely  unlikely  event  that
    the appellant chose to share them with  him.  As  I  noted  above,  the
    appellant was quite unable to explain how else his father-in-law  might
    be able to gain  access  to  such  a  secure  system.  I  am  therefore
    satisfied that there is no real risk of the appellant's whereabouts  in
    Pakistan being discovered by his father-in-law, whether via  the  NADRA
    database or otherwise.

Conclusion

16. I adopt Judge Mensah's conclusions and observations that  (a)  Pakistan
    is a large country, (b) the family would be returning as a  unit,  thus
    providing each other with mutual comfort and support whilst proving  to
    the Pakistani police the palpable falsity of the kidnap allegation, (c)
    it is not reasonably likely that his wife's cousin has the  ability  to
    use his position (if indeed he still holds it) to locate the  appellant
    and his family, and (d) the appellant  has  shown  himself  capable  of
    supporting his family in the UK and there is no reason  why  he  should
    not continue to do so on return to Pakistan. Judge Mensah  nevertheless
    concluded that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  family  to  relocate
    within Pakistan for two reasons: (a) the appellant would be  forced  to
    isolate himself from his own family in Lahore, and (b) it would "not be
    easy to live under the radar with children who have  to  attend  school
    etc.". So far as the first reason is concerned, the appellant claims no
    longer to be in touch with his family in  any  event.  So  far  as  the
    supposed difficulty of "living under the radar" is concerned, I  reject
    this for the reasons that I gave at paragraph 15 (above).

17. I therefore conclude that it would be reasonable for the appellant, his
    wife, and children to reside in an area of Pakistan other  than  Lahore
    where I am satisfied there would not be a real risk of  harm  from  the
    appellant's father-in-law.





Notice of Decision

    Having already set aside the decision to allow the  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal of his Protection Claim, I now substitute a decision to
    dismiss that appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 10th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly






















