
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13758/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2018                    |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [I M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For Mr [M]:   Ms A. Childs, Counsel instructed by CK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated  on  27
    July 2018 in which he allowed the appeal of Mr [M] against  a  decision
    to refuse  him  asylum  and  the  associated  claims  for  humanitarian
    protection under the ECHR.  I shall refer to Mr [M] as 'the  appellant'
    as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is an Afghan National who was born on 7 January 2000  and
    had already reached his majority when the appeal was heard on  26  June
    2018.  The nature of his claim was that, as  a  result  of  a  gangster
    known as Rustum being killed by the police, the appellant was  believed
    to have been responsible for informing of his whereabouts.  He  claimed
    he fled to Pakistan where he was traced by the group and then travelled
    to Iran where he was kidnapped by the same group or persons under their
    direction.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the claim largely because the  decision-
    maker did not believe it was true.  In the refusal  letter,  summarised
    by the judge in paragraph 3 of the  determination,  the  decision-maker
    provided at least 8 reasons why he rejected the claim.

 4. On its face, it is apparent  from  the  foregoing  that  there  was  no
    Convention reason advanced by the appellant in support  of  his  claim.
    These were non-state actors and an asylum claim could not  properly  be
    advanced  unless  there  was  an  insufficiency  of  state  protection.
    Notwithstanding this, the judge made no  attempt  to  bring  the  claim
    within one of the Convention  reasons  nor  to  make  findings  on  the
    sufficiency of protection.  Nevertheless,  he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

 5. In paragraph 7 of his determination, the judge recited the  appellant's
    comments in answer to the adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the
    Secretary of State.  These are found in sub-paragraphs (1) to (6).   At
    the hearing neither party submitted whether these were, or were not,  a
    direct answer to each of the 8 reasons advanced  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.   The  judge,  however,  concluded  in  paragraph  8  that   the
    appellant's evidence was broadly consistent with the evidence  he  gave
    in  his  interview  and  a   supplementary   statement   gave   further
    explanations.  The judge concluded in paragraph 10 of his determination
    that  the  matters  raised  by  the  respondent   turned   largely   on
    plausibility and that, given the appellant's explanations, it could not
    be said that his account was false.

 6. The judge made a reservation in relation to the  claim  that  the  gang
    were able to trace him in Pakistan, commenting somewhat  opaquely  that
    this element 'leans heavily towards a degree of  embellishment  on  his
    part.'  Since the judge  plainly  did  not  accept  it,  he  must  have
    rejected it on credibility grounds although he makes no express adverse
    credibility finding.  Nor does he deal with whether,  had  he  made  an
    adverse  credibility  finding,  this  would  have  impacted  upon   the
    reliability of his claim about the other events in Afghanistan.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  no  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's allegation that he was kidnaped in Iran.  It  is  difficult
    to see how he could have accepted it if he had rejected the appellant's
    claim of events in Pakistan.  On the other hand, paragraph  10  appears
    to  suggest  the  claim  of  events  in  Pakistan  had  'a  degree   of
    embellishment' whilst finding the remainder of the claims 'could not be
    said to be false'.

 8. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him a  report  by
    Dr Antonio Giustozzi whom the judge does not name but who  is  a  well-
    known expert on Afghanistan.  He clearly accepted the contents  of  the
    expert report which was to the effect that the appellant  would  be  at
    risk in his home area, Kabul, and that he would not be able to relocate
    beyond the reach of the gang.

 9. In his report, Dr Giustozzi is quoted as saying that this was  a  blood
    feud but the appellant himself made no such claim although it may be  a
    matter of inference arising from the circumstances.  A  blood  feud  is
    capable of placing a victim within a particular social  group,  thereby
    triggering the necessary element to  form  an  asylum  claim.   See  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 348 (IAC).   The  judge  makes  no
    such finding.

10. Dr Giustozzi concluded that the gang, of which Rustum formed part,  was
    one of the latest in  Afghanistan.   Clearly  this  was  a  significant
    factor in an assessment of whether this particular gang had  sufficient
    reach to  place  the  appellant,  on  return,  at  risk.   It  was  not
    altogether easy for me to trace how Dr  Giustozzi  linked  Rustum  with
    this larger group.  However, on a detailed examination of  the  report,
    that link is made.

11. I have highlighted a number of difficulties raised  by  the  manner  in
    which  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge   dealt   with   this   claim.
    Nevertheless, no challenge is made to the judge's findings of  fact  or
    to his apparent acceptance of the entire  contents  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report.  Such a challenge is crucial in the  context  of  this  appeal.
    The combined effect of the appellant's accepted  account  of  being  at
    risk in Kabul from members of a large Mafia group  and  Dr  Giustozzi's
    unchallenged evidence that such groups have the reach to  locate  those
    upon whom they wish to take out revenge is not challenged.  It  follows
    that whatever the outcome of an error of law hearing, the  remaking  of
    the decision cannot properly be conducted upon any  other  basis  other
    than the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

12. The grounds of appeal are limited in scope.  First there is a challenge
    to the finding made by the judge that he allowed the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds without identifying a Convention reason.  It is true  that  the
    judge does not identify a Convention reason.  However, for the  reasons
    I have stated, the evidence of a blood feud was capable of amounting to
    a Convention reason even though the judge made  no  such  finding.   It
    might reasonably be inferred that revenge attacks  by  an  Afghan  gang
    take the form of a blood feud.  That inference is supported by what  Dr
    Giustozzi stated.  Secondly, it is  not  necessarily  damaging  to  the
    appellant's claim for protection that there is no Convention reason  if
    the judge has made a sustainable finding of fact that the appellant  is
    at risk of being seriously harmed or killed.  Whilst it may not  be  an
    asylum claim, it opens the way for a claim for humanitarian  protection
    or protection provided under Articles 2 or 3  of  the  ECHR.   It  may,
    therefore, be a distinction without a difference.

13. Ground 2 concedes  that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  accept  the
    appellant's account of problems with the local Mafia group in Kabul and
    that he would be at risk in his home  area.   The  ground  proceeds  to
    assert that the judge failed to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    issue of internal relocation.  However, since the appellant comes  from
    Kabul  and  will  be  returned  there,  there  is  no  viable  internal
    relocation option.  The report of Dr Giustozzi makes it plain that such
    gangs have the ability to trace those whom they target.

14. Finally, the grounds submit that the judge failed to make any  findings
    on the issue of sufficiency of protection.  I have already pointed  out
    that no such findings were made.  Yet the  evidence,  which  the  judge
    accepted, refers to the activities of the local police.  However poorly
    the link was made in the evidence as to the  complicity  of  the  local
    police, it appears to have been accepted by the judge.  In  any  event,
    whilst the State cannot  guarantee  the  protection  of  its  nationals
    against the activities of local mobsters, the judge also found that the
    appellant would be at risk  of  harm  from  them,  notwithstanding  the
    presence of a police force.  In those circumstances, the legal  concept
    of a sufficiency of protection did not provide the appellant  with  the
    protection he required.

15. The grounds of appeal, in short, are  not  capable  of  identifying  an
    error which will have a material outcome upon this appeal if the appeal
    were to be re-made.  A judge on re-making this decision would be  bound
    to accept  the  undisturbed  findings  of  fact  and  the  unchallenged
    evidence of the expert report and these, alone, are sufficient to  make
    out a claim.

DECISION

    The grounds of appeal fail to disclose material errors in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal whose decision shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                2 April 2019
