
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13939/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2020                  |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SZH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, instructed by Bankfield Heath,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of  Iraq  who  was  born  in  1994.  He
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the refusal by the Secretary  of
    State to grant him international protection. The Upper Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hemingway) set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and gave directions for the decision to be remade in the Upper
    Tribunal. Following the making of a transfer order, I heard the resumed
    hearing at Bradford on 14 February 2020.

 2. Judge Hemingway set aside the decision for the following reasons [9]:

         "9.  As to Ground 3 it appears that, in fact,  when  she  made  her
         decision to refuse international protection, the Secretary of State
         had nevertheless accepted that Mosul was in an area which  remained
         a contested area. However, the Secretary  of  State's  position  at
         that stage seems to have been  that  Mosul  was  no  longer  to  be
         regarded as the claimant's home area because he  had  relocated  to
         Erbil which is within the part of Iraq under Kurdish control  (IKR)
         prior to leaving Iraq (see paragraph 43 of the Secretary of State's
         decision letter of 7 December 2016). But, on the  face  of  it,  in
         preparing for the appeal to the tribunal, it looks like no-one  had
         really appreciated that the Secretary of State's position was  that
         the claimant's home area had  changed.  In  her  skeleton  argument
         prepared for the purposes of the tribunal hearing,  Ms  Warren  had
         argued at paragraph 4 of that document that the claimant was from a
         contested area and, at paragraph 5, she had said "as it is accepted
         that the appellant is from a contested area, then the sole issue is
         one of internal relocation...". Although the skeleton argument  did
         not deal with the contention that the home area  had  changed  (and
         neither did the tribunal) I am satisfied that what was said in  the
         skeleton argument and elsewhere, irrespective of  what  might  have
         been said at the hearing, was sufficient to place the  tribunal  on
         notice that there was an issue to be decided as to whether  or  not
         the claimant's home area had changed and, if not, whether Mosul was
         located in an area which remained contested. The tribunal  did  not
         do that so it erred in law. That error was a material  one  because
         had the tribunal concluded that the claimant's home area was  still
         Mosul and had it concluded that Mosul was still in what remained  a
         contested area and had it  decided  that  there  was  no  available
         internal flight alternative it  would,  in  all  probability,  have
         allowed the appeal. That then is sufficient for me to conclude that
         the tribunal's decision has to be set aside."

 3. He indicated [15] that the issues remaining to be  determined  were  as
    follows:

         "15. Whilst I do not intend to be prescriptive  or  exhaustive,  it
         seems to me that the issues I (or a colleague) may have  to  decide
         and which therefore evidence and argument might be useful,  may  be
         as follows:

             (a)  Whether it can be said that the claimant's home  area  is
             Mosul or whether it is Erbil (further oral evidence may assist
             us to that).

             (b)  Assuming the home area is Mosul, whether  that  is  in  a
             part of Iraq which remains a "contested area". Expert evidence
             or background country material as well as  relevant  case  law
             might assist.

             (c)  Assuming that  the  home  area  is  Mosul  and  that  the
             claimant cannot  return  there  either  because  it  is  in  a
             contested area or for some  other  good  reason,  whether  the
             claimant might be able to relocate to a different part of Iraq
             including, as possible candidates, Baghdad or the IKR."

 4. At [14] Judge Hemingway preserved the following findings of  fact  from
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "14. In the above circumstances I have concluded  that  the  proper
         course is for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision  whilst
         preserving the tribunal's adverse credibility  conclusion  and  its
         consequent findings. That  means  the  section  of  the  tribunal's
         written reasons which I have reproduced above  will  be  preserved.
         So, in a nutshell, my starting point (or the starting  point  of  a
         different Upper Tribunal Judge if remaking is not to be  undertaken
         by me) will be the findings  that  there  was  no  relationship  as
         claimed; there was therefore no risk in  consequence  of  any  such
         relationship; the claimant is still in contact with his uncle;  and
         the uncle has his CSID card and nationality certificate  (paragraph
         75 of the written reasons)." [my emphasis]


 5. At the resumed hearing, the appellant adopted his written statements as
    his evidence in chief. He was not cross examined. Having heard the oral
    submissions of both representatives and having  considered  Ms  Smith's
    skeleton argument, I reserved my decision.

 6. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    whether there are substantial grounds for believing there to be a  real
    risk that the appellant faces  persecution,  ill-treatment  or  serious
    harm if he returns to his home area of Iraq. If he is unable to  return
    to his home area, it is necessary to determine whether would be  unduly
    harsh for him to  exercise  internal  flight  within  Iraq,  either  to
    Baghdad or to the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).

 7. In his most recent witness statement (which the appellant  adopted)  he
    denies that he is in touch with his uncle or, indeed, any other  member
    of his family. He denies that his home  area  is  the  IKR  (Erbil,  in
    particular). He asserts that he is still in fear of his life in the IKR
    on account  of  his  relationship  with  a  woman  notwithstanding  the
    rejection of account by the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant  asserts
    that he will be unable to find accommodation or work  in  the  IKR.  He
    states that he cannot live in Baghdad. He claims that he  went  to  the
    Iraqi consulate in Manchester but was told that nothing could  be  done
    to assist him or to provide him with replacement identity documents.

 8. I have considered the appellant's evidence in light of  the  fact  that
    the previous judge has found him to be a wholly unreliable witness.  In
    so far as the appellant's  most  recent  statement  simply  contradicts
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal, I  reject  it.  I  have  been
    directed by Judge Hemingway to proceed on the basis of the findings  as
    stated above and Ms Smith,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the
    resumed hearing, did not suggest to me that I should  do  otherwise.  I
    am, however, prepared to accept what the appellant says  regarding  his
    visit to the Iraqi Consulate; his experience there is very  similar  to
    that of other displaced  Iraqis  who  have  approached  their  nation's
    consular facilities in the United Kingdom and it has the ring of truth.

 9. Ms Smith submitted that the appellant remained at risk in his home area
    of Iraq and that that area should be identified as Bashiqa, Mosul which
    is in Ninewah Governate and not Erbil, de facto capital of the IKR. She
    submitted that Ninewah remains disputed between the government of  Iraq
    and the forces of the IKR.  ISIL  remains  a  threat  to  the  civilian
    population in the region. The balance of power  has  shifted  from  the
    Sunni to the Shia population and the appellant,  as  a  Kurdish  Sunni,
    would be exposed to risk.

10. I acknowledge  that  the  appellant's  home  area  should  properly  be
    identified as Ninewah. I accept the submission that the  appellant  was
    only a temporary, asylum seeking resident of the IKR. However, whilst I
    acknowledge that there is some political turbulence within  Ninewah,  I
    am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated that  the  appellant,  a
    Kurdish Sunni Muslim man with absolutely no political security profile,
    faces a risk on return at a  level  which  would  cross  the  necessary
    threshold. I was directed to no evidence which clearly  indicates  that
    the shift in the balance of power in the governorate has  been  per  se
    sufficient to expose an individual such as the appellant to a real risk
    of harm. I make that  finding  well  aware  of  the  requirement  (most
    recently encouraged by the Upper Tribunal in SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400  (IAC))  to  analyse
    each case on a fact-specific basis. The most  recent  country  guidance
    indicates that the security  situation  in  Ninewah  is  no  longer  so
    serious as to attract Article 15 (c) protection. I find that,  provided
    the appellant is able to travel safely from Baghdad to  his  home  area
    (which I find he should be able to do provided the  has  the  necessary
    identity documents) then he will be able to reside safely there for the
    foreseeable future.

11. However, the question remains whether  the  appellant  can  obtain  the
    necessary identity documentation (his existing or a new CSID or a newer
    form INID) in order to make the journey from Baghdad to his home  area.
    I have rejected the appellant's continuing assertion that he is not  in
    touch with his uncle who appears to remain living in  the  IKR.  Having
    regard to all  the  evidence  and  to  the  previous  findings  of  the
    Tribunal, I consider it reasonably likely that, through his  continuing
    contact with  his  uncle,  the  appellant  has  already  re-established
    contact with his immediate and wider family or that he would be able to
    do so now without difficulty. Crucially, the finding has been preserved
    that the appellant's uncle is in possession of the appellant's  genuine
    CSID and nationality  document  (see  the  emphasised  passage  at  [4]
    above). I find that it is likely that the appellant's uncle  will  send
    these documents to the appellant in the event that the appellant  tells
    him that he is to be removed to Iraq. It  follows  that  the  appellant
    will have in his possession all the necessary identity documents by the
    time he arrives in Baghdad. Being in possession of those documents, the
    appellant will be able safely to travel from Baghdad to his home  area,
    Ninewah. He will not need to reside in Baghdad for any length  of  time
    at all but, if he is delayed there, his possession of the  CSID  should
    ensure that he can access necessary services and thereby avoid harm and
    destitution. Even if I am wrong regarding the safety of the appellant's
    home area, I find that, in possession of the identity  documents  which
    is uncle will send to  him,  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  travel
    directly by air  from  Baghdad  to  Erbil.  I  am  aware  that  finding
    employment may be problematic in the IKR  but  the  appellant  has  the
    advantage of his family contacts there  and,  whilst  he  searches  for
    employment, the security of permanent accommodation with his  uncle  or
    other family members. Accordingly, I find that internal flight  to  the
    IKR would not have unduly harsh  consequences  for  this  appellant.  I
    stress that I make that finding in the alternative; it  is  my  primary
    finding that the appellant may safely reside in his home area.

12. It follows from what I have said that the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  him  international
    protection should be dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    7 December 2016 is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 16 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




