
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13689/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                          |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     CA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant CA, was born in 1980 and is a female citizen of  Nigeria.
    Following a number of applications to remain in the United Kingdom, the
    appellant applied for asylum in April 2017.  She  has  three  dependent
    children living with her in the United Kingdom.  By a decision dated  8
    December 2017, the appellant was refused international protection.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bart-Stewart)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  14  June  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Although he did not formally withdraw any of the  grounds,  Mr  Howard,
    who appeared for the appellant, made oral submissions only on Ground  3
    of the grounds of appeal.  This ground concerns Article 8 ECHR  outside
    the Immigration Rules and the application of MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705.

 3. I shall deal briefly with  the  grounds  challenging  the  decision  on
    asylum and Article 3, ECHR grounds.  The grounds have no merit.  Before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant claimed that her children  would
    suffer FGM (female genital mutilation) upon  return  to  Nigeria.   The
    grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  claim  that  the  judge  had
    "inadequately  considered  the  vulnerabilities  that  the  appellant's
    children have" and assert that the appellant, who is Yoruba, is from an
    area of Nigeria where the prevalence of FGM is 50%.  I  find  that  the
    judge has carried out an exhaustive analysis of the asylum and  Article
    3 grounds.  She found that Articles 2 and 3 were not engaged [50].  She
    did not accept that the appellant's family  would  cause  harm  to  the
    children [48].  There is no evidence that the appellant's son would  be
    subjected to forced marking [44].  Insofar as  the  grounds  of  appeal
    challenge the asylum and Article 2/3 findings, I conclude that they are
    without merit.

 4. Mr Howard dealt exclusively  in  his  submissions  with  the  remaining
    ground of appeal on Article 8, ECHR grounds.  Of the appellant's  three
    children, her eldest child has been living in the  United  Kingdom  for
    more than seven years and is therefore a  "qualifying  child"  for  the
    purposes of Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended):

 5. Neither Section 117B(6) nor MA (Pakistan) impose an absolute  bar  upon
    the removal of a "qualifying child" from the United Kingdom with his or
    her family.  Such a removal is subject to the test  of  reasonableness.
    The grounds of appeal as drafted  inaccurately  state  [3.4]  that  the
    judge had erred "in the assessment as to why it would be reasonable  to
    expect the appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom."  What  is
    said in the grounds is inaccurate because only one of the children is a
    "qualifying child" and in addition the ground is  little  more  than  a
    bare assertion that the judge had not carried out  a  proper  analysis.
    In his submissions, Mr Howard elaborated upon that somewhat  inadequate
    ground.  He submitted the  starting  point  in  the  appeal  should  be
    "strong reasons" (see MA (Pakistan)) and that more than had been stated
    by the judge in her decision was required to justify the removal  of  a
    qualifying child.  He submitted that the judge's analysis had  "started
    in the middle" rather than with  the  balance  at  the  outset  shifted
    towards the appellant on account of the  fact  that  her  child  was  a
    "qualifying child."

 6. Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State,  submitted  that  there  was  a
    strong public interest in the removal of the appellant who had  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on a visit visa and never returned.  He submitted
    that the judge's decision could not be characterised  as  perverse;  it
    was a decision available to her on the evidence.

 7. I agree with Mr McVeety.  The judge has commenced her analysis with the
    correct statement that the eldest child qualifies under Section 117B(6)
    of the Act [51].  Her analysis  adopts  a  proper  staged  approach  as
    provided for in Razgar [2004] 0027  UKHL.   She  notes  [55]  that  the
    appellant and her husband had entered the United Kingdom  together  and
    have remained unlawfully for ten years.  Further, they  had  chosen  to
    start a family knowing that their status was unlawful and they continue
    to "grow their family after the husband's various claims  were  refused
    and in full knowledge that they had no right to remain in the UK."   As
    regards the children themselves (including the eldest child) the  judge
    records that they are Nigerian nationals and that their best  interests
    are met by remaining with their parents.  They had no separate claim to
    remain in the United Kingdom. There is  a  functioning  healthcare  and
    education system in Nigeria.  Significantly, the judge found  that  the
    children are "not at an age where they would have strong  ties  outside
    the family."  Indeed, I cannot see that any evidence was put before the
    judge to suggest otherwise.  The  judge  also  cites  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [58-60]:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?

         On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children  to
         follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would
         be separated and the children would be deprived  of  the  right  to
         grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none  of
         the family is a British citizen. None has the right  to  remain  in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world."

 8.  Judge  Bradshaw  concluded  it  was  "entirely  reasonable   for   the
    appellant's children to relocate with their parents to their country of
    nationality which is Nigeria.  The  decision  is  not  a  violation  of
    Article 8, ECHR".

 9. As I have noted above, the decision which the judge made was  available
    to her in law and on the facts as she found  them.   She  has  provided
    strong and cogent reasons for  reaching  the  decision  which  she  has
    achieved.  Another judge, faced with the same facts, may have come to a
    different decision but that is  not  the  point.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    should hesitate before interfering with a First-tier Tribunal  decision
    where a judge has considered all the relevant evidence, has left out of
    account irrelevant matters, has applied  the  law  accurately  and  has
    judicially exercised a discretion available to him or her.  I find that
    that is what has occurred in this instance.  Mr Howard did not seek  to
    suggest that the judge's only option, on the facts, had been  to  allow
    the appeal.  It follows from that, if  the  judge's  decision  was  not
    perverse, it is only susceptible to successful challenge on  the  basis
    that the judge has carried out a flawed analysis of  the  evidence.   I
    find that that is not the case for the reasons I give  above.   I  have
    not concluded that the judge has erred in law for the reasons  asserted
    in the grounds or at all.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 28 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
