
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13741/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 10th February 2020                |On 5th March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Laughran, instructed by Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in this determination  identified  as  A  A.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


         1. AA, an Albanian citizen, arrived in the UK  on  13th  September
            2016 aged 15. On 15th September 2016  the  Competent  Authority
            found there were reasonable grounds to  believe  the  appellant
            was a victim of trafficking. On 7th June  2018,  the  Competent
            Authority made a negative conclusive grounds  decision  on  the
            balance of probabilities.


         2. The appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
            dated   21st   November   2018   refusing   his   international
            protection/human  rights  claim  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
            Tribunal judge Andonian for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
            promulgated on 2nd September 2018.


         3. Permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision was given
            on 6th November 2019 and hence the appeal came before me.

            Grounds of appeal

         4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the following
            grounds:

            Grounds 1 and 2

         5. That the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in  failing
            to have had any regard to  the  report  by  country  expert  Dr
            Tairaj.

         6. The First-tier Tribunal judge, in  a  decision  running  to  27
            pages, refers in [4] to  being  required  to  consider  reports
            prepared by "various experts" regarding  the  appellant's  PTSD
            and

                   "...also the report by other experts such the  expert  on
                  the issue of trafficking and retrafficking in Albania  who
                  had  provided  the  report  on   instructions   from   the
                  appellant's current legal advisors and had based it on the
                  documentation received from them which she had  considered
                  thoroughly but without  interviewing  the  appellant,  and
                  other reports that had been provided by experts  based  on
                  material received by the appellant's representatives."


         7. There is a  summary  of  part  of  a  trafficking  report  from
            Christine Bedoe, but it is unclear to what  extent  he  accepts
            that report or whether  he  places  any  weight  upon  it.  The
            judge's lengthy reference to the  appellant's  credibility  and
            the findings he has already made, are referenced to unspecified
            reports  in  a  curious  manner  as  possibly  adding  to   his
            credibility if the appellant had been found credible  but  that
            in his view the appellant had lied. The judge makes no specific
            reference to the report by Dr Tairaj either in summary form  or
            at all.


         8. The findings by the judge on the appellant's  credibility  have
            not been taken in the context of the expert  reports  provided.
            The judge does not state why he  has  failed  to  consider  the
            appellant's evidence in the context of the reports  or  why  he
            has ignored the reports when reaching findings. The  judge  has
            erred in law.

            Ground 3, 4 and 5

         9. These grounds refer to the weight given by  the  judge  to  the
            evidence regarding the Red Cross and  the  appellant's  journey
            through Belgium. It is quite  difficult  to  discern  from  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge's decision exactly what he is stating
            but overall it appears that the findings he  reached,  such  as
            they can be  discerned,  were  findings  open  to  him  on  the
            evidence he considered  but  that  they  are  infected  by  the
            credibility findings made without taking account of the  expert
            reports in reaching those findings. It may be that the findings
            in regard to the Red  Cross  are  sustainable  although  it  is
            unclear on what basis the judge placed such  weight  upon  that
            evidence  given   the   appellant's   vulnerability   and   the
            appellant's overall account, given the expert reports.


        10. Given the credibility findings are infected by error of law,  I
            am satisfied these findings are unreliable irrespective of  the
            fact that it is unclear why the judge placed such  weight  upon
            them.

            Ground 6

        11. In addition to making findings on credibility in isolation from
            the medical and other expert evidence, the judge has failed  to
            provide reasons for  his  finding  that  the  appellant's  core
            account of being forced  to  look  after  cannabis  plants  and
            sexually abused was not  credible.  He  has  not  related  that
            finding to the earlier finding of the  applicant's  credibility
            regarding contact with his family and he fails to consider  the
            account in the context of the evidence regarding  Albania.  The
            judge has erred in law in  failing  to  give  reasons  for  his
            decision.

            Ground 7

        12. The appellant relies  upon  a  description  of  the  respondent
            having rejected that there were reasonable  grounds  he  was  a
            victim of trafficking  as  indicative  of  a  lack  of  anxious
            scrutiny by the judge. The  judge  has  not  expressed  himself
            carefully  or  precisely,  but  the  error  is  an   error   of
            description and not an indication of lack of anxious scrutiny.

            Overall

        13. The First-tier Tribunal judge, although purporting to  reach  a
            decision on the core of the appellant's claim, failed  to  make
            an adequately reasoned decision. The judge has failed  to  give
            reasons for rejecting the core of the  appellant's  claim,  has
            made  adverse  credibility  findings  without  considering  the
            expert medical, country and trafficking experts  and  fails  to
            take an holistic decision.

        14. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
            remade, no findings preserved.

            Future progress of the appeal

        15. Although the appellant had  an  appeal  before  the  First-tier
            Tribunal, that appeal did not adequately  deal  with  the  core
            facts of his claim. There have been no sustainable findings  of
            any kind. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act
            2007 does not assign the function of primary  fact  finding  to
            the Upper Tribunal.


        16. The  Practice  Statement  dated  25th  September  2012  of  the
            Immigration and Asylum Chamber First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
            Tribunal states, when a First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  set
            aside:


                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


        17. In this case, the extent of the judicial fact-finding is total,
            and I am therefore satisfied that it  is  appropriate  for  the
            appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  remade,
            no findings retained.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the hearing of the appeal de novo to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                                    Date 24th February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
