
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13752/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 July 2017                           |On 11 July 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Farrell, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim.

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He is a  Kurd  who  was  born
          and lived in Tuz Khurmatu, Salah al-Din  province  before  leaving
          Iraq in 2015.  His asylum claim was based upon the armed  conflict
          in that area and his fears for his own safety and  the  safety  of
          his wife and children.


Procedural history

       3. In a decision  dated  26  January  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          dismissed the appellant's appeal  after  finding  his  account  of
          what happened in Iraq not to be credible.

       4. In a decision dated 18 May 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
          granted permission to appeal observing that it was  arguable  that
          the First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate reasons for rejecting  the
          explanation  provided  by   the   appellant   regarding   apparent
          inconsistencies in his evidence.   He  also  considered  that  the
          First-tier Tribunal arguably applied too high a standard of  proof
          by  referring  to   the   appellant's   account   as   not   being
          "convincing".

       5. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated  30  May  2017  in
          which she submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to
          draw adverse inferences from the appellant's evidence and  in  any
          event found internal relocation was viable for this appellant.


Hearing

       6. At the beginning of the  hearing  Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  the
          appeal was unopposed and the decision needs to be  remade  in  its
          entirety.  He was entirely correct to do so for  the  reasons  set
          out below.


       7. Both representatives agreed that the error of  law  is  such  that
          the decision needs to be remade completely.  I have had regard  to
          para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
          and the nature and extent of  the  factual  findings  required  in
          remaking the  decision,  and  I  have  decided  that  this  is  an
          appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


Error of law discussion

       8. I can state my reasons briefly given the respondent's  concession.



Country background evidence

       9. When asked to briefly explain his reasons for claiming  asylum  at
          the screening interview the appellant said  that  he  feared  ISIS
          and the Iraqi army and then said this: "They kill lots  of  people
          back home.  They fight and the war has been going on  for  a  long
          time, it's not safe for me or my family.  I was tortured  by  army
          and I fear I or my family will be killed one day if I  had  to  go
          home".  At  his  substantive  asylum  interview  in  response   to
          question 36 the appellant claimed that he feared ISIS  and  Hasht-
          Al Shabi ('the militia').  At question 97 the appellant was  asked
          why he said at the screening interview that  he  was  tortured  by
          the army and he answered: "That  is  what  I  meant  by  the  Shia
          Muslims, they are part of the army,  they  were  torturing  anyone
          not just me, I was going to explain that to you when  you  stopped
          me".  He then explained  that  in  2015  the  militia  would  drag
          everyone out of their houses in order to  mistreat,  threaten  and
          torture them (Q 98-106).

      10. The country background evidence supports the appellant's  evidence
          in two significant respects set out below.

      11. First, as acknowledged by Mr McVeety, the militia is  seen  to  be
          encompassed within the  Iraqi  army.    The  organisations  cannot
          properly be described as distinct, as was  done  in  the  rule  24
          response.  References to  the  strong  interconnectedness  between
          the militia and the army is set out  in  the  background  evidence
          adduced on behalf of the appellant.  For example, at page  105  of
          the appellant's bundle a report  from  the  Carnegie  Middle  East
          Centre dated 16 November 2015, says this:

                 "During his address to the UN General Assembly in September
                 2015. Iraqi Prime Minsiter Haider al-Abadi declared that al-
                 Hashd al-Shaabi (popular mobilisation) forces are  part  of
                 the official state.  Yet, it is no secret  that  Abadi  has
                 never  been  comfortable  with  the  Hashd  -  an  umbrella
                 organisation of various non-state armed  groups  that  have
                 never been directly  accountable  to  the  prime  minister.
                 Some of the groups and fighters  under  the  umbrella  have
                 been accused of committing crimes during various battles."

      12.  As  Mr  McVeety  acknowledged  the  background  evidence  clearly
          explains why the appellant would perceive the Iraqi army  and  the
          militia to  be  interchangeable.   He  was  therefore  correct  to
          concede that the adverse inferences  drawn  at  [24  and  25]  are
          unsupported by the country background evidence.


      13. Second, the appellant's claim that he lived  in  a  part  of  Iraq
          that was contested and in a state of internal  armed  conflict  is
          consistent with the respondent's country information  relevant  to
          the material time in 2015 - see AA  (Art  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
          UKUT 544 (IAC) at [36 and  101-106].   This  describes  systematic
          and widespread acts of violence in Salah Al-din at the  time  that
          the appellant fled the area.  The First-tier Tribunal states  that
          it considered all the material at [23] but it is difficult to  see
          that the plausibility and credibility of the account in  the  home
          area was considered in  the  context  of  the  country  background
          evidence.  The First-tier  Tribunal  has  also  erred  in  law  in
          requiring the appellant to corroborate the  assaults  and  torture
          he experienced in his home area at [26].  Aside  from  erroneously
          requiring the appellant to  provide  corroboratory  evidence,  the
          First-tier Tribunal has failed to take into account how  difficult
          corroboration would be for the appellant when the  home  area  was
          in a state of internal armed conflict at the relevant time.

Further errors of law

      14. The two errors identified above  are  sufficient  to  vitiate  the
          decision but there are further errors  of  law  which  I  set  out
          briefly.

              i) As noted when permission to appeal was granted, the  First-
                 tier Tribunal has erroneously  referred  to  matters  being
                 unconvincing  (see  for  example  references  at  [25-26]),
                 instead of applying the correct lower  standard  of  proof.
                 The correct application of  the  standard  of  proof  is  a
                 fundamental requirement in the determination of  an  asylum
                 appeal.


             ii) The First-tier Tribunal has not addressed how the appellant
                 returning without  a  CSID.   The  appellant  indicated  at
                 interview (Q 48) that he did not have a passport.  His home
                 area has, at least until relatively  recently,  been  in  a
                 state of internal armed conflict.  The First-tier  Tribunal
                 briefly addressed the fact that the appellant does not have
                 "identification documents" at [29]  and  inferred  that  he
                 should have contacted the authorities to obtain replacement
                 documentation without addressing [187] of AA.

            iii) In so far as the reference to identification  documents  at
                 [29] is  in  relation  to  the  IKR,  it  is  difficult  to
                 understand why this is relevant given the guidance  in  the
                 headnote at 17 of AA.

             iv) The First-tier Tribunal has implied at [29]  that  it  will
                 not  be  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to   internally
                 relocate to Baghdad without addressing the factors at 15 of
                 the headnote in AA.

              v) In considering the reasonableness of relocation to the IKR,
                 the First-tier Tribunal has failed to take into account how
                 the appellant together with his wife and children  will  be
                 able to safely travel from Baghdad to the IKR - see 17  and
                 20 of the headnote in AA.

      15. It follows, as agreed by both  representatives,  that  the  First-
          tier  Tribunal's   conclusions   on   credibility   and   internal
          relocation  are  vitiated  by  errors  of  law  and  unsafe.   The
          decision must be remade entirely and de novo.

Decision

      16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      17. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 July 2017

