
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13758/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th January 2018                      |On 19th January 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                    [I M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, instructed by CK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg dismissed the appellant's  protection
         and  human  rights  claim  for  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
         promulgated on 17th  July  2017.  The  appellant  sought,  and  was
         granted, permission to appeal on the grounds that it was arguable:



          i. That the respondent had conceded the appellant was entitled to
             humanitarian protection;

         ii. That the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  her
             findings; and

        iii. Had failed to make  proper  findings  in  terms  of  reception
             facilities.


      2. The appellant sought permission on the ground that  the  judge  had
         given the appearance of bias. Permission was not  granted  on  this
         ground.  Nevertheless,  the  counsel  who  had  appeared  for   the
         appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  produced  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal today a witness statement and her  contemporaneous  record
         of the proceedings. Ms Childs had no explanation  why  the  witness
         statement from Ms Fisher had been  produced  so  late  without  any
         explanation. She confirmed that no application  for  permission  to
         appeal on that ground had been made to the Upper  Tribunal  and  in
         the circumstances and given that permission  could  be  implied  as
         refused, she did not pursue that ground of appeal.


      3. The witness statement of Ms Fisher seems to assert that  the  judge
         stated that the appellant was entitled to  humanitarian  protection
         although she does not say this in terms. The  note  of  proceedings
         made by the presenting officer does not record that finding and nor
         does the note made by the judge. The note by the judge and  the  PO
         records that the appellant was invited to consider withdrawing  his
         asylum claim and relying upon humanitarian protection claim; he did
         not do so. The contemporaneous record produced by  Ms  Fisher  does
         not record such a statement by the judge. Given the note by the  PO
         and the note by the Judge and the  lack  of  any  note  of  such  a
         decision by Ms Fisher, I do not accept that the judge said that but
         then failed to set that out in the decision. There is no  merit  in
         that ground of appeal.


      4. The grounds upon which permission had been sought were amplified by
         Ms Childs. In essence, it was submitted that  the  finding  by  the
         judge that the appellant had an aunt in Kabul with  whom  he  could
         stay and thus he was not at risk on return as a minor, was  legally
         flawed. The existence of the aunt had  come  to  light  during  the
         hearing.  There  was,  she  submitted,  no  evidence  as   to   the
         suitability or even agreement  of  the  aunt  to  provide  adequate
         reception facilities for the appellant and, given the acceptance by
         the respondent that  there  were  inadequate  reception  facilities
         available as provided by his father, it was not open to  Judge  Beg
         to make the finding she did.


      5. The issue of the aunt was not explored by either representative  in
         the First-tier Tribunal but it is a  very  large  step  to  make  a
         finding that an aunt  who  lives  in  Kabul  can  provide  adequate
         reception facilities in the absence of evidence to that effect  and
         given an earlier decision by the respondent  that  there  were  not
         adequate reception facilities. That finding by the judge led to her
         failing  to  have  adequate  regard  to  AA  (unattended  children)
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016. The judge has materially erred in
         law in her conclusion that the appellant was not at risk of serious
         harm on return to Kabul.


      6. The judge made findings relating to the gang and threats based upon
         whether the  appellant  would  have  behaved  in  the  way  he  did
         confronting the gang. The judge failed to have regard to the  reach
         of the gang and its motivation, as considered by  Dr  Giustozzi  on
         his report, despite having accepted  that  the  appellant  and  his
         family were harassed. The  findings  are  unsafe  and  the  reasons
         provided as justification are peripheral to the core of  the  claim
         of threats. The judge has materially erred in law.


      7. I set aside the decision for material errors of  law;  no  findings
         preserved.


      8. It is not the role of the Upper Tribunal to make  primary  findings
         of fact where these findings are disputed or  unclear  as  in  this
         case. I conclude the decision should be remitted to the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a First-tier Tribunal judge to determine the appeal.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    hearing.


                                    Date 17th January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
