
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13698/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11th September 2018                        | On 3rd May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Ahmadshah [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnick (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thorne, promulgated on 19th January 2018, following a hearing  on
    20th December 2017 at Stoke-on-Trent.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  1st
    January 1978.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 24th November 2016, refusing  his  claim  for
    asylum and for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC  395.



The Appellant

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he comes from the province
    of Nangahar in Afghanistan.  His father was  an  attorney  in  Khogani.
    The Appellant joined the Taliban in Kabul for some four years  to  work
    for them.  He then returned  to  his  parents  in  1998.   He  went  to
    Jalalabad to see if he could then join the Afghan  Army.   However,  he
    saw someone from his home village at the  recruiting  office.   He  was
    told by the army office to go home where they would inform  him  if  he
    had been accepted into the army or not.  However, a few weeks later the
    Authorities came to his father's house looking for  the  Appellant  who
    was out at the time.  His father told the Appellant that they had  come
    because of his previous involvement with the  Taliban.   The  Appellant
    believed that his neighbour had  told  the  military  office  that  the
    Appellant had been involved with the Taliban.  The Appellant went  into
    hiding in Kabul.  In 2008 his father advised him to  leave  Afghanistan
    because he was wanted by the Afghan Authorities and  the  Taliban.   He
    left Afghanistan with the help of an agent.  He travelled through Iran,
    Greece, Italy, and France, before entering the UK on  17th  March  2009
    and claiming asylum.  In his asylum  interview,  the  Appellant  stated
    that he feared the Afghan Authorities, because he had  worked  for  the
    Taliban, and he feared the Taliban, because they would also target  him
    as well.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted that "like many other men of his age" the  Appellant
    did join the Taliban to work for them  for  about  four  years,  before
    returning to his parents in 1998.   (Paragraph  44).   The  judge  also
    accepted that  "the  Taliban  may  very  well  have  characterised  his
    behaviour as desertion" (paragraph 45).   Indeed,  the  judge  accepted
    that the Taliban sent five letters to his family at their home  between
    April 2008 and October 2009 "containing threats against  the  Appellant
    that they detained his father", and that the  Appellant's  account  "is
    supported by the expert  report  which  states  that  the  letters  are
    generally from the Taliban" (paragraph 45).

 5. Accordingly, the judge was led to the conclusion that the  Taliban  had
    an adverse interest in the Appellant in 2009 and that "in his home area
    there was a real risk that they would persecute him on account  of  his
    imputed political opinion" and that the risk  of  persecution  "in  his
    home area from the Taliban may still exist" (paragraph 46).

 6. The judge did not accept that the Appellant faced a risk of persecution
    from the Afghan Authorities or that they had any  adverse  interest  in
    him (paragraph 47).  He did not accept that the Appellant went  to  the
    army office in Jalalabad and that "by an extraordinary  coincidence  it
    still happened by chance that he saw someone from his home  village  at
    the recruiting office" (paragraph 48).  He  did  not  accept  that  the
    "Authorities have an adverse interest in the Appellant  on  account  of
    him being someone suspected of having been in the Taliban or seeking to
    infiltrate the Afghan Army on behalf of the Taliban" (paragraph 49).

 7. The judge went on to say that whilst moving to Kabul may be  consistent
    with a fear of  the  local  Taliban  in  his  home  area,  it  was  not
    consistent  with  the  fear  of  the  Authorities  who  control   Kabul
    (paragraph 49).  Accordingly, the Appellant may well have a  real  risk
    of persecution in his home area by the Taliban.  However, "as a  person
    who deserted the Taliban many years ago, the Appellant  would  only  be
    seen as a very low level priority for that group to  pursue"  and  "the
    Appellant could safely relocate  to  Kabul  or  some  other  Government
    controlled area" (paragraph 50).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge did not apply  "anxious
    scrutiny" to the claim because due regard was not given to  the  expert
    report produced by Dr  Giustozzi,  who  had  stated  that  the  Taliban
    themselves had verified to the independent expert  that  the  Appellant
    "is  now  on  the  Taliban's  blacklist"  (APP  21).   The  judge  also
    erroneously had regard to case law which  had  not  been  submitted  by
    either side.  Moreover, in concluding that it was  not  plausible  that
    the Appellant's attempt to join the army had been frustrated by someone
    who had  recognised  him  from  his  own  village,  the  judge  gave  a
    conclusion without a reason, overlooking the explanation given  by  the
    Appellant at question 89 of his interview (CC 2).

10. On 13th February 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before  me  on  11th  September  2018,  Mr  Karnick,  of
    Counsel,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  made   two   basic
    submissions.  First, that the judge had failed  to  take  into  account
    material evidence,  in  the  form  of  the  expert  report.   This  was
    important because the judge had  found  the  substantial  part  of  the
    Appellant's own evidence to be credible.  There had been  three  expert
    reports.  One  of  the  experts  had  confirmed  that  the  Appellant's
    identity had been verified as a defector, and that he was a wanted  man
    by the Taliban.  The experts had confirmed that  there  had  been  five
    threatening letters sent by the Taliban, and this had been accepted  as
    being the case by the judge.  The Appellant was on the blacklist  of  a
    wanted person  in  his  own  home  area,  Nangahar.   Even  though  the
    Appellant's Taliban activities had been in Kabul, and not in  Nangahar,
    this only helps to reinforce the expert's view that there  had  been  a
    high level of information exchange taking place  between  the  Taliban.
    Second, insofar as the judge did have regard to the decided  cases,  he
    had referred to the wrong cases.  He had referred to  the  case  of  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163, but this was a case  on
    "indiscriminate violence" in Afghanistan, and was an entirely different
    matter to being specifically targeted by  the  Taliban.   Against  this
    background, insofar as the judge did give any reasons for his findings,
    these were questionable because what the judge is doing (at  paragraphs
    48 to 50) is stating his conclusions for rejecting the  appeal,  rather
    than giving his reasons for doing so.

12. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately.  The findings that he had made were open to him.  He had
    concluded that the Appellant could relocate  to  Kabul  (see  paragraph
    49).  The judge had given reasons for why he came to this view.  He had
    made it quite clear that,

         "Moving to Kabul is perhaps consistent with having a  fear  of  the
         local Taliban in his home area but is not consistent with a fear of
         the Authorities who  controlled  Kabul.   There  is  no  reason  to
         suppose that the Appellant told the Authorities in  Kabul  that  he
         used to be in the  Taliban  or  tried  to  join  the  Afghan  Army"
         (paragraph 49).

    Secondly, the judge came to the conclusion  that,  in  any  event,  the
    Appellant "would only be seen as a very low  level  priority  for  that
    group to pursue" (paragraph 50).  This was despite the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had deserted the Taliban "many years ago" (paragraph 50).

13. In reply, Mr Karnick submitted that even though the judge had  referred
    to country guidance cases, a particular feature of the appeal here  was
    that the Appellant was active in the Taliban in Kabul, but is found  to
    be on the blacklist in Nangahar.  Against this  background,  the  judge
    did not take into account the expert reports, which  confirm  that  the
    Appellant is mentioned as a person who is wanted by  the  Taliban,  and
    this exhibits  a  high  degree  of  information  exchange  amongst  the
    Taliban, such that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk.   The  judge's
    conclusions that the Appellant "would not be at risk of harm  in  Kabul
    from the Authorities or the Taliban" (paragraph 56) was  unsustainable.



Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

15. First, the present appeal is one which uniquely  involves  a  situation
    where the Taliban themselves have verified to  the  independent  expert
    that the Appellant is on the Taliban's blacklist.  Although this is the
    case in Nangahar, and  not  in  Kabul,  where  the  judge  decided  the
    Appellant could relocate to, it is nevertheless, a  significant  aspect
    of this appeal.  This is because the Appellant, even though a low level
    defector, could still be subject  to  persecution,  because  low  level
    defectors have been punished,  and  the  judge  did  not  approach  the
    Appellant's situation on this basis.

16. Second, the evidence  suggests  that  there  has  been  no  high  level
    defectors at all, but only low level defectors, who have then  gone  on
    to be punished.

17. Third, it is plain from the background in this appeal that there  is  a
    high level of information being exchanged between various components of
    the Taliban.  The evidence does show that the Taliban has  intelligence
    at Kabul  Airport  and  monitors  new  arrivals  and  receives  regular
    reports.

18. In addition, insofar as the judge has referred to  the  decided  cases,
    cases such as AK (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 163, deal with the  risk  to
    an applicant of "indiscriminate  violence"  and  do  not  deal  with  a
    situation whereby an applicant is specifically known  to  be  a  wanted
    person.  The failure of the judge to so recognise was a material  error
    against the background of the existence of expert reports which were so
    telling in the Appellant's favour.

Remaking the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge.  The evidence before him and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent that there is an  error
    of law in the judge's determination, so that it should be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal, with all the positive findings in favour of
    the Appellant being preserved (as was agreed by the  parties  appearing
    before me).

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed under practice statement 7.2(b) because the nature or extent of
    any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the  decision
    in the appeal  to  be  remade  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, to be  heard  by  a  judge  other  that  Judge
    Thorne.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th September 2018
