
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13024/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 27th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                   M H M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 February 1995.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 May 2018 and claimed asylum.

 3. On 1 November 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.



 4. The appellant's appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    sent on 15 January 2018, Judge C H O'Rourke dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 5. On 15 February 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge P J M Hollingworth)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The appellant's claim was that, when he lived in the IKR, he  had  been
    in a relationship with a girl ("A") without her family's consent.   Her
    family had discovered their relationship and he feared that he would be
    killed by her family who were powerful and had links with  the  PUK  in
    the IKR.

 8. Judge O'Rourke found that the appellant was not credible  and  rejected
    his account.  The judge's  findings  are  at  paras  21  -  26  of  his
    determination.

 9. First, at para 21, the judge summarised the expert report of  Professor
    Bluth submitted in support of the appellant's claim as follows:

         "21. Professor Bluth's report.  For the purposes of this appeal,  I
             summarise the relevant aspects of Professor Bluth's report, as
             follows:

             i.   There are ongoing  tensions  between  the  Iraqi  central
                  government and the  IKR  administration,  with  the  Iraqi
                  government retaking control of some areas previously under
                  Kurdish control (but not relevant to the Appellant's  area
                  of the IKR).

             ii.  Honour killings  are  widespread  and  remain  a  serious
                  problem and while directed mostly at women and girls, have
                  been extended to men and can escalate to  homicidal  feuds
                  between families.

             iii. There is not a sufficiency  of  protection,  with  little
                  regard for law enforcement among the population.

             iv.  various persons of political importance are identified in
                  the photographs provided by the Appellant  [A6-7,  A14-27]
                  (the  Appellant  stating  that  the  man  shown   in   the
                  photographs at A21 and 24 is [H].)  Professor Bluth states
                  that if the Appellant's account is  accepted,  then  [A's]
                  family  would  have  the  level  of   influence   claimed,
                  throughout the IKR."

10. Then, at para 22 the judge identified a number  of  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's evidence as follows:

         "22. Appellant's Account of events in the IKR.  I  did  not  accept
             the Appellant's account of the events that he states  occurred
             in the IKR and therefore the claimed threat from [A's] family,
             for   the   following   reasons,   principally   relating   to
             inconsistencies in his evidence, indicating to me a fabricated
             account, parts of which he had now forgotten, or confused:

             i.   His account of the core incidents, the  two  'visits'  to
                  his family home, the 'alleyway' incident and the  'mosque'
                  incident was confused and contradictory.  As set out above
                  in my summary of the evidence, he met and talked to [H] in
                  the  alleyway  incident,  but  two  days  later  did   not
                  recognise his voice on the phone,  or  put  'two  and  two
                  together' as to his presence at the earlier incident  with
                  A's father.  Nor does it seem remotely  plausible,  having
                  already been directly threatened by [A's] family  that  he
                  would be apparently unaware of why  a  supposedly  unknown
                  person was abusing him over the phone (without  presumably
                  mentioning  his  relationship  with   [A]),   but   still,
                  seemingly out of curiosity, go to  meet  this  person,  on
                  ground of that person's choosing.  Also, his  evidence  as
                  to  who  accompanied  him   to   his   confrontation   was
                  contradictory, he stated  that  it  was  his  brother,  or
                  alternatively, a friend.

             ii.  He was asked to confirm in cross-examination  that  those
                  incidents were the  only  ones  and  he  did  so,  but  in
                  interview and  his  asylum  statement  referred  to  other
                  incidents, such as [A's] brother, [H], confronting him  in
                  the bazaar, the day after  [A']s  mother  had  found  them
                  together and also another  incident,  the  day  after  the
                  mosque incident, when [A's] father attacked  him,  kicking
                  and beating him, which, in cross-examination, he seemed to
                  have forgotten about.

             iii. His contradictory evidence as to how he obtained  a  visa
                  to travel to Turkey: his asylum statement said  that  he'd
                  gone to the Turkish embassy, but in interview  and  cross-
                  examination,  he  said  he  went  to   a   travel   agent,
                  specifically denying, in answer to a direct question  that
                  he had gone, or needed to go, to an embassy or  consulate.



             iv.  The timeline of these events, based  on  the  Appellant's
                  own evidence,  is  as  follows.   Sometime  in  2016,  the
                  anonymous letter was sent.  A couple of months  later,  he
                  and [A] are discovered by her mother (so either  still  in
                  2016, or perhaps early 2017).  After that  incident,  then
                  matters move very quickly, with a  further  visit  to  his
                  home by [A's] family, the alleyway incident and  two  days
                  later, the mosque  incident  and  then,  within  days  his
                  departure from Iraq.  On that timeline,  therefore,  these
                  incidents are unlikely to have  occurred  any  later  than
                  early/mid 2017, but yet the Appellant does not leave Iraq,
                  on his own evidence, until April 2018.

             v.   I found the idea that he and [A] were receiving at  least
                  several Facebook messages from a competing suitor of hers,
                  but that neither of them (and in particular her)  had  any
                  idea, or even suspicion, of this person's identity  highly
                  implausible."

 At para 23, the judge dealt  with  a  further  issue  which  he  considered
detrimental to the appellant's claim as follows:

         "23. Risk of 'Honour'-based Violence.  It seems  unlikely  that  if
             [A's] family were as  offended  as  he  stated  and  as  well-
             connected as he claims that more  serious  violence  or  worse
             would not have been meted out to him, in the up to four or  so
             months over which these events took place, but yet, the  worst
             thing happened, on his evidence  was  a  beating  and  perhaps
             being 'cut with a sharp thing'.  They knew where he lived  and
             were able, on his evidence, to make personal contact with  him
             on two (or four)  other  occasions  and  therefore  had  ample
             opportunity to  take  serious  revenge,  but  did  not.   This
             indicates to me that any such threat is either non-existent or
             at very least highly exaggerated."

11. Then at para 24 the judge  dealt  with  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, in particular photographs said to link the appellant with  A
    and in turn A and her family with powerful members of the PKU and  also
    videos.  The latter were  available  to  the  judge  in  DVD  form  and
    transcripts of the three videos were in the appellant's bundle at A74 -
    A75; A77 and A78.

         "24. [A's] Family Influence.  While I note Professor Bluth's expert
             evidence as to the identity of the 'prominent' persons in  the
             photographs,  the  identifies  of  those  others   shown,   as
             allegedly related to [A], could  be  of  anybody.   Crucially,
             there is no photograph showing the Appellant and [A] together,
             a strange omission for a relationship that  last  seven  years
             (in the iPhone era), but instead, somewhat curious photographs
             showing a male and female hand together, with a rose [45 & 46]
             and another, showing for no discernible  reason,  the  torsos,
             but not the faces,  of  a  man  and  woman  [47].   There  is,
             therefore, apart from the Appellant's own oral evidence, which
             I find generally  lacking  in  credibility,  no  corroborative
             evidence of the relationship between him and [A]  (apart  from
             Facebook messages and videos, which,  again  could  have  come
             from  anybody  [A73-78]).   Accordingly,  there  is  no   link
             established between [A] and the girl shown in  the  photograph
             with an older man [39] and consequently  his  appearance  with
             the prominent persons in subsequent photographs.  Again, there
             is no link between [A] and the person said to be  [H]  in  the
             photographs.  All such photographs would be easily  obtainable
             from social media or internet search."

12. At para 25, the judge dealt with whether the appellant could return  to
    the IKR and concluded that he could.  Then at para 26, in the light  of
    his earlier findings, the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he had a well-founded fear of persecution  or  a  real
    risk of death or serious ill-treatment contrary to Arts 2 and 3 of  the
    ECHR on return to Iraq.

The Submission

13. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Bayoumi relied upon the three grounds of
    appeal although she indicated that he was not pressing ground 3 as much
    as grounds 1 and 2.

14. First, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had  fallen  into  error  in
    para 24 of his determination.  She submitted that the judge had  failed
    properly to consider the video evidence and the photographs.   She  had
    not appeared before the judge but her understanding was that the videos
    were not shown but that nevertheless  there  were  transcripts  in  the
    appellant's bundle and also evidence from Professor Bluth at para 5.1.1
    of his expert report (at page A42  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  which
    linked "A" in the video with the same girl in the photographs  and  her
    family and prominent PUK members.  Ms Bayoumi submitted that the  judge
    was wrong to say that there was "no link" between "A" and the  girl  in
    the photographs and then subsequently, the older man she is  with  (her
    father) and prominent members of the PUK shown  in  other  photographs.
    Further, Ms Bayoumi submitted that it was wrong to say that  there  was
    "no discernible reason" why photographs said to be of the appellant and
    A did not show their faces.  In the third video there is  recorded  the
    following: "I would have loved to take photos  of  us  with  our  faces
    visible, but I could not do it because of my family".

15. Secondly, Ms Bayoumi submitted that the judge had  failed  to  consider
    written evidence of the appellant's brother at A29 of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

16. Finally, although with less enthusiasm, Ms Bayoumi submitted  that  the
    "timeline" recognised by the judge in relation to the  events  at  para
    22(iv) rested upon his assertion that  the  events  had  "move[d]  very
    quickly" following the discovery of the appellant's relationship with A
    by A's mother.  This, Ms Bayoumi submitted, was  not  readily  apparent
    from the evidence and the appellant had never been asked about it.

17. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Rushforth submitted that the judge  had
    not maternally erred in law.

18. First, she submitted that the judge had taken into account  the  videos
    at para 24 of his determination.  There was no print from them or video
    played at the hearing.  The judge was entitled to take into account  as
    a "strange omission" that there had been no photograph  of  A  and  the
    appellant together given that their relationship had lasted some  seven
    years.  She accepted that the judge did not appear to have  been  taken
    into  account  the  explanation  given  by  "A"  in  the  third   video
    (transcript at A78) why their faces had not  appeared  in  photographs.
    But that, Ms Rushforth submitted, was  not  material  to  his  decision
    given his overall reasoning.

19. Secondly, Ms Rushforth accepted that the  judge  had  not  specifically
    dealt with the evidence of the  appellant's  brother  but,  again,  she
    submitted that error was not material given the judge's  other  reasons
    for disbelieving the appellant.

20. Thirdly, Ms Rushforth took me through the evidence and  submitted  that
    the chronology, and the characterisation  that  "matters  move[d]  very
    quickly", was consistent with the evidence.

Discussion

21. As regards ground 1, I accept Ms Bayoumi's submissions that  the  judge
    failed properly to  consider  all  the  evidence  in  para  24  of  his
    determination.  His reasons failed to  grapple  with  the  evidence  of
    Professor Bluth, in particular at para 5.1.1 of his report.  I  do  not
    propose to set that paragraph out as it contained  a  number  of  names
    which, if I were to anonymise them, would make the paragraph  difficult
    to understand.  Suffice  it  to  say,  and  I  did  not  understand  Ms
    Rushforth to suggest otherwise, this evidence does  provide  A's  basis
    for linking "A" in the videos with a girl in  the  photographs  who  is
    shown with a man (said  to  be  her  father)  who  is  shown  in  other
    photographs with  other  family  members  and  prominent  PUK  members.
    Further, the photograph said to be taken of the appellant and "A"  are,
    again, referred to in the videos, as is the explanation why they do not
    show the faces of the individuals.  There is, at least,  some  evidence
    here linking the appellant to "A" and, in turn, "A" to  a  family  with
    connections to prominent PUK members.   That  is  evidence  capable  of
    supporting  the  appellant's  claim.   The  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider whether there was a "link"  (when  concluding  there  was  "no
    link") between "A" and the girl in the photographs and  then  a  family
    connected with the PUK.  Likewise, there was a potentially "discernible
    reason" why the photographs relied upon by the appellant did not  show,
    it was claimed, the faces of the appellant and "A".

22. I do not accept Ms Rushforth's submission that these  errors  were  not
    material to the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding.   Despite  the
    reasons (in particular in para 22),  and  assuming  those  reasons  are
    sustainable, the judge's reasons in para  24  by  failing  to  consider
    Professor  Bluth's  relevant  evidence  and   the   evidence   in   the
    transcripts, caused  the  judge  to  discount  potentially  significant
    evidence which, in my judgment, is an error that  tainted  his  overall
    credibility finding.

23. Added to which,  as  the  respondent  accepted,  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the supporting evidence of the  appellant's  brother  at  A29.
    The judge makes no reference to it.  Perhaps,  in  itself,  this  error
    would  not  be  material  if  all  the  other  judge's   reasons   were
    sustainable.  As I have already indicated, the judge's treatment of the
    evidence in para 24 is not sustainable.  His failure  to  consider  the
    brother's evidence adds weight to the conclusion that the  errors  were
    material taken overall.

24. As I have already indicated, Ms Bayoumi did not press ground 3 with the
    same conviction as grounds 1 and 2.  In the light of the  view  I  have
    taken in relation to grounds 1 and 2, I do  not  express  the  view  in
    relation to ground 3.  Grounds  1  and  2,  in  themselves,  amount  to
    material errors of  law  such  that  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding cannot stand.

Decision

25. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

26. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge O'Rourke.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                24 June 2019

