
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13283/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th April 2017 and 13th June 2017    |On 16th June 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms A Smith of Counsel instructed by Islington
Law Centre
For the Respondent:     Mr K Norton (25th April) and Mr S Kotas, Senior
HOPO's

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan date of birth 30th May 2001.
     He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge RG Walters) dated 10th February 2017 to dismiss  his  protection
    appeal.


    Anonymity


 2. The Appellant is a minor seeking international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 22nd April 2016.  He
    was given leave to enter in order that he could join his elder brother,
    who had already been recognised as a refugee by the UK government.  The
    Appellant had until that time been living in the 'jungle' in Calais.


 4. The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  from  Nangarhar
    province and left because of threatening behaviour towards  his  family
    from Daesh.  Daesh took his father and elder brother sometime in  2015.
    It was intimated that the Appellant's elder brother in the UK ('A') was
    considered to have "left Islam". They said  that  they  knew  that  the
    family had met up with A in Pakistan. His mother had been frightened by
    these events and so had arranged for the Appellant to  come  here.  The
    remaining family are now in Peshawar,  Pakistan.   The  Appellant  does
    have a maternal uncle in Kabul, but it is not  safe  for  him  to  live
    there because this uncle works for international organisations  and  is
    himself at risk.


 5. The Respondent had rejected the claim on credibility  grounds  but  had
    granted  a  short  period  of  discretionary  leave  because   of   the
    Appellant's young age.  His age  has  never  been  in  dispute.  It  is
    therefore  accepted  that  at  the  date  of  the  material  events  in
    Afghanistan the Appellant was 13; he was 14 on arrival and at the  date
    of the First-tier Tribunal determination he was 15.

 6. When the Appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal both he
    and his elder brother 'A' gave live evidence. He relied  on  an  expert
    report  prepared  by  Dr  Antonio  Giustozzi  who  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's home village is in "one of the main areas of Daesh activity
    and is mostly under its control".  Dr Giustozzi considered the claim to
    be plausible, given that Daesh have a policy of  maintaining  a  strict
    control over the  local  population,  rely  on  spies  to  provide  key
    information about suspect families and consider the  Appellant's  tribe
    to be hostile to them.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  believe  the  claim.  It  found,  in
    summary, that the Appellant had been sent here by his family for socio-
    economic, rather than protection, reasons.

 8. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following material respects:

              i) Rejecting without intelligible reason the  expert  evidence
                 of Dr Giustozzi;

             ii) Making findings  unsupported  by  reasons/failing  to  give
                 sound reasons;

            iii) Failure to put matters to the witnesses;

             iv) Making the irrational finding that A was a "pathfinder" for
                 the Appellant on a road to economic betterment;


 9. The Respondent opposed the appeal. At  the  error  of  law  hearing  Mr
    Norton submitted that it was clear  from  the  determination  that  the
    Tribunal had had regard to the report of Dr Giustozzi; it  had  however
    not been obliged to accept his evidence. The credibility of the claimed
    events was a matter for the Tribunal. It had been  entitled  to  reject
    the evidence about the perceived risk  in  Nangarhar  for  the  reasons
    given, and to have made the finding that it did about Kabul.  The  fact
    that the Appellant's brother A had been found to be at risk in 2011 was
    not directly material, since  time  had  moved  on.    At  the  resumed
    hearing Mr Kotas submitted that  the  Appellant  was  lying  about  the
    events that he had narrated, and that the appeal  should  be  dismissed
    for want of credibility. I shall address the  Respondent's  submissions
    on credibility in the re-making. I deal first with why the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal fell to be dismissed.




    Error of Law


10. I did not find the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  easy  to
    follow. At paragraph 8 the Tribunal directs itself to  the  appropriate
    standard  of  proof,  that  being  the  lower  standard  applicable  in
    protection cases. At paragraphs  27  and  28  the  determination  makes
    reference to the Appellant's age and  to  the  applicable  guidance  on
    dealing with claims from children, noting that the benefit of the doubt
    should be "applied more liberally" in such cases. It  is  not  apparent
    from what follows that the Tribunal followed its own direction.


11. I say this for the following reasons. First, the account given  by  the
    Appellant is a relatively straightforward one, with no obvious internal
    inconsistencies.  No credit appears to have been given  for  that.  The
    account of Daesh taking over the Appellant's home area, subjecting  the
    local population to their control and targeting perceived opponents  is
    wholly supported by the country background evidence, in particular  the
    expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi. No credit appears to have  been  given
    to that.   The Appellant's evidence was in large  measure  corroborated
    by that of his brother A, who had already been found to be  a  credible
    witness and who was a recognised refugee. No  credit  appears  to  have
    been given for that.

12. Instead the Tribunal embarks on a review of  the  plausibility  of  the
    claim without making clear findings on the evidence.  Having heard  the
    submissions of the parties I am satisfied that each  of  the  findings,
    such as they are, are flawed for legal error.

13. At paragraphs 35-36 the Tribunal  appears  to  doubt  that  the  family
    travelled to Pakistan as claimed in 2014 and 2015 because there was  no
    evidence that they had sought the permission of Daesh to  do  so:  this
    was a reference to Dr Giustozzi's evidence that the organisation  seeks
    to maintain a tight control over the local population by, for instance,
    imposing travel restrictions. Whilst it is not at all clear what weight
    the Tribunal gave to that observation, it is a  'finding'  that  cannot
    stand, for the simple reason that it was not a point put to either  the
    Appellant or his brother.  Neither was  asked  whether  permission  was
    sought, or given.  Mr Norton submitted that it was an  "obvious"  point
    arising from Dr Giustozzi's report and that they should have dealt with
    it. I struggle to  see  how  these  two  young  witnesses  should  have
    apprehended it to be obvious where neither the HOPO  nor  the  Tribunal
    appeared to regard it as so at the hearing.

14. Paragraph 37-40 appears to reject (again it is unclear) without  reason
    the evidence that Daesh became aware of the fact that A was  living  in
    the UK. Dr Giustozzi  had  commented  on  this  evidence  that  it  was
    plausible given that the family lived in a village, and that Daesh were
    likely to have informants in the local population. I hardly  think  one
    needs expert evidence on this point. There  is  nothing  incredible  or
    implausible in the suggestion that people in  the  neighbourhood  would
    have known about A being here, and that  this  information  would  have
    filtered through to Daesh.

15. Paragraph 41 comments on the fact that Dr Giustozzi has not  given  any
    examples of Daesh targeting families because they have  members  abroad
    in non-Muslim countries.  Although,  again,  no  finding  is  given  in
    conclusion, the suggestion left hanging is  that  the  account  is  not
    supported by the background material. What that analysis omits to weigh
    in the balance is the fact  that  the  same  material  -  including  Dr
    Giustozzi's  commentary  -  indicates  that  Daesh  use  arbitrary  and
    oppressive means of controlling the local population, that they are  in
    control of the Appellant's home village and that they have a particular
    hostility towards his tribe.  Those were all material  factors  capable
    of displacing the negative inference that the Tribunal appeared to draw
    from the absence of direct evidence on all  fours  with  this  account.
    It was an error of law to ignore them.


16. Paragraphs  43-44  are  concerned  with  the  safety  or  otherwise  of
    Jalalabad. The Respondent had not, at least in the reasons for  refusal
    letter,  posited Jalalabad as a place of alternative relocation;  given
    the terms of the  Respondent's  policy  (as  set  out  in  the  Country
    Information and Guidance) it would seem doubtful  that  the  HOPO  took
    that line at the hearing. The Tribunal was however concerned  with  the
    objective evidence on  the  city  because  that  is  where  the  family
    initially fled in fear of the Taliban.  Dr  Giustozzi  considered  that
    Daesh had "some ability" to operate there, but it had not yet  targeted
    individuals. Of this the Tribunal concluded, at paragraph 44:

         "If that be the case,  I  did  not  find  it  believable  that  the
         Appellant's family would risk sending him, aged 14, on the long and
         dangerous overland journey to the UK, as opposed to him  relocating
         in Jalalabad with other family members".


17. On first reading I did not  understand  this  reasoning  at  all.   The
    evidence of Dr Giustozzi is not rejected, but on the other hand  it  is
    not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  did  in  fact  make  that  journey
    described. Further reference is made to the perils of his  journey  [at
    paragraph 47], and [at 46] to the fact that Pakistan offered a "cheaper
    and safer" option than sending the Appellant all the way to Europe.  It
    is only in paragraphs 47 and 48 that the point becomes clear: the  fact
    that the  family  did  not  leave  the  Appellant  in  moderately  safe
    Jalalabad, and instead  chose  to  send  here,  indicates  an  ulterior
    motive:


         "His family's motives for sending  him  to  the  UK  are,  I  find,
         because of a desire for him to be looked after and educated by  the
         UK government.


         The Appellant's brother [A] has been a pathfinder.  He  arrived  in
         the UK as a minor and went into foster care where he prospered.  He
         did well academically and when he gave evidence said that  he  owns
         60 per cent of a mobile phone shop"

18. Ms Smith strongly objected to this reasoning. I accept  her  submission
    that it was legally flawed. The global conclusion  that  both  brothers
    had come here simply  to  obtain  an  education  and  foster  care  was
    irrational.  First, there was no evidential basis for  it.  Second,  it
    was made without taking the actual evidence into account. No regard has
    been had, for instance, to the fact that they are from a place formerly
    under control of Taliban militias, and now under  the  sway  of  Daesh,
    where the civilian population has  been  subject  to  widespread  human
    rights abuses for over a decade.  More significantly no regard has been
    had to the fact that A  had  been  found  by  another  Tribunal,  in  a
    decision never challenged, to have come here because he had  protection
    needs.


19. For the reasons set out  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did err in  law  in  its  approach  to  the  claimed  risk  in
    Nangarhar.  Ms Smith submitted that it followed that  the  findings  on
    internal flight to Kabul could not stand, since they  were  necessarily
    infected by the assumption that this was a child whose family had taken
    an economic, rather than  a  protection-based  decision,  to  send  him
    abroad.  I accept that this must be the case but for the  avoidance  of
    doubt set these findings aside for discrete errors.  The Tribunal finds
    that the Appellant could live  with  his  uncle  in  Kabul.  Whilst  it
    appears  to  be  accepted  that  this  man  is   an   interpreter   for
    organisations such as USAID (as found by the Tribunal which  determined
    A's appeal) the Tribunal considers it  reasonable  that  the  Appellant
    live with him because there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Taliban  have
    managed to attack him. This fails to  weight  in  the  balance  a)  the
    objective evidence that such interpreters are targets  for  terrorists,
    b) the evidence that only the immediate family of the interpreters  are
    given protection and c) whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    child with clinically diagnosed mental health problems  to  live  under
    those circumstances.


20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

21. The parties invited me to re-make the decision in the  Upper  Tribunal.
    No interpreter had been available at the hearing in April so the matter
    was reconvened before me on the 13th June 2017.



    The Re-Making

22. I remind myself that the burden lies at all times on the Appellant.  He
    must demonstrate there to be a real  risk,  or  reasonable  likelihood,
    that he would face persecution or serious harm in Afghanistan today. If
    there is a place where he can establish such  a  risk  his  claim  will
    nevertheless fail if I am satisfied that there is a somewhere  else  in
    the country where he could reasonably be expected  to  live  without  a
    risk of harm.


23. Certain elements of the claim are settled.  It  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a child; at the date of the re-making he had  just  turned
    16. It is accepted that he is from Afghanistan. It is accepted that  he
    is the younger brother of A, who came here himself as a child in  2011.
    A now has indefinite leave to  remain  following  a  grant  of  refugee
    status.  As far as policy is concerned I am guided by the  Respondent's
    Country Policy and Information Notes (CPIN) 'Afghanistan: Fear of anti-
    government elements (AGEs)' Version 2.0, published  in  December  2016.
    This document is relied upon by Ms Smith in particular at [2.4.2] where
    is states that in areas under AGE control, there will be a  failure  of
    state protection. At [2.4.3] it states that even  in  Kabul  and  other
    districts controlled by the government the authorities will "usually be
    unable to offer effective protection given the structural weaknesses in
    the security forces and the justice system".  I am asked to  note  that
    the only place of possible internal relocation suggested in the refusal
    letter is Kabul.

24. Mr Kotas forcefully submitted that the evidence of both  the  Appellant
    and his brother was false, and that the claim had been made up.  I have
    kept his submissions in the forefront of my mind as I have assessed the
    evidence.


    The Appellant's Evidence

25. The Appellant's 'screening interview' took place on the 20th May  2016.
    Because he was a child he was permitted to submit a  written  statement
    setting out the details of his case.  That is undated but was submitted
    under cover of letter dated the 13th June 2016 ('statement A').  He was
    then interviewed in detail about his asylum claim, on the 7th  November
    2016. Since then the Appellant has submitted  two  further  statements,
    one dated the 21st December 2016 ('statement B') and one dated 19th May
    2017, drafted to deal with matters that had only arisen in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  decision  ('statement  C').   The  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence before me. He was extensively cross-examined on behalf of  the
    Respondent.


26. The Appellant states that he is from a village in a remote  rural  area
    of Nangarhar.  It is called Bati Kot.   Before  coming  to  the  UK  he
    lived with his parents, sister and two brothers. Mr Kotas put it to him
    that in his screening interview it makes no mention of his sister.  The
    Appellant was unable to explain why the record shows that. As far as he
    is concerned his sister was living there  too.    He  attended  primary
    school and learned the Qu'ran at the village mosque. He enjoyed playing
    cricket with his friends.  In statement A [at 6] the Appellant explains
    that "life in Afghanistan for everyone including me is always  full  of
    fear".  People were worried about landmines and other explosions.  When
    he was a young child his father had been injured in an  explosion,  and
    now limps when he walks. His father is a farmer. The Appellant's  elder
    brother R and he would help his father in the fields.

27. The Appellant states that the Taliban and Daesh have control  over  the
    area where he lives.  He has seen those men with  his  own  eyes.  They
    have long straggly hair and wear black. They  cover  their  heads  with
    white  cloths.  They  carry  Kalashnikovs  and  rocket  launchers.   In
    statement B the Appellant explained why his family do not support these
    organisations. They burned schools, stopped  girls  from  studying  and
    slaughtered people. In cross examination Mr Kotas asked  the  Appellant
    if he had seen these things with his own eyes. The Appellant said  that
    he had never seen anyone beheaded, but he had heard about  such  events
    from other people who had. He knew that they had burned the  school  in
    the village down because he had seen this himself. Mr Kotas  questioned
    why he had not made this clear in his  statement.  The  Appellant  said
    that he did not know, perhaps he had not been asked about it as he  was
    being asked now.

28. The Appellant states that as far back as he can  remember  the  Taliban
    had been there, but more recently it was Daesh.  Asked to  explain  the
    difference between these two groups he said that the  Taliban  want  to
    fight the government; Daesh want to fight the people  too.   They  hate
    everyone who is not one of them.  He left because of Daesh.

29. In 2014 the Appellant's mother was very sick and they  were  told  that
    she needed an operation.  There was no hospital in their area and  they
    were told that she would need to travel to Pakistan.   The  family  all
    travelled with her. In statement C the Appellant addresses the question
    of how the left their home area. He has no idea whether his parents got
    permission in advance to travel: it did not occur to him to  ask  them.
    He just went with them. They went through a checkpoint, and his  father
    spoke with them. He does not know what his father said  to  them.  They
    went for about one and half months and stayed with a relative who lives
    there. A came from the UK and saw them.  The  Appellant  describes  the
    visit as a "strange time":  they were all happy to see A, but  sad  and
    worried about their mother because she was so sick.  It  was  a  "mixed
    time".  When they went back to the village they told people  that  they
    had gone away for medical treatment. That was normal. He remembers  his
    parents telling him, however, not to mention to anyone  that  they  had
    seen A.

30. In 2015 they went back to Pakistan in order to meet up with A for  Eid.
    They spent about two weeks with him there.  They  were  very  happy  to
    spend time with him. A had brought gifts, including smartphones for the
    Appellant and R.  The Appellant was excited and was thinking  how  cool
    it would be when he got home and could show his friends. No one else in
    the village had mobile phones like this and he wanted to show them  how
    they work.

31. Shortly after they arrived back in the village however, Daesh came  and
    detained the Appellant's father and R. The Appellant  was  out  playing
    with friends at the time and so was not taken.    The Appellant and his
    mother were very afraid. They knew that sometimes people  are  held  to
    make relatives do things, and that prisoners are sometimes tortured  or
    killed.  His mother went to the police but they could not do  anything.
    Mr Kotas asked the Appellant how his mother went to the police if Daesh
    were in control of the area. The Appellant said that the police stay in
    a base on the road, outside of the village. They said that  they  could
    not help. The Appellant's mother sought advice  from  her  brother  and
    brother-in-law. The Appellant's uncle made contact with  an  agent  who
    arranged for him to go to Europe with an agent.  He was taken first  to
    Kabul, where he went by air to Tehran where he was met by an agent.

32. The journey was  long  and  difficult.  The  Appellant  passed  through
    numerous countries. The journey from Tehran to the Turkish  border  was
    "horrible and very scary" and the Appellant does not like to talk about
    it: he was transported in the boot of a car and could  barely  breathe.
    When the Appellant was in the Jungle people  told  him  that  he  would
    scream in his sleep: he has nightmares about that journey.   He  walked
    into Turkey, and was driven to the Bulgarian border.  They  were  in  a
    "big and frightening" forest and the Appellant was  scared  that  there
    were wild animals in there. It took 5 days to cross  that  forest;  the
    Appellant was hungry, thirsty and  scared  the  entire  time.   At  the
    Serbian border they surrendered themselves to the  Serbian  police  who
    transported them to the German border.  They couldn't  cross  there  so
    they went via Austria and Italy. It was in this border hinterland  that
    the Appellant managed to speak with A in London. A told him that he had
    spoken to their family and that their father and R had managed  to  get
    away from Daesh. A "did something with  his  phone"  that  enabled  the
    Appellant to speak to his parents. They were in Jalalabad at that time.
    As far as the Appellant could understand it there had been  a  big  air
    and land operation against Daesh so they had  managed  to  escape.  The
    Appellant was very happy to hear that they were safe. It felt better to
    know that they were alive. After that the journey was mostly by  train.
    The Appellant ended up in Calais. Life in the Jungle  was  "not  good".
    Eventually some lawyers came  and  persuaded  the  appellant  to  claim
    asylum. They said that they would be able to get his claim  transferred
    to the UK so that he could be with A, and they did.


33. At the hearing the Appellant  said  that  he  was  unable  to  remember
    exactly when he had received that call from  A  telling  him  that  his
    father and brother were safe. He knew he was somewhere  on  the  border
    with Austria and Italy but could not give a date. Mr Kotas  put  it  to
    him that it was incredible that he could not remember the date that  he
    received this important news. The Appellant said that he was unable  to
    say.  He just knows that he was somewhere in Europe.

34. The Appellant states that he cannot really remember  the  time  when  A
    left Afghanistan. He is not aware of the details of why A left and  has
    never asked him why he came to the UK. In  statement  A  the  Appellant
    points out "in Afghanistan adults don't discuss important  issues  with
    children or  involve  them  in  decision-making".  He  maintained  that
    position when pressed by Mr Kotas at hearing. He has never  thought  to
    ask his brother about why he left.

35. The Appellant has maintained contact with his  family.  His  mother  is
    doing better than before but is still ill. She is  living  in  Peshawar
    and continuing to receive treatment at Lady Reading.  They were  living
    with his aunt but now they have rented a house  there.  He  last  spoke
    with them about four days before the hearing.  The  Appellant  believes
    that his brother in R is also in Pakistan but has not had contact  with
    him for some time.  He has been told that after he left Afghanistan the
    family had moved briefly to Jalalabad, and then his  parents  had  gone
    ahead to Pakistan, leaving his younger  sister  and  brother  with  his
    paternal uncle who lives there.  His brother  was  about  ten  at  that
    time. Now he is 12 and is living with his parents in Peshawar.


    Medical Evidence

36. I have been provided with a report by Dr Susan Storey, Consultant Child
    and Adolescent Psychiatrist. Dr Storey assessed the  Appellant  on  the
    19th March 2016 in Calais. In order to prepare her  report,  dated  the
    31st March 2016, she also interviewed A and was taken on a  group  tour
    of the Jungle.  The report sets out  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences  in  Afghanistan  and  his  journey  to  France.   In   her
    conclusions Dr Storey notes that unaccompanied minors are generally  at
    an increased risk of developing  mental  health  difficulties  at  some
    stage, due to the separation from  their  family  and  their  migration
    experiences. In her  assessment  the  Appellant  meets  the  diagnostic
    criteria for moderate depressive  disorder,  adjustment  disorder,  and
    some of the criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.


    Brother A


37. Brother A came to the UK in 2011 when he was accepted to have been  17.
    He claimed asylum on the basis that he had a well-founded fear  of  the
    Taliban in his  home  area  of  Nangarhar.   His  uncle  worked  as  an
    interpreter for the Americans, and A had been targeted by virtue of his
    association with  him.   The  Respondent  had  rejected  the  claim  on
    credibility grounds and A appealed. In a decision dated  5th  May  2011
    Immigration Judge Cohen of the First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal.
    Having heard A give evidence  Judge  Cohen  found  the  account  to  be
    credible. He found as fact that A's uncle did work  as  an  interpreter
    for the Americans and that A had been placed at risk as  a  result.  Mr
    Kotas asked me to note  that  the  Respondent  had  not  attended  that
    hearing, and so A had not been cross examined.


38. A has provided two witness statements in these proceedings.  The  first
    is dated the 21st December 2016 and the second the  5th  June  2017.  A
    gave oral evidence before me and was cross examined by Mr Kotas.

39. A came the UK in 2011 and claimed asylum. He now has  indefinite  leave
    to remain. He states that he had initially lost contact with his family
    in Afghanistan - they did not then have phones or anything like that in
    the village - but the Red Cross found them and put them back in  touch.
    He maintains regular contact with them today.  He said that now  social
    media has spread  through  Afghanistan  and  people  are  able  to  use
    facilities such as Skype.  A explains that he is  the  eldest  of  four
    brothers. The next down is R  who  is  about  20.  Then  there  is  the
    Appellant and their younger brother. Their  sister  is  about  16.    A
    confirms that his mother has been unwell for  some  time.  She  suffers
    from various complaints and has had a heart attack in the  past.    She
    continues to receive treatment at Lady Reading. Their father  has  sold
    land and A sends money when he is able to help pay for this treatment.

40. A recalls that in 2014 his mother became very unwell. She was taken  to
    hospital in Pakistan and she spoke  with  him  by  telephone.  She  had
    suffered a heart attack and was very ill. She said that she  wanted  to
    see him again before she died; this  was  a  heavy  burden  for  A.  He
    decided that he would try and travel to Pakistan.   A  managed  to  get
    there and see his family for the first  time  in  7  years.  It  was  a
    difficult experience for A. Although he was overjoyed to see his family
    again there was now something of gulf between them.  He  had  grown  up
    here and become westernised; they remained "traditional Afghan  country
    people".

41. A says that his family returned to Afghanistan  shortly  after  he  had
    returned to the UK. He stayed in touch via Skype. He  knew  that  their
    lives were "not great" but they were just trying  to  get  on.   Seeing
    them made him want to reconnect to his roots, so the following year  he
    arranged to meet with his family for Eid.  They  all  travelled  for  a
    second time to Pakistan.  They had  a  really  good  time  together.  A
    bought phones for his brothers as gifts because he wanted to give  them
    something of his life.

42. A describes Bati  Kot  as  a  close  knit  community.  Everybody  knows
    everybody and it is hard to conceal things. The first  time  that  they
    had gone to Pakistan his family had told everyone  that  they  were  in
    Pakistan for treatment because they did not think it  a  good  idea  to
    advertise the fact that their son was living in England.  They are  not
    rich people - nobody is expected to do  anything  other  than  survive.
    The second time they went it was more difficult to  hide.  It  was  not
    usual for families to travel abroad for Eid. People would normally stay
    at home and slaughter an animal. People only  really  travelled  abroad
    either for medical treatment like his mum, or to go to Mecca.   Now  he
    looks back on it A realises that giving  his  brothers  western  things
    like smartphones would have caused  problems.  It  was  not  usual  for
    people to have that sort of thing. It may have provoked jealousy in the
    village, or anti-western feeling.

43. About one week after they all returned from that Eid trip in  September
    2015 A received a call from his maternal uncle  telling  him  that  his
    father and brother R had been detained:

         "He said I should call  home.  I  immediately  called  my  father's
         mobile phone number, and my mum answered. Father usually  left  the
         phone at home because I was the only person who called the  number,
         and there was little reception anywhere else. My mum told  me  that
         Daesh had taken [R] and my dad. She was crying and very upset.  She
         said everyone that Daesh had taken before had been killed. They had
         raided a nearby village before. A man  who  lived  in  the  UK  had
         returned to Afghanistan to see his family was taken and he and  his
         father were killed. My mum was crying and saying that  [R]  and  my
         dad would be killed too. I tried to calm her down but  I  was  very
         worried too.


         I felt terrible that this had happened. I felt that  I  had  caused
         this to happen to my dad and brother. I  felt  guilty  that  I  had
         brought danger to them. I was shocked that  this  had  happened.  I
         never expected it. I would never  have  met  my  family  if  I  had
         thought that it would cause so much trouble. Now I  think  that  we
         had been a bit na�ve, but at the time we just wanted  to  see  each
         other so much that we hoped for the best".


44. A states that his family were concerned for the Appellant's safety. His
    uncles wanted to get him out of the village. The  uncle  in  Kabul  has
    some protection in his job, but his company would not  extend  that  to
    other family members.  This uncle has made it clear that he  would  not
    be able to take the Appellant in.  They decided that he should be  sent
    to Europe to join A.


45. A states that he followed the situation closely.    At  that  time  the
    situation with  Daesh  in  Nangarhar  had  reached  a  critical  point.
    People were growing tired of the violence and the brutality.  They  had
    started to do things like take unmarried girls and force them to  marry
    them. A member of the Afghan parliament called Zahir  Qadir  spoke  out
    against them. He was very vocal in challenging  the  government  to  do
    something about it. He said that if they did not, he would take his own
    forces and fight them. He captured some  Daesh  fighters  and  beheaded
    them. This was controversial and the government said that he should not
    have done this. Zahir Qadir questioned why he was being criticised when
    Daesh were allowed to carry on. All of this provoked  the  Afghan  army
    into actually engaging  with  Daesh.  They  launched  a  big  offensive
    against them in Bati Kot, Achin and  Kot.  There  were  airstrikes  and
    ground troops. A lot of Daesh fighters were killed. They released a lot
    of Daesh captives - that was how R and  his  father  were  released.  A
    states that he follows Zahir Qadir on Facebook and that at one point he
    had even messaged him asking him to help  find  them  but  he  had  not
    replied.


46. After they were released A spoke with his father and  R  by  telephone.
    They didn't discuss the details of what happened. That  is  their  way.
    There's no point upsetting someone by telling them about something that
    they cannot change.  R went to Pakistan some time after this. A has not
    been able to speak with him again. He tried to contact him but  R  does
    not answer. In his statement A explains that he and R do not get  along
    so well. He believes that R blames him for what happened. A feels sorry
    for this, but does not know what he can do  today  to  stop  him  being
    angry.

47. In cross examination Mr Kotas put it to A that  his  family  would  not
    have been able to travel to Pakistan from their home area because Daesh
    do not let people travel.  A said that he was unable to  comment  about
    the specific way that Daesh operate since they only  emerged  after  he
    left Afghanistan, but that he had spoken with  his  father  about  this
    matter.  They just had to pass through checkpoints  and  explain  where
    they were going. On all occasions they had reason to travel. His mother
    was obviously unwell, and in the case of September 2015  it  would  not
    have been unusual for people to travel out of the immediate vicinity of
    the  village,  since  they  would  have  been  preparing  for  Eid,  ie
    travelling to markets in the bigger towns etc.

48. A says that he and the Appellant are very close now. He knows that  the
    Appellant has been badly affected by what has happened to  him  and  he
    tried to give him love and affection as much as he can to show him that
    he is supported. The Appellant has been emotionally disturbed  by  what
    he has been through. He has nightmares and walks around in his sleep.



    Other Evidence


49. The Appellant has produced several pieces of evidence relating  to  his
    mother and her  illness.   In  his  evidence  A  explained  that  these
    documents were all scanned and emailed to him using  services  provided
    by shops in the bazaar. In respect of the most recent documents,  these
    were photographed on a smart  phone  and  simply  emailed  as  attached
    photos.  I have been shown a letter from  a  Dr  Qudratullah  Qani  who
    appears to be based in Afghanistan. His note is dated the 17th  October
    2016. He writes that  the  patient  has  several  complaints  including
    myocardial infraction and asthma, and that since Afghani  hospitals  do
    not have the facilities to deal with such diseases he has referred  her
    for better diagnosis and treatment in Pakistan.  Dr  Qudratullah  gives
    the patient's age as 55.  I have  three  documents  from  Lady  Reading
    Hospital in Peshawar. The first is dated  19th  December  2016  and  is
    addressed to whom it may  concern.  Its  states  that  the  patient  is
    suffering  from  cardiac  disease  and  requires  surgery  as  soon  as
    possible. She needs complete bed rest and extra care for her  recovery.
    Her age is given as 50. Various  prescriptions  are  appended  to  this
    document. The remaining two are invoices from  February  of  this  year
    indicating that the  lady  in  question  has  now  been  admitted,  and
    prescribed medicine, for the treatment of endometriosis.  These  record
    her age as 53 years.


50. At the hearing Ms Smith produced two monochrome print outs  of  what  I
    was told were photographs  taken  of  the  boys'  uncle's  photographic
    identity cards. Again, these were obtained  via  smartphone  photograph
    and email. The first was issued on the 25th August 2015.  It  describes
    him as a 'procurement consultant' in the 'GDPM'  department.  This  was
    issued by the Ministry of Public Health. The second is dated 31st March
    2017 and was issued by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  to  him  as  an
    employee of 'VEGA CBCMP II'. Ms Smith invited me to conduct an internet
    search on what those initials meant; she said that  they  relate  to  a
    USAID funded aid programme in the agriculture sector. They  do  indeed.
    I bear in mind that the Respondent has been  given  no  opportunity  to
    verify these documents.



    Country Background Material

51. The Appellant's representatives have produced evidence relating  to  an
    attack launched by the American military against Daesh  positions  very
    close to Bati Kot in Nangarhar  in  December  2015.    Mr  Matthew  Sam
    Wapples is a senior graphic designer with Independent Television  News.
    He has produced a witness statement dated 22nd May 2017 to which  there
    are appended several photographic exhibits.   Mr Wapples' statement  is
    a fairly detailed technical description of how he came to  produce  the
    photographs that he introduces. The point of  the  statement,  and  the
    photographs, is to illustrate how close Bati Kot is to the event  known
    as the 'MOAB' assault by the American airforce. This  stands   for  the
    'mother of all bombs', the largest ever  conventional  weapon  used  in
    war. The reason that Mr Wapples' evidence  was  necessary  was  because
    ordinary maps of the area are not of sufficient magnification  to  show
    Bati Kot. He used various tools including the professional systems used
    by ITN to  produce  the  maps,  which  show  the  strike  to  have  hit
    approximately 25 miles away from the Appellant's village.  A number  of
    newspaper articles relating to that strike and its aftermath  are  also
    produced in the bundle. These indicate  that  approximately  160  Daesh
    fighters died in the assaults during  December  and  that  hundreds  of
    local people were emboldened to take  to  the  streets  in  protest  at
    Daesh's beheadings and brutalisation of the people under their control.
     The MOAB was described by  residents  as  having  an  effect  like  an
    earthquake.


52. Dr Giustozzi's report is dated the 20th December 2016.  The  Respondent
    challenges neither his objectivity nor his well-established  expertise.
    The salient points of the report are as follows:

        . Nangarhar province saw the strongest increase in violence of  any
          province in Afghanistan during 2014. There  are  three  insurgent
          groups active there: the Taliban, Daesh and Hizb-i-Islami


        . Bati Kot is one of the main areas of Daesh activity and is  under
          their control

        . They are allied locally with Shinwari tribesmen, who  are  rivals
          to the Appellant's tribe

        . Daesh carry out forced recruitment of non-combatant staff

        . They maintain a strict control  over  the  local  population  and
          operate spy networks in order to root out any potential opponents

        .    Those    considered    to    be    "collaborationists"    with
          government/western interests are targeted by both Daesh  and  the
          Taliban.  People are threatened,  kidnapped  and  killed  on  the
          basis of such suspicions

        . Daesh have some presence in Jalalabad, and now some  presence  in
          Kabul, ever since 150 members of the Haqqani network defected  to
          them. They are mostly targeting Shi'a in the city  and  have  not
          yet developed the  capability  to  track  down  individuals.  The
          Taliban have an established presence there

        . If forced to relocate to Kabul the Appellant would  most  likely,
          because o his tribal origins, end up in the  east  of  the  city.
          This is where  the  Taliban  are  at  the  strongest.  They  have
          launched numerous successful attacks in the city,  including  the
          deployment of truck bombs

        . There is not a sufficiency of protection for persons who  are  at
          risk from insurgent groups in Kabul

        .  Living  in  Kabul  is   challenging.   Housing   is   expensive,
          unemployment is high and there is no  benefit  system.   Children
          are exposed to various forms of exploitation  including  begging,
          street  vending  and  sex  work.  The  exposure   to   narcotics,
          abduction, trafficking, delinquency and infection  with  HIV/AIDS
          is "very clear"



    My Findings


53. In his submissions Mr Kotas asked me to reject  the  account  given  as
    untrue. He  submitted  that  such  were  the  implausibilities  in  the
    evidence, he could not even accept that the  Appellant  was  from  Bati
    Kot,  in  the  area  now  controlled  by  Daesh.    I  consider   those
    submissions in turn.


54.  The  Respondent  submits  that  the  Appellant  has   given   evidence
    inconsistent with the country background  material,  in  two  respects.
    First, the evidence that the family were able to leave the  village  to
    travel to Pakistan is inconsistent with the  opinion  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    that Daesh maintain tight control of the civilian population. I am  not
    satisfied that there is any contradiction. Since this matter was raised
    by the First-tier Tribunal A has spoken with his parents who  explained
    that they were allowed to pass through  the  checkpoints  after  giving
    reasons for their journey. That is not inconsistent with Dr Giustozzi's
    opinion. The second matter raised by Mr Kotas was why the family  would
    elect to leave the two younger children in the  care  of  an  uncle  in
    Jalalabad: it was Dr Giustozzi's evidence that Daesh have some presence
    in and around the city. Again, in the context of the evidence overall I
    cannot find this to be  an  inconsistency,  or  implausibility  in  the
    evidence. This is a poor farming family who fell under  some  suspicion
    because they had travelled out of the vicinity of Bati Kot on more than
    one occasion, and who were believed to have a relative abroad.  It does
    not follow that Daesh would be so interested in pursuing them that they
    would track down two very young children in  Jalalabad.    No  doubt  a
    decision to leave young children behind is a difficult one, but  it  is
    one that many families facing forced migration make.


55. The Respondent  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  should  be
    rejected as it was unsatisfactory. I am asked to find that he was vague
    in a number of respects, notably in his inability to give  a  date  for
    the day that he received a call telling him that his father and brother
    had escaped from Daesh custody. This submission,  and  the  force  with
    which  the  issue  was  put  in  cross  examination,  bordered  on  the
    ridiculous. This is a child from rural  Afghanistan,  where  dates  and
    times mean little outside of identifying annual  celebrations  such  as
    Eid.   He had been, as set out in great detail in  his  statements  and
    the report of Dr Storey, on a protracted and perilous journey which has
    left him with clinically diagnosable mental  health  issues.    He  was
    able  to  tell  the  Tribunal  that  he  had  been  somewhere  on   the
    Austrian/Italian border, having failed to cross into Germany. He was in
    countryside so cannot say exactly where he was. He remembers the  phone
    call very well but could not give a date for it.  I  can  find  nothing
    incredible, vague or implausible in that.  I would be very surprised if
    he had been able to give a date.  I note, in respect of the  particular
    issue  of  when  the  escape   took   place,   that   the   Appellant's
    representatives have produced unchallenged country background  material
    to indicate that Daesh were under assault in Nangarhar  in  late  2015.
    The evidence of Mr  Wapples  about  the  'MOAB'  and  the  accompanying
    newspaper articles are all consistent with A's evidence that there  was
    a concerted  effort  made  by  the  Afghan  government,  local  people,
    opposing militias such as that he describes, and the American  airforce
    at that time.  There were a number of things that the Appellant did not
    know, or could not speak to in any detail. That was  wholly  consistent
    with his age and culture.

56. The Respondent submitted that it was inherently implausible that  Daesh
    would have been able to find out that A was in the  UK  in  2015  where
    they had not been able to do so before. I reject that submission. There
    are a number of possibilities. They might have  known  all  along,  but
    been concerned with other matters.  They  might  have  known,  and  not
    cared, their sudden interest in potential troublemakers  stemming  from
    increased opposition in the area. Perhaps  it  was,  as  the  Appellant
    suggests, a jealous local who noticed the boys returning from  Pakistan
    with obviously western goods. There are many possibilities: it  follows
    that the evidence cannot be said to be inherently incredible, ie so far
    fetched as to be incapable of belief.

57. Mr Kotas submitted that the Appellant had embellished his evidence.  He
    had said in his statement that Daesh burned down schools,  and  in  his
    oral evidence said that they had burned down a school in  his  village.
    This is considered by the Respondent to be an obvious  example  of  the
    Appellant seeking to inflate the evidence. Perhaps it is, but since  it
    does not appear to be in issue that Daesh do burn down schools, or that
    they are in control of Bati Kot, I find it difficult to see where  that
    takes the Respondent's case.


58. Finally Mr Kotas described the Appellant's evidence that  he  had  not,
    since he arrived in the UK, discussed family history with  his  brother
    as  "patent  nonsense".  He  identified  this  as  "one  of  the   most
    troublesome aspects of the evidence".  I am unable to follow the logic.
     The Appellant knows that A left because of some problems arising  with
    the Taliban, but says that  he  did  not  consider  it  appropriate  to
    question A about these matters.  I find  that  to  be  wholly  credible
    evidence for several  reasons.  Firstly,  it  is  consistent  with  the
    context of the case. These boys are from a region that has been in  the
    grip of a violent civil war, or under the sway of  oppressive  regimes,
    for the best part of 4 decades.  The reasons why  these  brothers  have
    left do not need to  be  explained  to  each  other.  Secondly,  it  is
    consistent with  the  culture  from  which  they  come.  The  Appellant
    explained, in several places in his evidence, that  in  Pathan  culture
    children are not expected to discuss such  matters  with  adults,  much
    less question them about it. In his evidence A spoke of how R  did  not
    tell him about his experiences at the hands of Daesh: "That is our way.
    There's no point upsetting someone by telling them about something that
    they cannot change".   It is further consistent with  the  evidence  of
    the Appellant, A and Dr Storey, that the Appellant has been emotionally
    disturbed by events in his past and would like to avoid discussing them
    if he can.


59. My assessment of the Appellant's evidence is  that  it  has  been  both
    internally  consistent  and  consonant  with  the  country   background
    material. He has been interviewed by immigration officers, assessed  by
    a consultant psychiatrist, had his evidence taken by  a  solicitor  and
    twice given evidence under cross examination. I can  find  no  material
    discrepancies in any of the evidence that he has  given.  His  evidence
    about his home area being under Daesh  control  was  reflected  in  the
    country background material. Importantly that  material  also  suggests
    that the organisation came under significant stress in that  region  in
    late 2015, which would accord both with the Appellant's family  members
    being rounded up, and with them managing to escape.

60. The evidence itself was detailed and, contrary to Mr Kotas' suggestion,
    I found that it did have the 'ring  of  truth'  about  it.   Small  but
    telling details revealed this account from the perspective of a  child:
    his mixed emotions at  seeing  his  brother  again  in  such  difficult
    circumstances (in Pakistan in 2014), how excited he was to go home  and
    show off his new iPhone to his friends (in 2015), how he  feared  being
    attacked by animals in the dark Bulgarian forest.

61. I place significant weight on the evidence of the Appellant.

62. The Appellant's evidence is supported to a great extent by that of  his
    elder brother, A.  A was found to be a witness of truth in  respect  of
    his own asylum appeal. It is true that the assessment  of  Judge  Cohen
    does not bind me, but it is my starting point. I bear in mind that  the
    Respondent did not attend that hearing and that  A  was  not  therefore
    cross examined. I bear in mind that he might well have told  the  truth
    then, but for whatever reason be lying today. Having taken all of  that
    into account, I found A to be  a  persuasive,  confident  and  credible
    witness. His written evidence was detailed. Under cross examination  he
    gave his answers in an unhesitant manner.   His evidence was consistent
    with that of his brother, and I attach significant weight to it.

63. The evidence of the brothers was supported by documentary  evidence  of
    their mother's illness. I have considered that medical evidence in  the
    round with the remaining evidence, per Tanveer Ahmed. I note that  none
    of these doctors appears to be able to agree about how old the  patient
    might be but I attach no weight to that issue. As the Appellant and his
    brother explained, chronological age is  not  something  that  attracts
    much attention from where they are from. Their mother does not  have  a
    birth certificate. She would have  been  accompanied  to  any  hospital
    appointments by a relative, and everyone might  have  had  a  different
    answer to the question. Whether she was 50, 53 or 54  at  the  time  of
    these consultations matters not.

64. Having considered all of the evidence I am entirely satisfied that  the
    burden of proof has been discharged. I accept  that  the  Appellant  is
    telling the truth.

65. I  find  as  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in  his  home  area  of  Bati  Kot  from  insurgent  groups
    including  Daesh.   If  returned  to  that  area  today  he  would   be
    immediately vulnerable to detention  and  interrogation,  as  a  person
    returning from the west, from a family who fled after Daesh  showed  an
    interest in them.

66. The Respondent submits that notwithstanding any risk that  might  exist
    in Nangarhar, the Appellant cannot qualify for refugee  status  because
    he can avail himself of an internal flight alternative.  Mr  Kotas  did
    suggest at one point that this might include Jalalabad, but in light of
    the CPIN and the terms of the refusal letter, withdrew this  submission
    and concentrated on Kabul.  Apparently  accepting  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk in Kabul if  he  were  to  be  returned  there  as  an
    unaccompanied minor, Mr Kotas submitted that there was no  good  reason
    why the Appellant would be unaccompanied if returned to  the  city.  He
    submitted first that the Appellant could live with his  uncle,  and  if
    that were not possible, that the family could leave Pakistan  and  come
    and live in Kabul to be with him.


67. I consider first the possibility that the Appellant could live with his
    uncle.  The maternal uncle has been living in Kabul for some time.  The
    Appellant said that he had originally lived in the  village,  where  he
    had interpreted for  the  American  forces  during  the  war,  but  had
    latterly been living in Kabul and working for various international aid
    organisations. Judge  Cohen  had  found  as  fact  in  2011  that  this
    gentleman had been working as an interpreter. I have been shown scanned
    photographs of his photographic ID cards from 2015 and 2017 and  I  see
    no reason to reject the evidence of A and the Appellant that he is  now
    working for USAID funded projects in the capital.

68. It has been the consistent evidence of the Appellant  and  his  brother
    that their uncle will not, and cannot, take them in. That his job  puts
    him at risk from insurgent attack is clear from the country  background
    material: see for instance paragraphs  8.4.1  to  8.6.7  incl.  of  the
    current CPIN. He is at increased risk as someone who has worked for the
    American forces in the past, as  someone  who  currently  works  in  an
    American funded project under the auspices of  the  Afghan  government.
    The consistent evidence (as far back as 2011) is that this uncle has  a
    security detail provided as part of  his  job.  It  is  the  consistent
    evidence that this security will  not  extent  beyond  members  of  his
    immediate family, ie his wife and children.  Ms  Smith  made  the  good
    point that this is hardly surprising: in the context of a country where
    people have large extended families it would seem  very  unlikely  that
    international organisations or the Afghan government would  pay  for  a
    possibly large number of cousins, nephews, nieces, brothers and sisters
    to receive protection.   I note that when the family fled in late  2015
    they did so leaving the two  youngest  children  in  Jalalabad  with  a
    different uncle. Given that  the  family  went  via  Kabul  (where  the
    Appellant himself was put on a plane) that would tend to  suggest  that
    it was not an option for them to be left  with  this  uncle  in  Kabul.
    Having considered all of the evidence I am satisfied that it would  not
    be possible for the Appellant to live with  his  uncle.  I  am  further
    satisfied that any association with this uncle, without the benefit  of
    his security detail, would place the Appellant himself at risk, just as
    it did A in 2011.


69. Mr Kotas  suggested  that  in  the  alternative,  the  family  who  are
    currently resident in Peshawar could give up the home  that  they  have
    made there and  return  to  Afghanistan  to  meet  and  live  with  the
    Appellant in Kabul. I am satisfied that this is not an option. I accept
    that the Appellant's mother has been unwell over a protracted period of
    time and that she must stay close to the Lady  Reading  hospital  where
    she continues to receive treatment.   I accept  that  the  family  have
    themselves been driven out of their  homes  by  Daesh  persecution  and
    would be unwilling to return to Afghanistan in those  circumstances.  I
    accept that at the date of the  appeal  before  me,  they  are  not  in
    Afghanistan, but settled and living in another  country.  In  light  of
    these facts I do not  find  the  suggestion  that  the  UK  return  the
    Appellant to Kabul in the hope that the family will be  there  to  meet
    him realistic or reasonable.

70. Having had regard to the evidence overall I am satisfied that there  is
    no other place in Afghanistan where the Appellant could  reasonably  be
    expected to stay. He has only just turned 16.  I  cannot  be  satisfied
    that suitable arrangements have been made for his reception or care  in
    Kabul, or that it would be safe or reasonable to  expect  him  to  live
    there alone: LQ  (age:  immutable  characteristic)  Afghanistan  [2008]
    UKAIT 00005, DS  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 30, KA (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014, AA (unattended  children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) applied.

71. It follows that the appeal must be allowed on protection grounds.



    Decisions


72. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.


73. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee".

74. There is a direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              15th June 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 3rd March 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Colyer


