
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13511/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2019                   |On 29 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Mirkhalillah [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, counsel instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan,  date  of  birth  1  February
    1981, appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State for leave
    to remain on the basis of protection and human  rights  based  grounds.
    His appeal came before Judge Obhi who, on 25  October  2018,  dismissed
    it.

2.   On 15 July 2019 I found  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision in respect of  the  way  in  which  the  Judge  had
    considered the evidence and assessed its quality in the context  of  it
    solely being argued as an Article 8 ECHR case.   The  protection  claim
    had fallen by the wayside in the progress of the matter being resolved.
     I  gave  directions  and  additional  evidence  was  served  upon  the
    Respondent but no further representations were made by  the  Respondent
    in advance of the hearing.  I also gave  directions  that  any  medical
    evidence relied upon must be served promptly and in any event not  less
    than ten clear days before the further hearing.

3.   At the resumed hearing the Appellant's wife was unable  to  attend  for
    childcare reasons,  but  the  Appellant  attended.   Mr  Mills  had  no
    questions for  the  Appellant  and  in  the  circumstances  the  matter
    proceeded based on the statements  that  had  been  produced  and  were
    relied upon by the Appellant's representatives.

4.   There was significance in this because part of the claim was  that  the
    Appellant's wife, the mother of the Appellant's five children, who  was
    currently pregnant with her sixth child, has been said to be  depressed
    and anxious over the forthcoming events  and  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant's removal.  The indirect  evidence  through  the  independent
    social worker's report was that the Appellant's  wife,  [AH],  date  of
    birth 11 March 1989, a British national, was being prescribed an  anti-
    depressant (Sertraline) for her symptoms; which in one sense seem to be
    post-natal depression but continuing with  low  mood,  low  motivation,
    isolation. This condition has impacted  on  her  wellbeing  and,  to  a
    degree, ability to take care of the children.  Why no GP report on  her
    mental  health  or  the  need  for  anti-depressant  (depressants)  was
    unexplained.  I therefore have very little evidence as such directly of
    her need for medical treatment or the impact on her psychological state
    of the removal of her husband. I infer a GP must have a proper basis to
    prescribe such a drug

5.   It was said by Mr Mills that just as  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi
    found and concluded that there was a measure of irresponsibility in her
    conduct, knowing the lack of settled status of the  Appellant  to  have
    continued to have children  in  those  circumstances.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge whose decision does not stand concluded that there was a
    choice being made in the  number  of  children  they  had  and  it  sat
    unhappily with the assertion that they were continuing to have children
    in the uncertainness and precariousness of his  continued  presence  in
    the UK.

6.   I take into account  that  she  is  a  British  national  and  all  her
    children are British nationals.  I also take into account her  evidence
    that for religious reasons she does not accept contraception  and  that
    at least two, including the current pregnancy were  accidental  in  the
    sense that they were unplanned, save insofar as presumably it was their
    choice to have the children as a fact.

7.   The Appellant's wife said that she has found things very  difficult  in
    the uncertainties and worries that she had for  her  children  and  how
    they would cope without the Appellant: This  was  over  and  above  the
    difficulties that she had faced when he was in prison, albeit  in  that
    period it was at least a finite period  in  which  those  uncertainties
    might arise.

8.    The  evidence  of  the  effects  of  her  husband's  absence  and  the
    detrimental effect on the children's schooling was evidenced in  school
    reports as well as replicated and repeated in terms of the  independent
    social worker's assessment  of  the  significance  of  the  Appellant's
    removal.

9.   The supplementary report of Ms Alison Tyrell,  the  independent  social
    worker, was helpful because she at least was able to offer an objective
    assessment of the Appellant's family life when she  visited  the  same,
    and her assessment of the way in which the Appellant and his wife share
    a great deal of the management of the children's needs  and  day-to-day
    activities.  There  was  nothing  to  gainsay  the  evidence  that  the
    children are very attached to both parents and  clearly  the  Appellant
    was actively involved in their day-to-day  activities.   The  parenting
    responsibilities have of course, as a fact, increased with the addition
    of the fifth child since the matter was originally looked at,  and  all
    being well, no doubt will not be assisted in the sense  of  being  made
    easier assuming the sixth child is born as forecast  in  January  2020.
    Ms Tyrell therefore, in addition to her stated opinions in the original
    report, expressed her concern that the Appellant's wife being  required
    to look after six children  without  support  and  involvement  of  the
    Appellant and its impact on the children's wellbeing.

10.  The original report dated 26 May 2018 extensively set  out  the  family
    history,  the  educational  reports  concerning   the   children,   the
    accommodation and financial arrangements  for  them,  as  well  as  the
    cultural connections and social connections which the  family  have  in
    the UK.

11.  The other factual matter that undoubtedly created a sense of  isolation
    for the Appellant's wife  was  that  her  family  had  broken  off  any
    relationship with her or contact with the children, and have in  effect
    been out of touch for some eleven years, never having met the children,
    nor provided any  support  or  involvement  in  their  development  and
    upbringing.  The breakdown in relationships was, on the face of it, and
    there is no evidence to gainsay it, very much long over and  there  was
    nothing to indicate any likely resumption.

12.  Ms Tyrell in that extensive  report  addressed  the  several  questions
    that were being raised  and  concluded  that  there  would  be  adverse
    impacts upon  the  children  and  the  Appellant's  wife  as  well  as,
    obviously, an impact upon the Appellant in his loss of involvement with
    the development of the children.  It seemed to me on a fair reading  of
    Ms Tyrell's report that she saw there being the likelihood of  negative
    impacts  in  terms  of  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  from   active
    involvement in the children's upbringing, daily decisions, control  and
    playing a part in their lives as they developed.   I find that to be an
    inevitable  consequence  of  removal.  I  find,  on  the   unchallenged
    evidence, the best interests of the children lie in  being  one  family
    unit with the Appellant present.

13.  This matter was put to me in the context of Section  117C(5)  exception
    2 where it states ...:-

         "where C (the criminal) has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
         with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the  effect  of  C's
         deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh".


14.  There is a variety of case law affecting the issue of what may  or  may
    not amount  to  a  matter  being  unduly  harsh  in  the  very  obvious
    circumstances where any deportation removing a family member was  going
    to have inevitably some consequences.  It was not suggested that either
    the Appellant's wife or the  children  should  remove  to  Afghanistan.
    They are all British  citizens  and  none  of  the  children  have  any
    connection whatsoever with life in Afghanistan or the language.

15.  In KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 the Supreme  Court  indicated  that  the
    words "unduly harsh" were clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle
    than that of reasonableness under Section 117B(6)  of  the  NIAA  2002,
    taking account of the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.   Further,  the  word  "unduly"  implies   an   element   of
    comparison.  It assumed that there was a due level of  harshness,  that
    is a level which may be  acceptable  or  justifiable  in  the  relevant
    context.  "Unduly" implies something  going  beyond  that  level.   The
    relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1),  that  is  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  I was looking for  a
    degree of harshness going beyond that which would  not  necessarily  be
    involved for any child faced with a deportation of a parent.   What  it
    does not require in my view (subject to the discussion of cases  in  an
    exception) is a  balancing  of  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
    parent's offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by
    the Section itself by reference to the length of sentence.  Nor can  it
    be equated with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons":   That
    would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by  Section
    117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more.

16.  Unduly harsh was further considered in the case of  RA  (Section  117C:
    "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123  (IAC)  in
    which in a discussion of Section 117C, particularly with  reference  to
    KO and NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in terms of an Appellant  who
    was a medium offender, as is this case, if an Appellant  falls  within,
    for example, exception 2, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.   If  he
    does not  then  the  next  stage  is  to  consider  whether  there  are
    sufficiently compelling circumstances over and above those described in
    exceptions 1 or 2.

17.  In respect of this case it was said, first, it  will  be  unduly  harsh
    for the Appellant's  partner/wife  and  children  to  go  and  live  in
    Afghanistan or to remain  in  the  UK  without  the  Appellant.  In  MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450, it was held that unduly harsh  meant  the
    same in Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act as it did in  paragraph  399(a)
    of HC 395 (the Immigration  Rules).   What  amounted  to  unduly  harsh
    required a holistic approach to all the  circumstances,  not  least  of
    course his offending, the  likelihood  of  repetition,  the  extent  of
    rehabilitation, the fact that there has not been  reoffending  and  the
    fact that he had favourable remarks from the Probation Service  and  he
    was committed to permanent change in his conduct.  The public  interest
    should  therefore  be  looked  at  in  light  of  the  above  and   the
    consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children.   The  best
    interests of the children plainly revolve around them being with  their
    mother and, I find, their father, and whatever their life  choices  had
    been as parents,  they  were  not  the  children's  fault;  as  to  the
    consequences of either their parents' decisions or the  Appellant's  to
    commit the serious offence which he did.

18.  There therefore was also  to  be  taken  into  account  the  very  real
    evidence of the extent of connection  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    children and plainly the negative emotional impact, spoken  to  in  the
    social worker's report in the Appellant's bundle of his absence.   That
    was in part demonstrated by the deterioration in  conduct  of  the  two
    elder children when the Appellant was imprisoned.   To  this  extent  I
    will also  bear  in  mind  the  school  reports  contained  within  the
    Appellant's bundle from 2017.

19.  The children are as follows:  [S1],  11  years,  [S2],  7  years,  both
    female; [M], 5 years, male, [S3], 4 years, male, [S4], 1 year,  female,
    and the Appellant's wife is pregnant with a further child.

20.  There was in effect no challenge to what the Appellant's  partner  said
    about the relationship, her difficulties that she has previously  faced
    and her general ability to cope.  I find this was a  question  of  fact
    and I give the public  interest  very  considerable  weight  given  the
    fortuitous position over the Appellant's criminality, as  an  arsonist,
    that more damage was done and fortunately no loss of life occurred.  In
    the circumstances I find, on balance, that  the  evidence  showed  that
    exception 2 was made  out  and  that  the  effect  of  the  Appellant's
    deportation on the partner/wife and the children would be unduly harsh,
    that was more than just harsh as  contemplated  in  the  case  law.  In
    reflecting on the seriousness of the offence with  which  he  had  been
    convicted.  I give full weight to the sentencing Judge had to say about
    the matter.  Whilst rehabilitation will not ordinarily  bear  any  real
    weight in favour of a foreign criminal, the fact was that  he  has  not
    reoffended, he was regarded as having  rehabilitated  himself.  He  was
    completely aware of the consequences that his conduct might  have  were
    he to re-offend.  On the evidence before this case was one of  the  few
    likely to succeed on Article 8 ECHR grounds. On the  evidence  I  found
    the Respondent's decision was disproportionate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

21.  The appeal is allowed on argument 8 ECHR grounds.

ANONYMITY

22.  No anonymity direction was sought nor is one required.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee has been paid, this is a case which has succeeded on  the  strength
of after-arising evidence.  I find no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

