
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/13882/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 January 2019                    |On 6 February 2019               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom, and
           did so on 20 January 2010 as a Tier 4 student.  On  30  December
           2011, shortly before its expiry, he applied for his leave to  be
           varied, but this was refused on 18 January 2012.
        2. On 29 February 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain as
           a Tier 1 Post Study work migrant, but this  was  refused  on  18
           October 2012.  The  Appellant  lodged  an  appeal  against  this
           decision, but it was dismissed on 11  March  2013  with  amongst
           other reasons, a finding that he had relied upon  a  false  bank
           statement when making that application.
        3. After some considerable time  as  an  overstayer  the  Appellant
           applied for leave to remain on the basis of his Article 8 rights
           on 24 October 2014. This was refused on 4 November 2014, and  no
           appeal was lodged.
        4. After a further considerable period of time as an overstayer the
           Appellant the Appellant made a protection claim on 9 June  2017,
           based upon events that he said had  occurred  in  Bangladesh  in
           2007-8, and that had caused him to  flee  that  country  with  a
           genuine fear of harm at the hands of the authorities. This claim
           was refused on 8  December  2017.  The  refusal  challenged  his
           account of his experiences as  untrue.  The  Appellant's  appeal
           against the refusal  of  his  protection  claim  was  heard  and
           dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Arullendran in a decision
           promulgated on 20 February 2018.
        5. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused
           by the First tier Tribunal, but a  renewed  application  to  the
           Upper Tribunal was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge  Perkins
           on 17 September 2018 in the following terms;
           All grounds may be argued but point 15 seems the most  pertinent
           on asylum grounds.
           Without in any way wishing to suggest that the appellant  has  a
           strong case it is clearly arguable that the Article 8  balancing
           exercise has not had regard to the best interests of the  child,
           and additionally is not structured properly.  The  Appellant  is
           reminded of the need to show that any error is material and that
           if an error  is  established  the  Tribunal  will  endeavour  to
           correct it without a further hearing.
        6. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The challenge
        7. Ms Cleghorn (who did not draft the  grounds,  or  appear  below)
           advanced the appeal on the  six  (re-numbered)  grounds  of  the
           application that had been settled  by  Counsel  who  did  appear
           below. Of those, grounds 1-2 raised a challenge to  the  Judge's
           disposal of the Article 8  appeal,  and  grounds  3-6  raised  a
           challenge to her disposal of the  protection  appeal.  It  makes
           more sense to deal with grounds 3-6 first.
        8. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge's  findings  were  inconsistent,
           when she accepted that the Appellant had been physically present
           at a football match prior to it deteriorating into a  riot,  but
           rejected his claim that he was of any adverse  interest  to  the
           authorities in Bangladesh. As framed, there is in  my  judgement
           no merit in that complaint, and indeed Ms Cleghorn  appeared  to
           recognise as much, because she sought to reframe  it.  Thus  she
           accepted that it was open to the Judge to make the  findings  of
           fact that she had made given the evidence that was  before  her.
           Instead she complained that the Judge had not in fact  made  any
           finding to the effect that the Appellant was of no  interest  to
           the authorities.
        9. Thus I reject both the original, and the reframed complaint. The
           latter is plainly based upon a misreading of the decision  [77].
           The Judge found that the Appellant  had  attended  the  football
           match of 20.8.07, and that even on his own account he  had  left
           before any riot commenced, and that he took no part in any riot,
           because he had already been injured and taken to hospital before
           any riot commenced [76]. As such he was never in a  position  to
           be able to identify any rioter, and  since  this  was  the  only
           reason he had given to the Judge for the authorities  having  an
           adverse interest in him, the Judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
           finding that she did, for the reasons that she  gave,  upon  the
           way that the Appellant had advanced his appeal [77].
       10. Ms Cleghorn then sought to advance an argument that the  Judge's
           findings of fact were perverse because they were irrational.  In
           so doing she accepted that the grounds [#15-18] advanced no such
           complaint, and thus no permission had been granted for  such  an
           argument. I can see no merit in this argument either,  which  in
           my judgement is based either upon a misreading of the  decision,
           or a failure to recognise the way in  which  the  Appellant  had
           advanced his appeal before the Judge.
       11. Ground 4 is a  complaint  about  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
           assessment of the weight that could be attached to the documents
           that the Appellant had produced with his witness statement of  6
           February 2018 as corroborative evidence of his account.  In  the
           light  of  the  Appellant's  immigration   history,   his   past
           dishonesty in his dealings with the Respondent and the Tribunal,
           and his very lengthy delay in seeking international  protection,
           the Judge's approach to the weight that  could  be  attached  to
           these documents, and to the Appellant's evidence, was  one  that
           was well open to her. In my judgement her conclusions as to  the
           weight she  could  attach  to  these  documents  was  adequately
           reasoned. The Respondent was under no obligation to  prove  that
           these documents were forgeries, before the Judge could  conclude
           that she could attach no weight to them, and that they had  been
           procured to bolster a false asylum claim. There is no  error  of
           law in the self direction at paragraph 8 of the decision.
       12. Ground 5 is a complaint that it was not open  to  the  Judge  to
           conclude that the Appellant had  not  told  the  truth  when  he
           claimed never to have attended  an  immigration  appeal  hearing
           previously. The grounds do not assert (and there is no  evidence
           to suggest) that the Appellant did not answer  the  question  as
           the Judge recorded him doing. Given his  undisputed  immigration
           history, if he did answer in the  way  she  recorded,  then  the
           answer he gave was either a mistake, or untrue. The  Appellant's
           Counsel had the opportunity at the  time  to  lead  evidence  to
           clarify or to explain his answer, and as the Judge  noted,  that
           opportunity was not taken. In the circumstances I  am  satisfied
           that it was open to the Judge to reach the conclusion  that  she
           did, for the reasons that she gave, and  to  conclude  that  the
           Appellant was not a reliable witness when stepping back to  look
           at all of the evidence in the round [75-6].  Thus  there  is  no
           merit in this complaint as framed  either,  but  the  conclusion
           that he was not a reliable witness would have  followed  in  any
           event given the Tribunal's previous finding that he  had  relied
           upon forged documents.
       13. Ground 6 is a complaint that although the Judge  made  reference
           to the principles to be found set out in  JT  (Cameroon)  [2008]
           EWCA Civ 878, and to the statutory provisions of s8 of the  2004
           Act, in the course of her decision [74],  she  failed  to  apply
           them properly. It was however plainly well open to the Judge  to
           ask herself whether the Appellant would really have acted as  he
           did, if upon arrival in the UK  in  January  2010  he  genuinely
           believed  himself  to  be  a  real  risk  of  harm  anywhere  in
           Bangladesh  from  either  the   Bangladesh   armed   forces   in
           particular, or, the authorities in Bangladesh in general. It was
           plainly open to her conclude that he would  not,  and  that  the
           protection claim he had advanced for the first time  on  9  June
           2017 after having been an overstayer for many years,  and  after
           having applied for leave to remain on other grounds,  and  after
           having attended an appeal before the Tribunal,  was  a  fiction.
           She gave adequate reasons for that conclusion, and she  analysed
           the evidence that was before her before making that  conclusion,
           rather than simply taking the delay  in  making  the  protection
           claim as determinative of his reliability as a witness.
       14. I turn then to consider Grounds 1  and  2  which  challenge  the
           Judge's disposal of the Appellant's Article 8 appeal.
       15. The Appellant married his wife in Bangladesh on 19 October 2009.
           She too is a citizen of Bangladesh. Although  she  gave  written
           evidence in support of the Appellant's  appeal,  she  failed  to
           explain within that witness statement either the date upon which
           she came to the UK, or to make any mention of her daughter.  She
           completely failed to offer any evidence to suggest that she  had
           a "private life" in the UK of significant  strength  or  quality
           that would permit a conclusion that her Article  8  rights  were
           engaged by the decision under appeal.
       16. I note that the Appellant's own witness statement  is  similarly
           lacking - the only reference to his child is the claim  that  he
           cannot be expected to expose a young child to  such  a  horrific
           government as exists in Bangladesh. There is no  explanation  of
           how he has spent his time since he ceased any study that he  has
           undertaken, and no explanation of how he has  supported  himself
           and his family as an overstayer. No friend  or  community  group
           offered evidence in support of the appeal.
       17. The Judge noted that the Appellant's wife joined him in  the  UK
           in 2011 as his dependent shortly before the expiry  of  his  own
           leave  to  remain.  It  has  never  been  suggested   that   the
           Appellant's wife has enjoyed had any other grant of  leave.  She
           is not a "qualifying partner". She advanced no evidence (and nor
           did the Appellant) to suggest that she believed there  would  be
           any difficulties in re-integration into  society  in  Bangladesh
           for  either  herself  or  her  daughter,  and  neither  did  the
           Appellant.
       18. The Appellant's daughter was born on 8 November 2013 in the  UK.
           She is a citizen of Bangladesh, who has never enjoyed  leave  to
           remain in the UK. At the date of the hearing she was four  years
           old, and living with her parents.  She  was  not  a  "qualifying
           child".
       19. The Judge's record of proceedings shows that no attempt was made
           by Counsel to lead evidence in chief from the Appellant  or  his
           wife any other evidence to support their Article 8 claims.
       20. In the circumstances although the three members of  this  family
           plainly enjoyed  "family  life"  together,  Article  8  was  not
           thereby engaged by the decision under appeal.  Neither  of  them
           enjoyed leave to remain in the UK, and they  all  faced  removal
           together as a family unit, so there was no basis upon  which  to
           suppose they might be separated through removal.
       21. At its highest, the Appellant's Article 8 appeal was therefore a
           "private life" appeal, for which  he  had  offered  no  evidence
           beyond the bald facts of the length of time  that  each  of  the
           members of his immediate family had  lived  in  the  UK.  In  my
           judgement, the Appellant therefore failed to offer  evidence  to
           the Judge that meant that it would have been an error of law  on
           her part to fail to conclude that Article 8 was engaged  by  the
           decision under appeal. It was  plainly  open  to  the  Judge  to
           conclude that Article 8 was not engaged  on  this  evidence,  as
           indeed she did. In those circumstances,  in  my  judgement  both
           grounds 1 and 2 fall away.
       22. However, even if the Judge were considered to have been wrong to
           have reached such a  conclusion,  given  the  low  threshold  of
           engagement of Article 8, there  was  no  evidential  basis  upon
           which she could have rationally gone on  to  conclude  that  the
           balance of proportionality required the Appellant and his family
           to be granted a period of discretionary leave to  remain.  There
           was a clear public interest in his removal as an overstayer  who
           did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, enhanced
           by his immigration history which included his past use of forged
           documents when seeking a grant of leave to which he was  plainly
           not entitled. Moreover, given the findings upon  the  protection
           appeal, it was implicit that the family would  be  returning  to
           Bangladesh in safety, and able to build a  life  together  there
           with the support of their family and friends.
       23. Although, as the grant of permission to appeal noted, the  Judge
           failed to assess what the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
           child were, there was no evidence before the  Judge  that  would
           have permitted a conclusion  that  the  child's  best  interests
           required a grant of discretionary leave be made to  either  her,
           or her parents. There was no evidence of health needs that could
           not be met in Bangladesh. She had barely  started  any  form  of
           education in the UK, and there was no  evidence  of  educational
           needs could not be met in Bangladesh.  Thus  the  only  rational
           conclusion open to the Judge upon  the  evidence  was  that  the
           child's best interests were served by being brought  up  by  her
           parents, and living in a household with them, but with access to
           the members of the extended family so  that  she  could  develop
           relationships with her grandparents, aunts, uncles  and  cousins
           through face to face contact. Since the Appellant had failed  to
           demonstrate that any of the wider family were present  (lawfully
           or otherwise) in the UK, and had accepted that his  own  parents
           and siblings remained in Bangladesh, it followed inevitably that
           the only possible assessment was that the child's best interests
           were served by removal to Bangladesh with her parents,  so  that
           she could enjoy the benefits of the country of which she  was  a
           citizen.
       24. In the circumstances a decision to dismiss the Article 8  appeal
           was the only rational outcome on  the  evidence  placed  by  the
           Appellant before the Tribunal. The  Judge's  overall  conclusion
           that the appeal should be dismissed is entirely consistent  with
           the  guidance  offered  recently  by  the  Supreme   Court,   in
           particular in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58. Accordingly  the  grounds
           fail to disclose any material error of law in the approach taken
           by the Judge to the appeal that requires her decision to be  set
           aside and remade.







   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 20
   February 2018 contained no material error of  law  in  the  decision  to
   dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set
   aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 18 January 2018
