
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13907/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2017                   |On 23 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Rees instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent: Miss Vijiwala Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Chowdhury promulgated on 13 June 2017 in which the Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on both protection and human rights grounds.

Background


     2. The appellant is an Albanian national born  on  22  June  2000.  He
        claimed to have left Albania on 3 April 2016 and to have  travelled
        through various countries before arriving in the United Kingdom  on
        15 April 2016, where  he  claimed  asylum.  The  asylum  claim  was
        refused against which the appellant appeals.

     3. The Judge  considered  the  evidence,  including  noting  that  the
        respondent accepted that the appellant's mother killed  his  father
        [12] that the appellant had provided an internally  consistent  and
        credible account of this aspect of his claim. The  Judge  noted  at
        [36] that "the core elements of the Appellants claim are  accepted.
        I accept that this Appellant's mother killed  his  father.  However
        aside from that appalling tragic fact I find I  can  accept  little
        else".

     4. The Judge had regard to not only the appellants evidence but also a
        country  expert's  report,  a  letter  from  the  Refugee  Council,
        evidence from the appellant's foster mother in the UK, and  medical
        evidence. The Judge accepted the appellant was suffering from  PTSD
        and  impaired   concentration   did   not   find   this   explained
        inconsistencies  that  the  Judge  found  in  the   evidence   when
        considered as a whole.

     5. The Judge did not accept the appellant's claim that he was at  risk
        as a result of a blood feud in Albania. At [40] the Judge finds:
             40. This is because of a number of credibility findings I make
             in respect of this Appellant. I make clear here  that  I  have
             had regard to the fact that the Appellant is a minor and  that
             he is currently seeing a psychotherapist. I have had regard to
             the letter from the Refugee Council exhibited at  page  65  of
             the Appellants bundle and also the  testimony  of  his  foster
             mother. I accept that this Appellant had a "deep seated  sense
             of loneliness and loss" (see second  paragraph  of  page  65).
             This is to be expected given his feelings of loss  around  the
             murder of his father by his mother. I also accept that he  has
             a history of traumatic physical abuse from his mother and  has
             suffered scarring as a result. Nevertheless, even  giving  due
             weight to these factors, I do not find elements of his account
             to be credible.

     6. The Judge then gives reasons in support of his finding from  [41  -
        42] of the decision under challenge.

     7. The Judge finds at [49] that the appellant is an  economic  migrant
        whose exit from Albania has been facilitated by his family.

     8. The applicant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  by  a
        Designated judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the  grounds  it  is
        arguable that the  judge  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
        appellant being an unaccompanied asylum seeking child and  that  it
        is incumbent upon a decision maker dealing with a vulnerable person
        such as a child to give the benefit of the doubt more leniently and
        to give more regard to evidence  from  others  than  might  be  the
        approach in other cases (see KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014]  UKUT
        552).

Error of law


     9. The appellant disagrees with the findings of the Judge in  relation
        to the existence of a blood feud.  Submissions  were  made  at  the
        hearing that this was "an unusual blood feud" and it  is  said  the
        expert noted the appellant had become the primary  target  of  such
        feud.

    10. It was asserted in submissions to the Upper Tribunal that  although
        the Judge was fully aware of the fact the appellant is a minor  the
        Judge failed to give full cognizance of this  fact  when  assessing
        the merits of the appeal.

    11. The submission by Mr Rees  that  [36]  of  the  decision  displayed
        ambiguity has no arguable merit. This is not the Judge finding that
        all aspects of the appellants  claim  are  accepted  as  the  Judge
        clearly states that the core elements of the claim are accepted and
        then provides details, by  way  of  confirmation,  that  the  Judge
        accepted that the appellants mother  killed  his  father  but  that
        apart from that nothing else could be accepted.  This  is  a  clear
        unequivocal finding.

    12. It is argued the Judge failed to give adequate weight to  the  fact
        the appellant was having psychotherapy had suffered traumatic abuse
        when undertaking an assessment of those aspects of the  appeal  the
        Judge found undermined the credibility of the claim.

    13. It was argued the Judge failed to follow the Presidential  guidance
        regarding the assessment of the evidence of vulnerable witnesses.

    14. There is no arguable merit in the assertion  the  Judge  failed  to
        give adequate reasons for why it was found the appellant was not at
        risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  The  Judges  reasons
        are clearly that the claim  for  international  protection  has  no
        arguable merit, that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  a
        credible real risk on return to Albania, and that he  was  no  more
        than an economic migrant.

    15. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that the Judge needed to
        do more in relation to section 55 and the  best  interests  of  the
        children.

    16. I find the Judge was fully aware of the  appellants  circumstances,
        including his being a minor, and also the events that he claimed he
        had experienced in Albania which had been accepted as  credible  by
        the respondent for the purposes of this application.

    17. It is not  made  out  the  Judge  paid  mere  lip  service  to  the
        appellant's  situation  which  she  then  completely  ignored  when
        assessing the weight to be given to the evidence. It  is  not  made
        out the Judge failed to take  all  possible  steps  to  ensure  the
        appellant was able to understand and participate in the proceedings
        and to properly assess the  available  evidence  in  light  of  the
        appellant's presentation.

    18. In relation to assessing the evidence of a vulnerable  person,  the
        Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note,  Number  2  of  2010:   Child,
        vulnerable adult and sensitive  appellant  guidance,  at  paragraph
        10.3, states:

             10.3 assessing evidence

             Take account of potential corroborative evidence

             Be aware:

               i. Children often do not provide as much detail as adults  in
                  recalling experiences and may often manifest  their  fears
                  differently from adults;

              ii. some forms of  disability  cause  or  result  in  impaired
                  memory;

             iii. the order and manner in which evidence  is  given  may  be
                  affected by mental, psychological or emotional  trauma  or
                  disability;

              iv. comprehension of questioning may have been impaired.

    19. It is clear that the Judge was cautious in the  way  in  which  the
        evidence was to be assessed making specific reference not  only  to
        the appellants experiences but also the impact of  those  upon  his
        cognitive functioning. The Judge found at [43] that even though the
        appellant suffered from PTSD symptoms and  impaired  concentration,
        this did not explain the inconsistencies in the evidence  presented
        to the Judge. It is still reasonable to expect that even  though  a
        person may be a minor, but they will tell the truth. The Judge  was
        not satisfied that the appellant had done so in  relation  to  this
        appeal.

    20. In addition to considering the evidence with the required degree of
        anxious scrutiny the Judge has also given adequate reasons for  the
        findings made,  bearing  in  mind  the  fact  the  appellant  is  a
        vulnerable witness. As such the weight to be given to the  evidence
        is a matter for the Judge.

    21. It has not been made out that  the  decision  under  challenge  was
        affected by any arguable procedural irregularity,  failure  of  the
        Judge to consider the appellant's presentation, or to  factor  that
        into the  decision-making  process,  sufficient  to  amount  to  an
        arguable error of law.

    22. It has not been made out that the conclusion by the Judge that  the
        appellant is an economic migrant is outside the range  of  findings
        reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence considered as a whole.

    23. The Judge clearly considered the best interests of  the  child  but
        notes that he has a legal guardian in  Albania  and  a  network  of
        support to turn to such as his paternal  family  if  returned.  The
        fact the appellant has other family members who have  left  Albania
        was also considered by the Judge.

    24. No arguable legal error sufficient to warrant a grant of permission
        to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been made out.



Decision

    25. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.

    26. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 14 December 2017
