

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13690/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th October 2018                     |On 7th November 2018               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     J K
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hosie promulgated on 12th March 2018 on the basis of the  dismissal  of
    her asylum and humanitarian protection claims.  The Appellant's  appeal
    was allowed on the basis of Article  8,  both  under  and  outwith  the
    Immigration Rules and there is no challenge to those findings by either
    party.  The Appellant appealed against the outcome of  her  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claims and was granted permission to appeal  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds of appeal asserts that the Judge erred in  failing
             to assess: (i) the real risk of harm in the  Appellants  (sic)
             local area and (ii) sufficiency of protection for women.   The
             grounds of appeal assert that the errors are material  because
             the Appellant described her brother-in-law as a policeman with
             connections [73] who has continued to make threats to her [72]
             and background evidence suggested that  there  was  inadequate
             protection in Punjab for women fearing violence.  Further,  if
             this evidence was considered there was a  failure  to  provide
             adequate reasons as to why this evidence was  rejected;  (iii)
             whether there was a real risk the Appellant and her son  would
             face destitution; failed to carry out  an  assessment  of  the
             cumulative effect of the Appellant's prospective circumstances
             in India and failed to provide a clear finding in  respect  of
             Article 3 or  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  the
             Appellant failed to provide adequate reasons why the Appellant
             failed to establish a real risk of Article 3 harm.

         3.   The grounds of appeal raise arguable  errors  of  law  in  the
             decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Whilst  the   Judge
             considered sufficiency of protection at [63] to [70] this  was
             in general terms only and not with reference to the particular
             facts of the Appellant and risk on return to her home area  of
             Punjab.  The Judge then went on at [71]  onwards  to  consider
             internal relocation, without having first  determined  whether
             there was a risk on return to Punjab.  It is further  arguable
             that whilst at [87] the Judge found that 'it is possible  that
             she would face destitution on return to  India'  she  did  not
             make a finding on this issue.

         4.   The grounds of appeal raise arguable  errors  of  law  in  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent but  was
    given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the hearing I indicated that I had found that there was
    a material error of law in the decision but that  my  detailed  reasons
    for so finding would follow.   My  reasons  for  that  finding  are  as
    follows.

 4. In respect of the Grounds of Appeal as they are couched, they start  by
    criticising the decision in that the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraphs
    59 onwards does not deal explicitly with the topic of  whether  a  real
    risk on return can be seen to the lower standard as being posed against
    the Appellant on the basis of her claim which emanates from her being a
    widow, and a victim of domestic violence by her alcoholic late  husband
    (both of which were accepted by the Secretary  of  State)  and  on  the
    basis that there would be a risk to the Appellant arising in particular
    from her former brother-in-law, a police officer, whom had made threats
    to kill against her indirectly via her father in Punjab.   The  Grounds
    further criticise the assessment of  whether  internal  relocation  was
    viable, and even if viable, it is said that the assessment of  internal
    relocation being not unduly harsh was also fundamentally flawed.

 5. I am grateful to Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  whom,
    having heard extensive submissions made by Counsel for  the  Appellant,
    pragmatically accepted that there were material errors of  law  in  the
    decision, one of which errors he identified as follows.   At  paragraph
    61 of the decision Mr Walker highlighted that the First-tier Judge  was
    under the false impression that there had not been any interests  shown
    by the Appellant's late husband's family, however, Mr Walker pointed to
    the fact that at paragraph 7 of JK's witness statement of 25th  January
    2018 there was clear evidence that the family were still interested  in
    the Appellant and also her young son and that they were in the midst of
    attempting to disinherit the Appellant's son of the inheritance he  was
    legally entitled to from his late father.  Mr Walker  also  highlighted
    that the Appellant had a further brother-in-law from her marriage  (not
    the police officer) whom resided in  the  UK  and  whom  had  extensive
    contact with the Appellant in  the  past  and  whom  had  attempted  to
    influence her and prevent her from co-operating with  the  Metropolitan
    police when there was an investigation into the  charges  and  possible
    prosecution of the Appellant's late husband in light  of  the  domestic
    violence and abuse that he had perpetrated upon her in the UK.

 6. These pieces of evidence, combined with the further evidence  regarding
    the Appellant's other brother-in-law in  India  (the  police  officer),
    which I shall turn  to  momentarily,  were  sufficient  to  demonstrate
    material errors of law in the First-tier Judge's decision,  given  that
    the judge failed to take these factors into account when assessing  the
    risk to the Appellant upon return and whether there was any opportunity
    for her to internally relocate, either locally  or  further  afield  in
    India.

 7. A further material error of law was identified in that Mr Gilbert  drew
    my attention to several paragraphs  within  the  materials  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, including  perhaps  most  pertinently  of  all,  a
    witness statement from the Appellant in  a  former  applicant's  bundle
    (which formed part of a previous judicial review when  this  claim  was
    formerly  certified  as  clearly  unfounded,  which  certification  was
    subsequently removed).  At pages 48 to 62 of that applicant's bundle in
    her statement dated 31st July 2015, the Appellant had at paragraphs  56
    through to 62 cited extensive details of her fear  that  emanated  from
    her former brother-in-law (the police  officer  in  Punjab),  whom  she
    described as being "well-connected" and also regarding the fact that he
    had threatened that he would not stop  looking  for  the  Appellant  in
    light of the difficulties that she had caused to her late husband  (the
    police officer's late brother).  The police officer was described as  a
    (i) threatening man and  (ii) a man of his word who usually  does  what
    he says and (iii) whom she had seen first  hand  using  his  powers  to
    unlawfully protect friends whom were the subject of complaints  through
    official channels and in which  he  had  asserted  influence  in  legal
    disputes, and (iv) whom was very close to other senior police  officers
    and kept them on good terms and (v) whom lived  far  beyond  his  means
    taking into account his meagre official income and (vi) whom  had  been
    seen mingling with senior political figures at social events first-hand
    and also on various family videos which depicted these social events.

 8. The consideration given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  threat
    emanating  from  the  Appellant's  former  brother-in-law,  the  police
    officer, can be seen at paragraphs 39, 50 and 73 of the decision.   The
    first paragraph in question simply reflects  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that her brother-in-law worked in the police department  and  was  also
    connected  with  politicians,  whereas  paragraph  50   reflected   the
    Appellant's Counsel's closing submissions and the submission that there
    was impunity for abuse by the police and a lack of  civilian  oversight
    and that the  brother-in-law  would  be  able  to  perpetrate  acts  of
    violence which would result in a risk of harm to the Appellant  in  her
    home area and elsewhere.   The  final  paragraph  that  refers  to  the
    Appellant's brother-in-law states in the judge's findings that  in  her
    view the Appellant had not established that her late  husband's  family
    had the means or ability to find her in India to cause her harm as  she
    had not specified what role her brother-in-law had in the  police,  and
    importantly stated there was no indication that he would have the means
    or influence to find her should she return to India.

 9. In my view these concise  findings  do  not  deal  with  the  extensive
    evidence put forward by the Appellant against the background  materials
    which show that firstly, corruption is rife within the security  forces
    in India and secondly, that  there  is  a  susceptibility  to  bribery,
    particularly from political figures and those having  connections  with
    such figures, in light of the meagre state resources  and  income  that
    these state officers receive.  There is also a failure to  account  for
    why the Appellant's evidence, the remainder of which  was  accepted  on
    its face, should not also be accepted in this event, given  that  there
    was no challenge  to  this  evidence  specifically  as  Mr  Walker  had
    highlighted and accepted in his own submissions.

10. Thus,  given  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appears  to  have
    implicitly accepted the Appellant's account on its face, and given that
    there is no challenge made, nor any negative or adverse  findings  made
    in respect of  the  Appellant's  credibility  or  her  account  in  its
    entirety in the judge's decision, this material should have been  taken
    into account.  Albeit the judge notes that the police officer's rank is
    not known, other than that, there are no criticisms  made  anywhere  of
    the Appellant's evidence.  As such, as the  judge  has  not  explicitly
    considered the passages which I  have  been  referred  to  against  the
    background evidence, I do find  that  there  was  an  omission  in  the
    judge's assessment of whether there would be a risk on  return  to  the
    Appellant in that the judge has failed to adequately assess and  reason
    why the Appellant would not be at risk, given her  evidence  which  was
    accepted that she has a brother-in-law whom has  political  connections
    and is a man of influence.

11. There is also a further error identified in the decision,  namely  that
    the judge's  assessment  of  the  internal  relocation  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's claim is inconsistent with her  later  findings  under  the
    immigration rules when considering the  factors  that  would  face  the
    Appellant on return (see paragraphs 76 through to 87 of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision) which  almost  entirely  support  the  Appellant's
    position that it would be difficult for her  to  return  to  India  and
    relocate there, and which extreme  difficulty  the  judge  has  plainly
    accepted, given that she has found that there would be very significant
    obstacles to the Appellants' re-integration in  India  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) (which again has not been challenged by either  party  on
    appeal).

12. I note in particular paragraphs 76 to 78, 82, 85,  86  and  87  of  the
    judge's decision which collectively show an assessment pointing to  the
    fact that the Appellant would not  be  able  to  obtain  employment  on
    return to India and that she would not be able to return to  live  with
    her own family, even if  they  could  accommodate  her,  and  that  the
    Appellant as a matter  of  honour,  and  also  in  light  of  her  late
    husband's demise, would not receive a welcome at  her  former  in-laws'
    house, alongside the fact that the  Appellant  met  the  terms  of  the
    Country Information and  Guidance  (CIG)  Report  for  India  (February
    2015).  This CIG Report is of crucial importance in the asssessment  of
    internal relocation for an Indian woman as it shows that in order for a
    woman to relocate in India without it being unduly  harsh,  that  woman
    would have to be (a) single,  (b)  without  any  children  that  needed
    support, (c) able to  access  accommodation  and  (d)  be  educated  or
    skilled  enough  to  be  able  to  support  themselves  (see  paragraph
    1.2.10[1] of the February 2015 Report).

13. The judge found that the Appellant did  not  fall  into  any  of  these
    categories  specifically.   Given  that  this  paragraph  is  aimed  at
    identifying  whether  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  a  woman  to
    internally relocate in India, as the judge found that the Appellant did
    not fall into any of the categories where it would not be unduly  harsh
    to internally relocate, it must follow that the judge's findings  point
    to a conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant  to  be
    forced to relocate in India, given that she did not  meet  any  of  the
    factors which would make it reasonable for her to internally  relocate.



14. As the judge notes at paragraphs 83 onwards, the Appellant will not  be
    able to live in a shelter provided to women given that she  had  an  11
    year old male child accompanying her, nor would she be able  to  secure
    rental accommodation  in  a  private  sector  given  that  she  had  no
    financial resources to rely upon and had limited education,  and  would
    not be able to live in such accommodation even if she were able to find
    a male guardian from a member of her family, and given that  she  would
    still, even if she had a male guardian, be vulnerable to discrimination
    and untowards sexual  attention  given  the  societal  views  regarding
    widows in India.  Added to this,  the  judge  further  found  that  the
    Appellant would have no assistance from her friend upon return to India
    whom was presently supporting her financially and  that,  perhaps  most
    important of all, the judge found that  the  Appellant  would  possibly
    face destitution on return  to  India,  given  her  particular  set  of
    circumstances and those of her family.  Thus given  the  cumulation  of
    these factors, it was irrational for the  judge  to  conclude  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  internally
    within India.

15. In light of the above findings, I set aside the assessment by the judge
    of the risk on return  to  the  Appellant  and  the  viability  of  her
    internal relocation and the Article 3 assessment  that  followed  as  a
    consequence  but  preserve  the  remaining  findings  and   credibility
    assessment.

Remaking the Decision

16. I note that since the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  there  has
    been a publication of a further Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    India: Women fearing gender-based violence, Version  2.0  published  in
    July 2018 which states under heading 2.6 concerning internal relocation
    that the Secretary of State's  view  is  maintained  that  it  will  be
    reasonable for women  to  relocate  if  they  are  single  and  without
    children to support  and  have  access  to  accommodation  and  support
    networks and are skilled or  wealthy  enough  to  be  able  to  support
    themselves, and that those fleeing a risk of domestic  violence  would,
    if they are able to rely upon shelters, must also  be  assessed  as  to
    whether they would have such availability of shelter after  they  leave
    such centres (see paragraph 2.6.4[2] of the July 2018 CPIN).

17. Thus, in light of my  above  findings  and  discussion  concerning  the
    judge's error and the reasons for that error, and taking  into  account
    the Appellant's evidence which I have summarised in my decision, I find
    that the Appellant has established that there would be a risk on return
    to her emanating from her former brother-in-law  as  a  police  officer
    with some political connections and influence, in light of her evidence
    given collectively and particularly in her witness  statement  referred
    to above, which I accept.  Thus, given that  there  is  a  sufficiently
    serious risk of harm to the  Appellant,  I  turn  to  the  question  of
    whether it would be viable for her to internally relocate.  Given  that
    the  Appellant's  former  brother-in-law  is  a  police  officer   with
    connections and influence in Punjab, in my view there is no question of
    her being able to relocate in her home area of Punjab, particularly  in
    light   of   the   objective   evidence   concerning   corruption   and
    susceptibility to corruption by police officers in general and  to  the
    judiciary alike.

18. Thus I turn to whether it  is  open  to  the  Appellant  to  internally
    relocate further afield to the proposed  city  of  Delhi.   I  base  my
    approach upon the House of Lords' decision in Januzi [2006]  2  AC  426
    and the decision of the Court of Appeal in AH (Sudan) & Ors v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ  297  at  [33],  cited
    with approval at [8] of Lord Bingham's judgment in Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) & Ors [2007] UKHL 49, which states
    as follows:

         An analysis of the judgment of Lord Phillips in E and of the speech
         of  Lord  Bingham  in Januzi therefore  yields  the   following
         propositions as to the approach to whether internal  relocation  is
         available in a particular case; bearing in  mind  always  that  the
         standard for rejecting  the  availability  of  internal  flight  is
         rigorous (per Brooke LJ in Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2000] 3  All  ER  449,  456,  and  Lord  Carswell
         in Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426, para 67):

           i)  The starting-point must be conditions prevailing in the place
         of habitual residence

           ii)  Those   conditions   must   be   compared   with   the
         conditions prevailing in the safe haven

           iii)  The latter conditions must be assessed  according  to  the
         impact that they will have on a person with the characteristics  of
         the asylum seeker

           iv)  If under those conditions the asylum seeker cannot  live  a
         relatively normal life according to the standards of his country it
         will be unduly harsh to expect him to go to the safe haven

           v)  Traumatic changes of life-style, for instance from a city to
         a desert, or into slum conditions, should  not  be  forced  on  the
         asylum seeker.

19. Of further assistance is [20]  of  Baroness  Hale's  judgment  from  AH
    (Sudan) wherein her Ladyship repeats the correct approach  to  internal
    relocation from Januzi:
         We are all agreed that the correct approach to the question of
         internal relocation under the Refugee Convention is that set out so
         clearly by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bingham of Cornhill,
         in Januzi and others v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, at para 21:
             "The decision-maker, taking account of all relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country of
             origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to
             expect him to do so."
         As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this
         case,
             " . . . the correct approach when considering the
             reasonableness of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to
             assess all the circumstances of the individual's case
             holistically and with specific reference to the individual's
             personal circumstances (including past persecution or fear
             thereof, psychological and health condition, family and social
             situation, and survival capacities). This assessment is to be
             made in the context of the conditions in the place of
             relocation (including basic human rights, security conditions,
             socio-economic conditions, accommodation, access to health
             care facilities), in order to determine the impact on that
             individual of settling in the proposed place of relocation and
             whether the individual could live a relatively normal life
             without undue hardship."
         I do not understand there to be any difference between this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5 of his
         opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the country to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out.

20. In my view, applying the above approach, I  find  that  the  conditions
    prevailing in the former place of her habitual residence in  India  are
    such that the Appellant would be at risk in that location in  light  of
    her former brother-in-law's position as a police officer and a  man  of
    influence with political connections.  The conditions that  prevail  in
    Delhi are plainly better than that in Punjab but it is not clear to  me
    that Delhi  will  provide  a  safe  haven  given  the  brother-in-law's
    influence and that a great  deal  depends  upon  political  connections
    which he appears to have.  In any event, given the factors as found  by
    the judge, at paragraphs 76 through to 87 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and taking those findings and comparing  them  against
    my  analysis  of  paragraph  1.2.10  of  the  February   2015   Country
    Information and Guidance Report and against paragraph 2.6.4 of the July
    2018   CPIN   listing   the   Respondent's   position   governing   the
    reasonableness for a woman to internally relocate, I find that, bearing
    in  mind  the  characteristics  of  the  Appellant,  it  would  not  be
    reasonably open to her (and her child) to internally relocate to  Delhi
    given all of the factors found  which  unarguably  point  to  it  being
    unduly harsh for her to do so.  As such, the Appellant would  certainly
    not be able  to  live  a  "relatively  normal  life  according  to  the
    standards of that country without undue hardship".

21. I make these findings, notwithstanding that in my view  there  is  also
    sufficiently serious risk  that  her  former  brother-in-law,  being  a
    police officer with  some  influence  and  being  connected  to  senior
    political figures in Punjab, would have influence  further  afield  and
    would also feasibly know if  the  Appellant  returned  given  that  the
    Appellant's other former brother-in-law is still residing in the United
    Kingdom and had extensive contact with her, and given that  the  family
    certainly demonstrated that they had the  Appellant's  contact  details
    when they called her on her mobile at the time of  her  late  husband's
    funeral when they also conveyed the efforts they were willing to go to,
    to disinherit the Appellant's son from her late husband's (and his late
    father's) estate.

22. In light of the above findings  I  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal on protection grounds.  I do not go on  to  consider
    Article  3  of  the  European  Convention   on   Human   Rights,   such
    consideration being irrelevant in light of my findings above.



Notice of Decision

23. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  protection
    claim is set aside to the discrete extent identified above.

25. I remake the decision and substitute a decision of my own allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal on protection grounds.

26. The Appellant's Article 8 decision stands, there being no challenge  to
    that from either party.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


-----------------------
[1] "In general it will not be unduly harsh for a woman, especially if
single and without children to support, who is able to access accommodation
or is educated or skilled or wealthy enough to be able to support herself,
to relocate. However, careful consideration must be given to the relevance
and reasonableness of internal relocation on a case by case basis, taking
full account of the individual circumstances of the particular person".
[2] "In general, it will be reasonable for a woman to relocate, especially
if she is single and without children to support, able to access
accommodation and support networks, or is educated, skilled or wealthy
enough to be able to support herself. In assessing whether a woman who is
fleeing a risk of domestic violence has a viable internal relocation
alternative, decision makers must not only have regard to the availability
of shelters/centres but also to the situation the woman will face after she
leaves such centres".

