
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th October 2017                     |On 01st November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr n m e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Asjad, promulgated on  14th  February  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 26th January 2017.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereby the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Sudan,  who  was  born  on  1st
    January 1987.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 18th February 2012  refusing  his  application
    for asylum and humanitarian protection.

The Grant of Permission

 3. On 30th August 2017, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider evidence relating to the Appellant's sur place activities,  as
    set out in the bundle at pages 88 to 89, together with  photographs  at
    pages 92 to 97.  Furthermore,  the  judge  appears  not  to  have  been
    directed to the  country  guidance  decision  in  IM  and  AI  (risk  -
    membership of Beja tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00188, and it was arguable that he did not assess the risk on return in
    the light of that guidance, and the context of the evidence as a whole.
     Second, that although there had been an earlier  determination  by  IJ
    Dickson, there  were  now  additional  documents  that  postdated  that
    determination, and these appeared  at  page  87,  and  related  to  the
    Appellant's tribal membership of the Berti tribe,  and  this  does  not
    appear to have been taken into account by the judge.  Finally,  insofar
    as any criticism was made of the judge's rejection of  the  credibility
    of the Appellant and his two brothers as witnesses (see  paragraphs  28
    to 34) the judge had given adequate and sustainable reasons  for  this,
    and this could not be criticised.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 13th October 2017, Mr Ramzan,  relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal, as the Appellant's solicitor.  He submitted that
    the judge failed to consider the sur place activities, as recounted  in
    the Notice of Decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  at  pages  80  to  89.
    Second, there were photographs at pages 92 to 97, which  had  not  even
    been mentioned  by  the  judge.   Furthermore,  there  were  additional
    photographs at pages 88  to  89  that  had  not  been  mentioned.   The
    Appellant had expressed a fear arising on account  of  the  Justice  of
    Equality Movement (JEM) and this had not even  been  mentioned  by  the
    judge.  Other documents about the Appellant's tribal  affiliation  with
    the Berti tribe were not mentioned at page 87.  Finally, the sur  place
    activities were not mentioned.

 5. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that she would have  to  accept  that,
    notwithstanding the Rule 24 response, which was  written  at  the  time
    when there had been no access to the  trial  bundle,  that  failure  to
    mention these court documents, and in particular the  letter  from  the
    Berti  Organisation,  did  show  an  error  of  law  arising  from  the
    determination.  Nevertheless, the judge was right in his assessment  of
    the credibility of the witnesses, and this finding should be  preserved
    intact.

 6. In reply, Mr Sharif submitted that it will be difficult  to  argue  for
    the retention  of  the  judge's  findings  in  the  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the witnesses,  once  it  had  been  accepted  that  the
    surrounding documents relating to the Appellant's claim  had  not  been
    properly taken into account, and that it was far better  to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal on a de novo basis.

Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are  quite
    simply that there is broad agreement  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent Secretary of State that court documents have not been  taken
    into account, such as the  letter  from  the  Berti  Organisation,  the
    Appellant's sur place activities, and the photographs, and  this  leads
    to a material error of law.

 8. The main question is whether the findings of the judge in  relation  to
    the witnesses should be preserved intact.

 9. In my opinion, it would be artificial to do so, and lead to unnecessary
    complication for the judge who will next hear this appeal, and that  it
    is right and proper that the matter is remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Asjad, on a  de  novo
    basis.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard by a judge other than Judge Asjad.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date 31st October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss


