
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13720/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 November 2018                     |On 02 January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Atiq Ajmal
                       (anonimity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Brien
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The  appellant  challenges  the
    decision of Judge Bradshaw sitting in the First-tier Tribunal.  I shall
    deal with the grounds of appeal in the order in which they were  raised
    by Mr O'Brien who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.



 2. Mr O'Brien submitted that Judge Bradshaw had  placed  excessive  weight
    upon the appellant's delay in claiming asylum as determinative  of  his
    credibility as a witness.  The judge refers  to  the  delay  repeatedly
    throughout her decision and applied Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 [66].  She
    considered the FIR document and subsequent arrest  warrant  adduced  by
    the appellant and found that it carried little evidential  weight  when
    examined in the round and in the light of  the  appellant's  delay  and
    consequent lack of credibility.  In response to a question which I  put
    to him, Mr O'Brien accepted  that  delay  in  claiming  asylum  may  be
    relevant to the assessment of credibility; his submission is  that  the
    judge treated the delay as determinative of credibility.   Further,  he
    submitted that the Secretary of State had accepted that  the  appellant
    is a member of the United Kashmir People's National Party (UK  PNP).  I
    note that Judge Bradshaw [47] also accepted  (which  the  Secretary  of
    State did not) that the appellant was a member of the student  wing  of
    the UK PNP.  Neither the Secretary of State nor Judge Bradshaw accepted
    that the appellant was the general secretary of the PUK PNP as  he  had
    claimed.  Mr O'Brien submitted that the concession by the Secretary  of
    State that the appellant had some basis for  his  claim  (that  he  was
    involved in Kashmiri separatist politics, albeit not at  the  level  or
    with the  profile  claimed)  set  this  case  apart  from  that  of  an
    individual who, apprehended for working illegally,  invents  an  asylum
    claim without any basis in order to frustrate his or her removal.

 3. An applicant's immigration history including a delay in claiming asylum
    may be so egregious as to render an individual without  credibility  as
    to the core of a claim for asylum.  The question here  is  whether  the
    fact that the appellant has been engaged in opposition politics, albeit
    in the view of the Secretary of State only as a  member,  in  some  way
    negates or reverses the damage to his credibility caused by  the  delay
    in  claiming  asylum.   Having  read  Judge  Bradshaw's  decision  very
    carefully, I find that it was open  to  her  to  place  weight  on  the
    appellant's delay and subsequent failure  to  explain  coherently  that
    delay.  Mr O'Brien submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  take  any
    account at all to an injury suffered by the appellant which he  claimed
    had taken some time from which to recuperate and which had  contributed
    to his delay in claiming asylum.  Mr Tan, for the Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that there was no evidence to suggest that the injury was  so
    severe to incapacitate the appellant such that he was unable  to  claim
    asylum.  I agree with Mr Tan.  There is no evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant's injury was such that it had any effect upon his ability  to
    claim asylum.  Further, I cannot see that the fact that the  appellant
    has been accepted as a member of the UK PNP  in  any  way  reduces  the
    weight which the judge found should attach  to  his  failure  to  claim
    asylum at an  earlier  date.   The  appellant  is  an  intelligent  and
    educated man who came to the United Kingdom as a student.  He attempted
    to extend his immigration status but failed.  Thereafter, he  chose  to
    remain in the United Kingdom illegally and to work illegally at a shop.
     Further, the judge found that the appellant  had  given  a  number  of
    different explanations for claiming asylum  at  an  earlier  date.   As
    early as February 2014 the  appellant  claimed  that  he  had  received
    details of a threatening letter from a mullah  of  a  local  mosque  in
    Pakistan concerning the appellant's separatist activities.  He  claimed
    to have found out in May 2014 that an IR had been  filed  against  him.
    However, the appellant had also said that he had left Pakistan to  come
    to the United Kingdom at a time when he was  fearful  of  remaining  in
    Pakistan.  Whilst the threat to him in Pakistan  may,  therefore,  have
    increased (coincidentally) just before the  appellant  happened  to  be
    detained for illegal working, he had reason to seek asylum  at  a  much
    earlier date.  Two witnesses had  given  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellant.  Mr [Y] failed to persuade the judge that he knew very  much
    about the appellant's activities in Pakistan [61].  Mr Ahmed also "took
    the matter no further" [62].  The judge fully  acknowledged  [63]  that
    the appellant's uncle (Mr [Y]) had successfully claimed asylum  in  the
    United  Kingdom  on  account  of  his  own  involvement   in   Kashmiri
    independence politics.  However, the judge found:

         "His own asylum claim [i.e. that of Mr [Y]] and  his  evidence  was
         tested and accepted and had a  successful  appeal  but  if  he  had
         sincerely believed what the appellant told him had happened to  him
         in 2009, the threats to his  life  before  he  left  Pakistan,  the
         various documents which appeared  to  support  what  the  appellant
         claims and that his activities in the UK had led to  the  issue  of
         the FIR and an arrest warrant against  him  in  2014,  then  it  is
         simply not credible that he would have  advised  the  appellant  to
         apply for further leave to  obtain  what  he  described  as  "legal
         status" in the UK rather than claim asylum if he was in fear of his
         own life on return.  I do not accept that his uncle saw asylum in a
         different light.   Both  the  appellant  and  his  uncle  knew  and
         understood about claiming asylum.  The appellant had a clear choice
         when his application for further leave was refused on  12  February
         2014 if indeed his life was in danger on return and that he was not
         to go into hiding but to make a claim for asylum as his  uncle  and
         friend had done."

 4. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom and lived with Mr [Y], his
    uncle, and his aunt.  Significantly, the  judge  found  that  both  the
    appellant and the uncle were well aware of  the  nature  of  an  asylum
    claim and how this might differ from  making  another  application  for
    further leave to remain.  The judge was fully entitled  to  make  those
    findings on the facts.  This was not a case where the appellant is able
    to plead ignorance of the asylum system operating in a foreign  country
    about which he knows very little and when he has no family  members  or
    friends to advise him  as  to  the  best  course  of  action.   On  the
    contrary, the appellant's uncle had passed through  the  asylum  system
    yet, notwithstanding the appellant's claim that  he  left  Pakistan  in
    fear of his life, appears to have encouraged the appellant not to apply
    for asylum but instead to remain living and working  illegally  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On the particular facts of this case, I  am  satisfied
    that Judge Bradshaw was entitled to place  significant  weight  on  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  Whilst she does not  say  so  in
    terms, it  is  the  obvious  conclusion  from  her  findings  that  the
    appellant would never have claimed asylum had he not  been  apprehended
    for working illegally.  In my opinion, the appellant's  conduct  within
    the United Kingdom itself was such as to satisfy  the  judge  that  the
    appellant did not have a genuine fear of returning to Pakistan.

 5. Mr O'Brien submitted that the judge had erred in her treatment  of  the
    documents provided by the appellant.   These  consist  of  an  FIR  and
    subsequent arrest warrant  and  also  newspaper  reports.   Mr  O'Brien
    submitted that the judge appeared to rely  upon  the  mere  possibility
    that the documents may have been forged [65] as  indicating  that  they
    should be given no weight at all.

 6. I find that the judge has approached the documents in  accordance  with
    the established practice in Ahmed (insert reference).  I have no reason
    to disbelieve the judge when she says that she considered the documents
    "in the round" with the other evidence.  I  find  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that she could,

         "...  attach  little  weight  to  [the   documents]   because   the
         appellant's failure to  provide  a  credible  explanation  for  his
         failure to claim asylum until forced to  do  so  and  none  of  the
         documents when taken in the round demonstrate that mere involvement
         at the relatively low level of the appellant puts him at risk ..."

    I also agree with what she says regarding the newspaper  extracts;  the
    appellant had not filed full copies of the various newspapers,  thereby
    limiting significantly the probative value of the documents.

 7. The third issue raised by Mr  O'Brien  appears  less  contentious.   At
    [69], the judge found that there would be a sufficiency  of  protection
    even if the appellant was to be believed and that  an  FIR  and  arrest
    warrant had been issued in  Pakistan.   Mr  Tan  accepted  that  it  is
    unlikely that the appellant would enjoy such protection from the  state
    authorities of Pakistan if an arrest warrant had  been  issued  against
    him for separatist activities.  However, I find that  Judge  Bradshaw's
    alternative and comprehensive finding on sufficiency of protection does
    not undermine her decision because I find that the judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that, beyond his claim to be a member of  the  UK  PNP,  no
    other part of the appellant's claim could  be  believed  and  that  the
    appellant himself did not  have  a  subjective  fear  of  returning  to
    Pakistan.

 8. The judge made findings [72] regarding Article 8, ECHR.  Those findings
    are not challenged before the Upper Tribunal.

 9. In conclusion, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 25 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 25 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
