
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13788/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 August 2017                      |     On 18 September 2017            |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                        Miss Hidy Magdy Mesack Faraj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by AMZ Law
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is an Egyptian national who was born on  17  March  1975.
    She made an application for a visit visa on 15 December 2010 which  was
    granted and was valid from 23 December 2010 until 23  June  2011.   The
    appellant came to the UK in January 2011 and returned to Egypt a  month
    later.  The appellant then made a further application for a visit  visa
    on 2 November 2015.  This was granted and was valid  from  12  December
    2015 until 12 May 2016.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on
    13 December 2015.  On 24 May 2016 she was served with an  IS.96  as  an
    overstayer.  She claimed asylum on 27 May 2016.  The appellant's  claim
    for asylum was on the basis that she is  at  risk  from  an  individual
    known as Mohamed El Shrif, who she says wants to marry  her  and  force
    her to convert to Islam.  The respondent refused the appellant's  claim
    on 25 November 2016.  The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. In a decision promulgated on 27 January 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Manyarara dismissed the appellant's appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    refused/dismissed the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    European Convention grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  there
    was a sufficiency of protection from the state that the appellant could
    internally relocate in Egypt, that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate for the appellant to be removed to Egypt.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  On 10  May  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed  her
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  on  10
    July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission to appeal.

    The appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 4. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground  of  appeal  asserts
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to act fairly.  It is asserted that
    the judge failed  to  consider  paragraph  2(2)(c)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Rules, which required her to consider not just  sanctions  and
    punitive measures for breach of the Rules but also whether it was  fair
    and just for the appellant to be unrepresented at the hearing.   It  is
    asserted that the judge ought to have directed herself to the  reported
    decisions of McCloskey J in respect of procedural fairness.  The  judge
    erred in considering whether the absence of a representative would make
    a difference and concluded that it would not because in  her  view  the
    appeal was straightforward.  However, in so concluding  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred given that this was an  asylum  appeal  and  so  anxious
    scrutiny and the higher standards of fairness applied.  The  merits  of
    the appeal  are  not  relevant.   There  is  no  requirement  that  the
    appellant should  demonstrate  materiality  in  respect  of  procedural
    unfairness.

 5. Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to consider the current  country
    situation.  The judge erred in consigning her assessment of risk  to  a
    country guidance case that was promulgated in 2013.  It is set out that
    a number of incidents since December 2016 have  been  reported  in  the
    public domain. Those developments constitute a  dramatic  and  material
    change in circumstances since the country guidance case of  four  years
    ago.  The judge did not undertake a particularised approach in  respect
    of gender.  The judge erred in failing to make any findings in  respect
    of the additional fact-finding  assessment  required  when  the  Coptic
    Christian is a woman.  It was found in the country guidance  case  that
    there was in general inadequate state protection in respect  of  Coptic
    Christians.  The finding at paragraph 55 demonstrates that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to give effect to the  generic  findings  in
    the 2013 country guidance case that there is as a  matter  of  fact  an
    absence of adequate state protection.

 6. In oral submissions Ms Jegarajah submitted that the appellant had  paid
    for representation, the solicitors representing her submitted a  poorly
    written letter that contained lies, they had undertaken no  preparation
    for the appeal at all.  There has  been  recognition  that  women  aged
    between 14 to 25, who lack a male protector are in need of  protection.
    If the appeal had been  properly  prepared  there  would  have  been  a
    witness statement addressing all the  discrepancies.   The  appellant's
    Counsel would have  presented  the  best  evidence,  particularly  with
    regard to the lack of credibility.  She  submitted  that  even  if  the
    appellant's account was incredible there  is  evidence  in  the  public
    domain to show that the situation has deteriorated and that there is  a
    significant risk for the particular category of Coptic women in  Egypt.
    There has been an increased participation of ISIS and if the  appellant
    had been represented by competent solicitors all  these  matters  would
    have been addressed.

 7. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response, which sets out that the judge
    has had regard to the evidence presented by the appellant  and  to  the
    guiding case law and arrived at conclusions open to her.   Noting  that
    the case was a straightforward case it is not clear how  representation
    could have ameliorated the end result  of  this  case,  which,  on  its
    factual matrix, was bound to  be  dismissed.   It  is  clear  from  the
    appellant's evidence that the authorities have not refused to help  her
    and that she has the option to internally relocate even  if  there  was
    some credence in her account that she was harassed by Mohamed El  Shrif
    for marriage.  Mr Tarlow submitted that in essence this was a  stalking
    case and, as found by the judge in paragraph  55,  there  is  effective
    protection from  the  state.   It  was  difficult  to  see  what  other
    conclusion could have been reached even if Counsel had been present  to
    represent the appellant.  There was no requirement  that  an  appellant
    should be represented.

 8. In response Ms Jegarajah submitted that good  representation  can  make
    the difference between winning and losing the case.  This was not  just
    a stalking case.  If the appellant had been represented she could  have
    made a full case on the objective evidence that is available.

    Discussion

 9. The First-tier Tribunal  with  set  out  with  commendable  detail  the
    reasons for deciding not to adjourn the matter.   These  extended  from
    paragraphs 14 to 24.  The judge was faced with quite appalling  conduct
    by Shervins  Solicitors,  who  were  representing  the  appellant.   At
    paragraph 21 the judge set out:

         "21. Shervins Solicitors have shown a  contumelious  disregard  for
             the Procedure Rules or the directions of the  Tribunal.   They
             have shown a willingness to mislead by suggesting that further
             evidence is arriving in 24 hours when the  appellant  says  it
             has not been sent yet, and have further  suggested  that  they
             would require twelve weeks to consider what only amounts to  a
             single document that  is  self-explanatory.   There  has  been
             absolutely no attempt by them to prepare the appellant's  case
             and the suggestion  that  Counsel  could  not  attend  due  to
             extreme weather conditions is unsupported by any evidence.  If
             Counsel  had  been  instructed  and  had  been  hindered  from
             attending by the weather, then the Tribunal expects contact to
             have been made by Counsel or Counsel's clerks."

10. It is clear that the Tribunal  considered  in  very  great  detail  the
    position that the appellant had been  put  in  by  her  solicitors  and
    referred to all the evidence  in  support  of  an  application  for  an
    adjournment including the appellant's evidence that she  had  paid  for
    and was expecting to be represented at the hearing.  The Tribunal  then
    considered  the  case  of  VA  (Solicitor's  non-compliance:  Counsel's
    duties) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00012 (IAC).  The Tribunal also  referred
    to the  decision  in  Shabir  Ahmed  and  others  (sanctions  for  non-
    compliance) [2016] UKUT 00562 (IAC).   The  judge  properly  considered
    these cases and applied them to the facts of this case.  Quite  clearly
    the judge was entitled to consider there had been serious  professional
    failures by the appellant's solicitors. However, the judge did not  pay
    sufficient regard to the requirement, when considering whether  or  not
    to grant an  adjournment,  that  a  judge  must  always  yield  to  the
    requirement of fairness. The judge, having considered that this  was  a
    straightforward case and that the appellant had attended  the  hearing,
    decided that she could proceed to hear the appeal.  Although the  judge
    reassured the appellant that the behaviour of her legal representatives
    would not affect her decision and was not held  against  her  it  would
    appear to solely be the behaviour of the representatives that  led  the
    judge to refuse to adjourn the hearing.

11. The decision demonstrates that the judge attempted to  explain  matters
    to the appellant  and  to  provide  her  with  a  full  opportunity  to
    participate  in  the  hearing.   The  decision  is  careful  and  well-
    considered.  However, this appellant was not in any way to blame or  to
    have even  to  any  extent  caused  the  significant  failings  by  her
    representatives.  This was an asylum claim.   As  the  judge  set  out,
    there was no appeal bundle and there was not even a  witness  statement
    prepared on behalf of the appellant. Credibility was in  issue.  Whilst
    this is a case that does appear on  the  face  of  it  to  have  little
    prospect of success had the appellant been competently represented,  as
    submitted by Ms Jegarajah, there is evidence that might have been taken
    into account by the judge that was not drawn to her  attention  because
    the appellant was unrepresented.

12. When considering a request for an adjournment the Tribunal must  always
    yield to a party's right to a fair hearing.  As was set out in the case
    of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) at paragraph
    8:

         "In determining applications for adjournments, judges will also  be
         guided by focusing on the overarching criterion established in  the
         overriding objective which is that of fairness."

13. Given the need to ensure and always yield to fairness I find that there
    has been a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    to refuse to grant an adjournment. I set that decision  aside  pursuant
    to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    ('TCEA').

14. Given my finding on the first  ground  of  appeal  I  do  not  need  to
    consider the second ground.

15. The appellant in this case has  not  had  a  fair  hearing.  The  Upper
    Tribunal is not the correct venue  for  initial  fact  finding.  It  is
    appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. I remit the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Hatton Cross before any judge other than Judge Manyarara
    pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA.  A  new  hearing
    will be fixed at the next available date.

16. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal is allowed. The decision to refuse the adjournment  request,
    on the facts of this case, amounted to a material error of law. I remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at  Hatton
    Cross before any judge other than Judge Manyarara pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed  at  the
    next available date.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 17 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw




















