
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13601/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr T Bahja, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clarke promulgated on 8 October 2018 in  which  the
    judge allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2 December  2017,  to  refuse
    his protection and human rights claims, and to maintain the deportation
    order made on 24 February 2017.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    5 December 2018.  The matter then came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Juss on 7  March  2019.   The  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    promulgated on 21 March 2019 found an error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and set that decision aside remitting it to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

 4. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal's error of law and remittal decision.   That
    was considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill who, on 3 May 2019, decided
    to review the decision instead of  considering  permission  to  appeal,
    pursuant to Rules 43(a) and 46 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

 5. Judge Gill considered that Judge Juss failed to  apply  relevant  legal
    authorities to the effect that it was necessary for the Upper  Tribunal
    to consider the extent of the fact-finding that is  necessary  when  an
    appeal is remitted or a decision on appeal is  to  be  re-made.   Judge
    Juss failed to consider whether the error of law he identified infected
    Judge Clarke's findings of fact, and failed to explain why  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should consider the appeal "on the merits".   Judge  Gill
    stated,

         "It was not possible to discern from the reasons he gave  at  paras
         10 to 14 for setting aside the decision of Judge Clarke whether  he
         considered that the judge's error included any errors  in  relation
         to his assessment of credibility so as to shed light on his reasons
         for deciding that the First-tier Tribunal should decide the  appeal
         on the merits".

 6. Consequently, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill set the decision of Judge  Juss
    aside.  In the circumstances, the matter had to be considered again  by
    the Upper Tribunal on the error of law complaint by  the  Secretary  of
    State against the decision of Judge Clarke.

 7. Thus the matter came before me at Manchester Civil Justice Centre on 21
    January 2020.   For the reasons set out in my decision  promulgated  on
    31 January 2020, I found that there were errors of law in the making of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to be set
    aside.  I summarise those reasons below but reference should be made to
    the decision itself for my full findings.

 8. At the hearing before me in January 2020, the respondent relied on  two
    principal issues, that of credibility and the judge's treatment of  the
    respondent's asserted sexuality and any risk on return to  Afghanistan.
    Between [75] and [78] of the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  the  judge
    identified  alleged  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  claim   for
    international  protection.   The   judge   identified   a   number   of
    difficulties with the sexual orientation claim but ultimately concluded
    that it was made out to the lower standard of proof.

 9. The respondent also pointed out that  the  previous  judge,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew, made a number of  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the claimant.  It is submitted that Judge  Clarke  should  have
    applied the Devaseelan principle to take those credibility findings  as
    the starting point in relation to assessment of credibility.   However,
    it is relevant in this regard that in that previous case  the  claimant
    did not make any claim with regard to his  sexual  orientation.  Whilst
    the judge  has  made  a  reference  to  the  respondent's  reliance  on
    Devaseelan at paragraph 37 of Judge Clarke's decision, nowhere else  in
    the decision does the judge address the principle or adopt any of those
    credibility  findings  as  the  starting  point  in   considering   the
    claimant's credibility in relation to his sexual orientation.

10. In summary, in my decisions promulgated on 31.1.20 I found an error  of
    law in the making of the decision  in  the  appeal  for  the  following
    reasons:

      a) Failure to take as a starting point in  assessing  credibility  the
         adverse credibility findings made in a previous First-tier Tribunal
         (First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew) appeal decision from  2017,  and
         failure to take into account in assessing credibility  the  circuit
         judge's sentencing remarks;

      b) When giving weight to the expert report of Dr  Thomas,  incorrectly
         assuming that  she  was  aware  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for
         deportation and was  aware  of  the  previous  adverse  credibility
         findings;

      c) Giving undue weight to the scarring report as consistent  with  the
         appellant's claim when  only one of six scars was  consistent  with
         assault;

      d) Giving weight to the NRM conclusion that the appellant had given  a
         credible account when that assessment dealt  with  his  trafficking
         claim and not the 'new' claim to gay  sexual  orientation,  to  the
         point that the judge  relied  on  the  NRM  as  conclusive  of  the
         credibility of the sexual orientation claim ;

      e) Failure to apply the Country Guidance of AJ (Risk  to  Homosexuals)
         Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  0001  (IAC),  which  held  that   a
         practising homosexual returning to Kabul who would not  attract  or
         seek to cause  public  outrage  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
         persecution.

      f) That the judge appears to have regarded sexuality as  determinative
         of the protection claim,  when  the  appeal  was  only  allowed  on
         article 3 grounds and there has been no  cross-appeal  against  the
         finding that the appellant failed to rebut the s72  certificate  so
         that he was excluded from both asylum and humanitarian protection.

11. I, therefore, concluded in my January 2020 decision that there was such
    error of law within the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
    require it to be set aside and remade, which  Mr  Bahja  agreed  should
    take place in the Upper Tribunal.  However,  I  preserved  the  judge's
    findings concluding that  the  Section  72  certificate  has  not  been
    rebutted.  It  followed  that  the  only  remaining  avenue  of  appeal
    available to the claimant is under Article 3.

12. In a legally erroneous application,  the  appellant  sought  the  Upper
    Tribunal's permission to appeal my error of law decision to  the  Court
    of Appeal before  the  remaking  of  the  decision.  As  the  Principle
    Resident Judge pointed out in  the  Notice  dated  2  March  2020,  the
    finding of an error of law does not of itself  represent  a  'decision'
    within the meaning of s13 of the 2007 Act, as the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    not yet completed its functions. Consequently, there  is  no  right  of
    appeal against my decision promulgated on  31  January  2020,  and  the
    application for permission was refused for want of jurisdiction.

13. For the continuation hearing listed before me on  3  August  2020,  the
    appellant's representatives have submitted:

      a) a further skeleton argument, dated 28 July 2020;

      b) A consolidated bundle; and

      c) What is said to have been a supplementary  bundle  put  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal;

14. The appellant accepts that as the s72 findings have been preserved,  in
    the remaking of the decision in the appeal the sole issue  is  that  of
    article 3 ECHR  in  the  context  of  a  claim  to  be  of  gay  sexual
    orientation on return to Afghanistan. If the decision is to  be  remade
    as anticipated in January 2020, the Upper Tribunal would first have  to
    decide on the lower standard of proof  whether  the  appellant's  late-
    disclosed sexual orientation is as claimed. If that  is  accepted,  the
    Tribunal would then have to decide whether  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    treatment contrary to article 3 ECHR on return to Afghanistan, the risk
    on return.

15. However, before addressing those issues, Mr Bahja applied to set  aside
    that part of my decision of 31.1.20 that appears between [13] and [14],
    which relates to my finding an error of law in relation to the  judge's
    reliance on the NRM assessments. In fact, as advanced  before  me,  the
    argument is somewhat wider in scope than those two paragraphs.

16. Reliance is made on AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice)  Iran
    [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC), where it was held that:

         "(1) Before it has re-made the decision in an appeal,  pursuant  to
         section 12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
          Act  2007,  the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  depart  from,
         or vary, its decision that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   made   an
         error  of  law,  such  that  the   First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
         should be set aside under section 12(2)(a).

         (2)  As Practice Direction 3.7 indicates, that  jurisdiction  will,
         however, be exercised only in very exceptional cases.  This will be
         so, whether or not the same constitution of the Upper Tribunal that
         made the error of law decision is re-making  the  decision  in  the
         appeal ...".

17. I accept that as the decision-making process of the Upper Tribunal  has
    not concluded, it remains open for me  to  review  and,  if  necessary,
    change my earlier findings and the basis on which I found an  error  of
    law. I have carefully considered the further submissions  of  Mr  Bahja
    and the  response  of  Mr  Diwnycz  and  considerable  time  was  spent
    addressing again the issue of an error of law in the decision of  Judge
    Clarke.

Failure to Consider  Previous  Adverse  Credibility  Findings  &  Sentencing
Remarks

18. With respect to the failure to take into account the  previous  adverse
    credibility findings, Mr Bahja accepted in his submissions to  me  that
    the adverse credibility findings from the previous First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal were relevant to the issue of the credibility of the appellant's
    sexual orientation claim and  should  have  been  taken  into  account.
    However,  he  submitted  that  in  the  overall  consideration  of  the
    evidence, the error was not material. Whilst those findings should have
    been taken into account, they  are  not  determinative  of  the  sexual
    orientation claim and the Judge Clarke was not bound by them.  I  agree
    that the judge was not bound by them, as I made  clear  at  [9]  of  my
    earlier  decision,  I  found  only  that  they  were  relevant  to  any
    assessment of  credibility,  even  on  a  different  issue.  I  accept,
    however, that they are only a starting point and it has to be borne  in
    mind that Judge Clarke was addressing a  different  issue  to  that  of
    Judge Andrew.

19. Mr Bahja makes the same point in relation  to  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks. It is accepted that they should have been taken  into  account
    but submitted that the error is not material or fatal to the outcome of
    the appeal. I have considered both these two points  further  below  in
    the overall assessment of the error of law issue.

Were the Experts Aware of the Reasons for Deportation?

20. In relation  to  whether  Dr  Thomas  was  aware  of  the  reasons  for
    deportation, contrary to  my  findings  at  [10]  of  my  January  2020
    decision, and having been directed to the list of documents (as seen at
    p20 of his report and page 106 of the consolidated  bundle)  Dr  Thomas
    claims to have read, I now accept that these included  the  Deportation
    Order and the HO bundle, which included the decision to revoke  refugee
    status. Reference is also made to the decision of Judge Andrew.  Whilst
    it is accepted the respondent's decision of 2.12.19  rejecting  further
    submissions could not have been before Dr Thomas, whose report is dated
    3.11.17, Mr Bahja is correct in asserting that  Dr  Thomas  would  have
    been aware of the reasons for deportation. Mr  Bahja  accepts  that  Dr
    Grant-Peterkin's report did not include any documents relating  to  the
    reasons for  deport.  However,  at  [82]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision it was only Dr Thomas's report to which the judge was prepared
    to give greater weight  because  she  was  aware  of  the  reasons  for
    deportation. In the premises, there is no error in this regard  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Scarring Report

21. In relation to the scarring report and the finding that only one of six
    scars could be attributable to assault, Mr Bahja points out that  scars
    4-7 related to self-harm. Mr Bahja took me to various  passages  of  Dr
    Thomas's report where it is clear that the claim of  sexual  abuse  and
    sexual orientation were detailed by the appellant in 2017.  At  section
    7.13 to 7.23 of the report the expert related the  self-harm  to  being
    consistent with symptoms of severe depression and  PTSD.  At  7.23  the
    expert considered that multiple trauma including sexual  assaults  were
    of an exceptionally threatening  nature,  "likely  to  cause  pervasive
    distress as defined  in  the  Diagnostic  Guidelines  for  PTSD."  From
    sections 3.12 to 3.32, it is clear  that  the  appellant  had  given  a
    detailed account of gay  sexual  orientation  and  of  being  raped  on
    multiple occasions. I, therefore, accept that there was no error in the
    judge's acceptance at [84]  of  the  decision  that  the  scarring  was
    consistent with the appellant's account.

NRM/CA Referral and Decisions

22. In relation to the specific issue of the NRM/Competent  Authority  (CA)
    decisions , the appellant also relies on the  recent  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in MS (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] UKSC 9 (18th  March  2020),  of  which  the  headnote
    reads:

         "Whether tribunal bound by  NRM  decision  -  When  determining  an
         appeal that removal would breach  ECHR  rights,  the  tribunal  was
         required to determine the relevant factual issues for itself on the
         basis of the evidence before it, albeit giving proper consideration
         and weight to any previous  decision  of  the  competent  authority
         under the NRM. The tribunal was in no way  bound  by  the  decision
         reached under the NRM, nor did it  have  to  look  for  public  law
         reasons why that decision was flawed.  Its  jurisdiction,  pursuant
         to the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 s.82(1), was to
         hear appeals against the immigration decisions  of  officials:   it
         did not have jurisdiction judicially to review the decisions of the
         competent authority under the  NRM.   Appeals  against  immigration
         decisions were clearly intended to involve the hearing of  evidence
         and the making of factual findings, Huang v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, [2007]  2  A.C.  167  followed.
         The "proper consideration and weight", which the secretary of state
         accepted should be given to any previous decision of the  competent
         authority, would upon the nature of the decision and its  relevance
         to the issue before the tribunal.  The decision  of  the  competent
         authority under the NRM process was essentially factual,  and  both
         the FtT and the UT were better placed than the competent  authority
         to decide whether the  appellant  was  the  victim  of  trafficking
         (paras 11-15)".

23. Addressing the same  issue  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  DC  (trafficking:
    protection/human rights appeals) Albania [2019] UKUT  351 (IAC) held:

         "(a)  In  a  protection  appeal,  the   "reasonable   grounds"   or
         "conclusive grounds" decision  of  the  CA  will  be  part  of  the
         evidence that the tribunal will have  to  assess  in  reaching  its
         decision on that appeal, giving the CA's decision such weight as is
         due, bearing in mind that the standard of proof applied by  the  CA
         in  a  "conclusive   grounds"   decision   was   the   balance   of
         probabilities".

24. In relation to the NRM referral and the  CA's  reasonable  grounds  and
    conclusive grounds decisions, it now transpires that the  referral  and
    both CA decisions were put before the First-tier Tribunal, as confirmed
    by the new evidence from the appellant's legal representative  and  the
    submission of what has been described as a supplementary bundle. Whilst
    there  was  no  bundle  in  the  Tribunal's  case  file  marked  as   a
    supplementary bundle, some of the documents including  one  of  the  CA
    decisions appear attached  to  the  back  of  an  unpaginated  skeleton
    argument. I also accept that the other was within the appellant's  core
    bundle. I was unable to verify at the January 2020 hearing  that  these
    documents were before the First-tier Tribunal but am now satisfied that
    they were.

25. On the basis of the authorities cited, I  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to take the CA decisions as part of the  evidence
    to be considered and give appropriate weight to them.  However,  as  Mr
    Bahja conceded, neither of the CA decisions made any reference  to  the
    sexual orientation claim or of the appellant being  trafficked  because
    of his sexual orientation. Whilst that is a feature  of  the  Salvation
    Army's NRM referral that is not the  same  thing  as  there  being  any
    conclusion drawn by the CA. Mr Bahja submitted that all three documents
    need to be read together for the inference to be  properly  drawn  that
    his claim  of  trafficking  because  of  sexual  orientation  had  been
    accepted as credible. I find that is going too far, reading into the CA
    decisions something which is not there. However, having considered  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision further,  I  accept  that  the  judge  was
    entitled at [102] to [103] of the decision to rely on  the  credibility
    findings on his trafficking claim to "add  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    claims regarding his sexual orientation." The judge did not go  as  far
    as Mr Bahja submitted the Tribunal could or should, by reading into the
    CA's decisions a finding of credibility of being trafficked because  of
    sexual orientation. Nevertheless, I accept that the judge was  entitled
    to  find  that  the  NRM/CA   decisions   supported   the   appellant's
    credibility. These credibility findings perhaps should  have  been  set
    against the negative credibility  findings  of  Judge  Andrew  and  the
    sentencing remarks. However, the fact is that the judge was entitled to
    assert that the appellant was not coming to the  tribunal  without  any
    credibility. In the circumstances, there is no error in the  Tribunal's
    reliance on the NRM/CA decisions to the limited extent it did.

26. In summary, it  is  clear  from  both  authorities  relied  on  by  the
    appellant that the NRM decisions are part of the evidence the  Tribunal
    was required to assess, giving due weight to the CA's  assessment  made
    on the balance of probabilities rather than the lower standard of proof
    applicable to this issue in the Tribunal. However, I do not accept  the
    further submission of Mr Bahja that in light of the NRM/CA decisions it
    is now not open to the Secretary of State to argue on appeal before the
    FtT or the UT that the appellant is not gay. As pointed out the  actual
    decisions made no reference to sexual orientation. Further, whether the
    respondent is or is not prohibited from resisting the claimed sexuality
    was a matter for the Tribunal to decide as a finding of fact.

Delay in Making the Sexual Orientation and Abuse Claim.

27. The appellant not only claims to be gay but his account includes  being
    abused and raped by men on  multiple  occasions.  I  bear  in  mind  in
    relation to credibility that whilst the sexual orientation is  a  late-
    made claim,  delay  in  disclosing  sexual  orientation  or  abuse  was
    considered in the expert evidence as  entirely  consistent  with  known
    behaviour. Mr Bahja pointed out that the first reference to the  sexual
    orientation claim was on 4.7.17 and that further references  were  made
    in correspondence from his legal representatives  in  August  2017.  At
    [98] to [100] of the impugned  decision  the  judge  cited  the  expert
    evidence to the effect that it is  not  unusual  for  people  who  have
    suffered trauma or sexual abuse to delay disclosing their  experiences.
    It was also noted that both experts concluded that  the  appellant  was
    not feigning his symptoms. I am satisfied that the judge  was  entitled
    to regard the delay in making  the  sexual  orientation  claim  as  not
    undermining of credibility.

Risk on Return: Failure to Address Country Guidance

28. The second strand of complaint made by the respondent  related  to  the
    risk on return to Afghanistan, the judge having found that the claimant
    was homosexual as asserted.  It was asserted that the judge  failed  to
    apply the Country Guidance case of AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) Afghanistan
    CG [2009] UKAIT 0001.  This explains that though homosexuality  remains
    illegal in Afghanistan there is a lack of appetite by the government to
    prosecute and it is concluded that  so  far  as  non-state  actors  are
    concerned a practising homosexual on return  to  Kabul  who  would  not
    attract or seek to cause public outrage would not face a real  risk  of
    persecution.  It further held that a homosexual may be relatively  safe
    in a big city (especially Kabul) and it would take cogent evidence in a
    particular case to demonstrate otherwise.  The position in small  towns
    and in rural areas can be different and will depend on the evidence  in
    a specific case.  Relocation to Kabul is generally a viable option  for
    homosexuals who have experienced problems elsewhere  though  individual
    factors will have to be taken into account.

29. Mr Bahja submitted to me in January 2020 and again in August 2020  that
    AJ was made before the HJ (Iran)  decision  and  subsequent  strand  of
    cases in which it was held that a claimant is not required to  suppress
    his sexual orientation and, if he would be discreet on  return  to  his
    home country only because of a fear of persecution, then he is entitled
    to protection.  It was submitted that AJ had to be read in the light of
    HJ (Iran).

30. I was also referred in the Consolidated bundle to  the  CPIN  at  2.4.3
    which sets out the respondent's policy in relation to gay men returning
    to Afghanistan. It is there stated that as the  'reasonably  tolerable'
    test of AJ was found  to  be  incorrect  and  rejected  in  HJ  (Iran),
    headnotes 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 should not be followed and the  test  should
    be as set out at [35] and [82] of HJ (Iran). However, it  became  clear
    during submissions to me that whilst this policy document  features  in
    the appellant's consolidated bundle prepared  for  the  Upper  Tribunal
    appeal hearing, it was not what was put before the First-tier  Tribunal
    in 2019, and could not have been, as it is  dated  February  2020.  The
    CPIN put before the First-tier Tribunal was  an  earlier  version  from
    2017 which did not express any caution about applying AJ.

31. The difficulty is that the judge failed to adequately  address  Country
    Guidance in the impugned decision. At [71] the judge stated, "I  remind
    myself of the approach to be taken when assessing  someone's  sexuality
    as set out in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC 31." At [72] of the decision the judge also
    referred to the CPIN on  Afghanistan  from  January  2017,  which  also
    refers to AJ. At the January 2020 hearing, Mr Tan complained  that  the
    summary of the CPIN at [72] was not accurate. At [72] the judge stated,
    "as the objective evidence confirms that same-sex acts are  illegal  in
    Afghanistan it follows that there is no sufficiency of  protection  and
    the appellant's subjective fear of  persecution  is  objectively  well-
    founded".  In this regard, at the January 2020 hearing Mr Bahja drew my
    attention to section 2.3.6 to 2.3.7 and 2.4.1 of the CPIN which  stated
    that,

         "As same-sex sexual acts are prohibited in Afghanistan, it would be
         unreasonable to expect a  person  identifying  as  LGBT  who  fears
         persecution or serious harm by non-state actors to seek  protection
         from     the     authorities     without     themselves      facing
         prosecution/persecution by the state".

32. The difficulty with the First-tier Tribunal decision on this  issue  is
    that the judge  appears  to  have  regarded  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is of homosexual orientation as entirely determinative of the
    protection claim. Whilst the judge claims to have adopted the HJ (Iran)
    approach, Mr Bahja accepted that there  was  no  reasoning  within  the
    decision to indicate an assessment as to whether  the  appellant  would
    behave discretely on return or live openly as a gay man, and whether if
    he would live discretely he would do so only because  of  the  fear  of
    persecution or harm.

Conclusions on the Error of Law Issue

33. In the premises, I remain satisfied  that  whichever  Country  Guidance
    applied, the judge erred by failing to adequately address the  risk  on
    return to Afghanistan and for that reason the  decision  cannot  stand.
    However, having carefully reviewed the reasons I cited in January  2020
    and in the light of further submissions and clarity as to what evidence
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, I am  satisfied  that  the  primary
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant is a gay  man  is
    sufficiently cogently reasoned by the First-tier Tribunal  to  disclose
    no material error. I have noted above the apparent failure to take into
    account  previous  adverse  credibility  findings,  as  well   as   the
    sentencing remarks. However,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  was  not
    ignorant of the previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal, or of the
    sentencing remarks, which are referenced  in  the  chronology  and  the
    sentencing remarks are referred to again  at  [70]  and  [106]  of  the
    decision. The judge noted a number  of  difficulties  with  the  sexual
    orientation claim and carefully addressed the issue of delay. The judge
    carefully  assessed   the   expert   evidence,   concluding   that   it
    overwhelmingly  supported  the  claim  and  explained  the   delay   in
    disclosing his sexuality and abuse. The judge was also entitled to take
    into account that the appellant been found credible in relation to  the
    NRM/CA trafficking assessment. Those factors relied on by the judge  in
    support of the claim would, I am now satisfied, outweigh the failure to
    specifically take account of the previous adverse credibility  findings
    of the previous Tribunal appeal decision,  which  was  on  a  different
    issue, so that the failure is not a material error of law.

34. In summary, the single error found is in failing to go on to assess the
    risk on return of a gay man to Afghanistan. For that reason alone, that
    part of the decision has to be remade. Both representatives agreed that
    this could be done immediately with the appellant giving evidence. That
    evidence was taken after a short break.

Risk on Return

35. I bear in mind that the only route now open  to  the  Appellant  is  on
    article 3 ECHR grounds. He  is  prohibited  from  pursuing  asylum  and
    humanitarian  protections  grounds  by  the  s72  certificate  and  the
    preserved finding that this had not been rebutted.

36. I have to proceed on the basis that the  appellant  is  of  gay  sexual
    orientation.

37.  The  respondent  continues  to  rely  on  AJ  (Risk  to   Homosexuals)
    Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001, heard in October  2008.  Mr  Diwnycz
    pointed out that as of May 2020  this  case  was  still  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal's list of current Country Guidance Cases. The headnote reads:

         "1.  Though  homosexuality  remains  illegal  in  Afghanistan,  the
         evidence of its  prevalence  especially  in  the  Pashtun  culture,
         contrasted with the absence of criminal convictions after the  fall
         of the Taliban, demonstrates a lack of appetite by  the  Government
         to prosecute.

         2.   Some conduct that would be seen in the West as a manifestation
         of homosexuality is not necessarily interpreted in such  a  way  in
         Afghan society.

         3.   A homosexual returning to Afghanistan would normally  seek  to
         keep his homosexuality  private  and  to  avoid  coming  to  public
         attention. He would normally be able to do so, and hence avoid  any
         real risk of persecution by the state, without the need to suppress
         his sexuality or sexual identity to an extent  that  he  could  not
         reasonably be expected to tolerate.

         4.   So  far  as  non-state  actors  are  concerned,  a  practising
         homosexual on return to Kabul who would  not  attract  or  seek  to
         cause public outrage would not face a real risk of persecution.

         5.   If some individual,  or  some  gay  lobby,  tried  to  make  a
         political point in public or otherwise behaved in a way such as  to
         attract public outrage, then there might be a sharp  response  from
         the Government.

         6.   A homosexual may be relatively safe in a big city  (especially
         Kabul) and it would take cogent evidence in a  particular  case  to
         demonstrate otherwise. The position in smaller towns and  in  rural
         areas could be different and will  depend  on  the  evidence  in  a
         specific case.

         7.    Relocation  to  Kabul  is  generally  a  viable  option   for
         homosexuals  who  have  experienced  problems   elsewhere,   though
         individual factors will have to be taken into account.

         8.   The evidence shows that a considerable  proportion  of  Afghan
         men may have  had  some  homosexual  experience  without  having  a
         homosexual preference. A careful assessment of the credibility of a
         claim to be a  practising  homosexual  and  the  extent  of  it  is
         particularly important. The evaluation of an appellant's  behaviour
         in the UK may well be significant."

38. Mr Bahja submitted that AJ and the 'reasonable tolerance' test  at  [3]
    above is inconsistent with HJ (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  13  principles.  He
    submitted that the appellant cannot be expected to act  discretely  and
    conceal his sexual identity  if  he  would  only  do  so  for  fear  of
    persecution.

39. It is now well established following HJ (Iran) that if it  is  accepted
    that a gay person will be returned to a country where people  who  live
    openly are subject to persecution, the Tribunal must go on to determine
    what the individual would do. If the  individual  would  in  fact  live
    discreetly and so avoid persecution, then it must be asked why he would
    do so. HJ (Iran) stated:

         "[82]    If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose
         to live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
         wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted."

40. Of course, that begs the question whether an openly gay person would be
    subjected  to  persecution  on  return  to  Afghanistan.  There  is   a
    distinction to be drawn between AJ and HJ (Iran), as it  is  not  clear
    that an openly gay person would attract persecution in  Kabul  so  that
    the HJ (Iran) issue may not arise at all. [35] of  AJ  noted  the  high
    prevalence of sexual activity between men in Afghanistan and  elsewhere
    the lack of appetite to prosecute is noted. Headnote  [4]  of  AJ  held
    that a practising homosexual on return to Kabul would would not attract
    or seek to  cause  public  outrage  would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution. There was no evidence in  this  case  that  the  appellant
    would attract or seek to cause public outrage. The case  also  suggests
    that a practising homosexual will  be  relatively  safe  in  Kabul.  As
    stated above, the HJ (Iran) test applies only to countries where people
    who live openly are subjected to persecution. It follows that there  is
    no inconsistency between HJ (Iran) principles and the findings in AJ as
    to risk on return to Afghanistan for gay men who relocate to Kabul.

41. However, as I am remaking the decision in the appeal, I  also  have  to
    apply the CPIN dated February  2020,  as  reflecting  the  respondent's
    current policy. This includes a clear direction to caseworkers  not  to
    follow headnote paragraphs [3] to [7] but instead to  adopt  that  test
    set out at [35] and [82] of HJ (Iran). If the  application  were  being
    remade to the Secretary of State, she would be expected to  decide  the
    matter on the basis of her own extant policy.

42. 2.5.1 of the CPIN indicates that where a person has a well-founded fear
    of persecution from state actors,  they  will  not  be  able  to  avail
    themselves of the protection of the authorities. 2.5.4  states,  "Same-
    sex sexual  acts  are  prohibited  in  Afghanistan,  and  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a person identifying as LGBTI, who has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution from  non-state  actors  because  of  their
    sexuality,  to  seek  protection  from  the  authorities  as  they  are
    unwilling to provide effective protection."

43. It is also stated at 2.6.1 that "where a person has a well-founded fear
    of persecution from state actors, they will not be able to relocate  to
    escape that risk."  2.6.3  confirms  that  homophobic  and  traditional
    attitudes are prevalent throughout  the  country  and  "there  is  very
    little space in Afghan society to openly identify as an LGBTI person...
    Whilst Kabul and other large cities might offer a degree of  anonymity,
    there is unlikely to be any place in Afghanistan to which a person  who
    openly identifies as LGBTI, could reasonably  relocate  without  making
    fundamental changes to their behaviour. Therefore, headnotes 6 and 7 of
    AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) should not be followed."

44. Applying the respondent's current CPIN, it seems to me  that  the  only
    parts of AJ that can survive, are headnotes [1], [2],  and  [8],  which
    note that whilst homosexuality  remains  illegal  in  Afghanistan,  its
    prevalence demonstrates  a  lack  of  appetite  by  the  government  to
    prosecute.  Some  conduct  that  would  be  seen  in  the  West  as   a
    manifestation of homosexuality would not necessarily be seen  the  same
    was in Afghan society. Further, a considerable proportion of Afghan men
    may have had some homosexual experience  without  having  a  homosexual
    preference. That last element is not relevant to the present case,  the
    claim  to  be  of  homosexual  orientation  having  been  accepted  and
    preserved.

The Evidence

45. The appellant relied on a new witness statement, dated  24  July  2020.
    Whilst his previous statement of 5 July 2018 was adduced,  it  did  not
    address the issue of discretion or how  the  appellant  would  live  on
    return to Afghanistan and was not specifically relied on.  However,  in
    the new statement, it is made clear that on return to  Afghanistan  the
    appellant asserts that he would live openly as a gay man. This is a new
    assertion but on the other hand he has  never  before  been  questioned
    about that. When asked in interview at Q67 whether he had lived  openly
    gay in the UK he said he had. He was not asked in interview whether  he
    would continue to live openly on return. In his most  recent  statement
    he stated that he would like to live  openly  gay  in  Afghanistan  but
    could not do so because the police would not protect him and  he  would
    be killed by the government for being gay. "So the only  reason  why  I
    would hide my  identity  on  return  to  Afghanistan  is  the  fear  of
    persecution and not for reasons of embarrassing family or friends."

46. The appellant relied on  his  witness  statements  and  was  not  asked
    further questions in chief. In cross-examination  he  confirmed  to  Mr
    Diwnycz that if return to Afghanistan he would wish to live  as  openly
    as a gay man.  In  summary,  the  oral  evidence  was  clear  that  the
    appellant would wish to live as a gay man and would only not do  so  on
    return to Afghanistan for fear of persecution. I  have  to  assess  the
    credibility of that assertion.

47. Reliance was also placed on Dr Thomas' report  at 3.37 where in October
    2017 the appellant expressed  to  her  that  what  he  feared  most  if
    returned to Afghanistan, stating  he wanted to live normally but feared
    that  if  his  homosexuality  was  discovered   he  would   be   killed
    straightaway.

48. In assessing the credibility of this  aspect  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellant would live openly as a gay man on return to  Afghanistan,  I,
    of course, have to begin from the  preserved  finding  that  he  is  of
    homosexual orientation and would, therefore, remain  a  gay  person  on
    return to Afghanistan.

49.  I consider that  some  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  positive
    credibility findings have to be  offset  by  the  negative  credibility
    findings of Judge Andrew which may not have been  properly  taken  into
    account by Judge Clarke. However, I accept that  the  NRM/CA  decisions
    found the trafficking claims credible and  that  is  in  general  terms
    supportive of the sexual orientation  claim  and  the  claim  that  the
    appellant would wish to live openly as a gay man. Further, whilst those
    assessments did not  specifically  address  the  late-disclosed  sexual
    orientation claim, it is clear from the referral that the claim  to  be
    gay and to have been abused and raped on multiple  occasions  was  very
    much part of the appellant's claim at least back to 2017. There is some
    support as to why he did not disclose this element of his claim sooner.
    The medical evidence of mental health issues is generally supportive of
    both the claimed sexual abuse and the credibility of late-disclosure of
    his sexual orientation. Taking into  account  overall  the  credibility
    findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke,  having   identified
    difficulties with the sexual orientation claim, and  even  taking  into
    account that the  appellant  was  found  not  credible  by  a  previous
    Tribunal on the trafficking claim, the appellant has demonstrated  such
    an overall level of credibility so that applying the lower standard  of
    proof, I find that he has demonstrated that on return to Afghanistan he
    would wish to live openly as a gay man and would only  not  do  so  for
    fear of persecution.

50. Whilst I would  have  concluded  that,  following  the  principles  and
    headnotes of AJ as set out above, there would be no risk on  return  to
    Afghanistan and relocation to  Kabul  for  the  appellant  even  living
    openly as a gay man, I find that my hands are effectively tied  by  the
    recent CPIN, including that part which clearly  states  at  2.6.3  that
    there is unlikely to be any place in Afghanistan to which  person  only
    identifying  as  LGBTI  could  reasonably   relocate   without   making
    fundamental changes to their behaviour, which  cannot  be  expected  of
    them, pursuant to HJ (Iran) principles.

51. It would be an error of law to fail to apply the  respondent's  current
    policy and I  cannot  both  apply  AJ  and  follow  the  CPIN.  In  the
    circumstances, I must conclude that as an openly gay man  returning  to
    Afghanistan the appellant has demonstrated to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof that he would face a risk of treatment  contravening  his  rights
    under article 3 ECHR.

Decision

52. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on
                    article 3 grounds only.

     Signed DMW Pickup


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 4 August 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
