
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13193/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th July 2019                     |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Abdulkarim [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Morris, promulgated  on  3rd  January  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 18th December 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Sudan,  who  was  born  on  5th
    October 1993.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395, such a decision  being
    dated 12th February 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is a Sudanese  national
    from the Falata tribe.  His problems began in 2010 when  the  Janjaweed
    began terrorising his village.  They beat  up  the  Appellant  and  his
    father.  They told him to go back to Darfur.  They also cut  the  water
    supply  coming  to  the  land.   The  Government  officials  owned  the
    neighbouring land.  Therefore, armed gunmen then came and demanded  the
    Appellant and his father work for them.  Whenever the Appellant built a
    small house on his land to live the government would come  and  destroy
    it saying they had no right to be there.  In 2014 armed  men  from  the
    Government came to their farm and told his father that they would  take
    half the profits from the harvest.  The Appellant refused and they beat
    him up.  On 5th June 2014 Government forces came to  the  farm  of  the
    Appellant and tied his hands together and put a hood over his head.  He
    was put in a vehicle and taken to an unknown destination where  he  was
    detained.  Upon release on conditions, the Appellant  after  July  2014
    was helped by his uncle to leave Sudan.  He had travelled to Libya.  He
    then went to Italy.  He arrived in the UK  on  19th  August  2015.   He
    could not now return to Sudan.  He fears persecution and  ill-treatment
    as a member of the Falata tribe.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge found  the  Appellant  to  be  inconsistent  and  lacking  in
    credibility in his account (paragraph 37).  The  judge  held  that  the
    Appellant's  account  that  he  is  systematically  targeted   by   the
    Government is not borne out by the objective evidence.  Accordingly, he
    had also failed to satisfy  the  judge  as  to  the  existence  of  the
    Convention reason of race (paragraph 40).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    Appellant's ethnicity was misconceived.   At  paragraph  40  the  judge
    accepted the submission made for the Respondent (recorded at  paragraph
    28(vi)) that the "African" groups  include  the  Falata  and  paragraph
    5.1.1 of the CPIN notes that 70% of the population  are  Sudanese  Arab
    and that the Falata are one of the other main ethnic groups.  The judge
    was referred by the Respondent to the decision in MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan
    (CG) [2015] UKUT 10.  The Respondent accepted that the Falata  are  not
    non-Arab Darfuri.  The judge does not record any disagreement with  the
    submission although paragraph 12 of MM makes it clear that  the  Falata
    are non-Arabs from Darfur.

 6. On 29th May 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 8th July 2019, there was agreement  between
    Mr Bates for the Home Office and Mr Holmes, that the judge had erred in
    law in failing to apply the relevant country guidance case in  relation
    to non-Arab Darfuris of African descent.  The relevant country guidance
    cases were AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015]  UKUT  00010.   These  make  it
    clear that "all non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution in  Darfur
    and cannot reasonably be expected to relocate elsewhere in Sudan".  The
    judge's failure to give proper weight to the country guidance cases was
    a material error of law.  For his part, Mr Bates also  added  that  the
    judge had approached the matter on a misconceived basis from the outset
    by stating that "in making these findings I note  that  the  issues  in
    this appeal largely turn upon the credibility  of  the  Appellant  ..."
    (paragraph 32).  That is not the  case,  submitted  Mr  Bates,  if  the
    country guidance case makes it clear that all non-Arab Darfuris are  at
    risk of  persecution.   The  only  appropriate  course  of  action,  he
    submitted was to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision, for the reasons that have been stated above.

Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  I remake  the  decision
    as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) of the practice statement because
    the judge has failed to have regard to the applicable country  guidance
    cases and that are of fundamental importance to the  position  of  non-
    Arab Darfuris such as the Appellant who belongs to  the  Falata  tribe.
    The appeal would be heard by a judge other than Judge Morris.

10. No anonymity direction is made.

11. The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019
