
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2020                   |On 28 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MJA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim instructed by Kalam Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Ferguson ('the Judge') promulgated on  the  11  June
         2020 in which the Judge dismissed  the  appellants  appeal  on  all
         grounds.
      2. Permission to appeal has been granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
         renewed application.
      3. In a  Rule  24  reply  dated  1  September  2020  the  respondent's
         representative writes:

              "2.     Whilst it was open to the FTTJ to make  a  number  of
                  the findings set out in the decision and a number  of  the
                  grounds appear to amount to disagreement on their own,  it
                  is accepted that inconsistencies/findings made and  relied
                  on by the FTTJ as identified in the grounds 2 and  7  (for
                  example [29]  and  [57])  were  matters  not  put  to  the
                  appellant nor submitted on by the Respondent  as  recorded
                  in the decision. This could equally be said in relation to
                  the evidence referred to in ground 6. It is accepted  that
                  this amounted to procedural unfairness; and as  identified
                  by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch the multiple  references  to
                  terms 'established' is suggestive  of  applying  a  higher
                  standard of proof then that  required  and  a  failure  to
                  apply this standard  holistically  to  the  whole  of  the
                  evidence as alluded to in the  majority  of  the  grounds.
                  Whilst the FTTJ was asked to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
                  vulnerable witness and there is no apparent  complaint  on
                  the treatment in the hearing, there does not appear to  be
                  any consideration of this issue and it's application  when
                  addressing credibility overall. Given the  nature  of  the
                  material error is accepted,  it  is  considered  that  the
                  matter is required to be heard afresh  in  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal."

      4. In light of the errors being conceded in  relation  to  both  their
         existence and materiality I set the decision aside.
      5. In light of the failure to set out how the appellants vulnerability
         was factored into the decision-making process; I find that none  of
         the findings can be preserved.
      6. This is a  complex  appeal  in  which  extensive  fact  finding  is
         required having applied the correct legal test and  explaining  how
         the appellants vulnerability has been factored into the assessment.
         Having considered the Presidential Guidance on remittal of appeals,
         I consider this matter suitable for remittal.
      7. I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
         House to be heard de novo by a judge other than Judge Ferguson.

Decision

      8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal siting at Taylor House for it to be considered afresh
         by a judge other than Judge Ferguson.

    Anonymity.

      9. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
         Dated the 23 October 2020
