
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13932/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 26th July 2019                    |On 05th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills of Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Knowles (the judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal  (the  FTT)  promulgated  on  2nd  May  2019
    following a hearing on 15th March 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Ethiopia born 3rd May  1986.   She
    arrived in the UK on 5th June 2017 and claimed asylum.  The application
    was refused on 21st November 2018 and the  Appellant  appealed  to  the
    FTT.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant.  The judge noted that  the
    Appellant claimed to be at risk in Ethiopia by reason of her  political
    opinion in that she claimed to support PG7 and also because her brother
    had killed his wife's cousin, and the  wife's  family  wanted  to  take
    revenge.

 4. The decision of the FTT is  lengthy  running  to  49  paragraphs.   The
    findings of fact commence at  paragraph  44.   The  judge  reached  the
    following conclusion at paragraph 45;

         "45. Considering the Appellant's evidence, her  documents  and  the
             submissions of both parties in the round, I  do  not  consider
             that the Appellant has provided a credible account of her core
             situation.  In my conclusion, taking into account  the  volume
             of  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence,  in  matters  which  I
             consider are material, added to her section 8 issues,  I  find
             that  the  Appellant's  account  of  her  core  situation  not
             reasonably likely to be true applying the  lower  standard  of
             proof."

 5. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. In summary it was contended that the judge had made material errors  of
    law by failing to make adequate  findings,  failing  to  take  material
    matters into account, provided  inadequate  reasoning,  and  failed  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The submissions as
    to error of law are summarised below.

 7. The judge had considered the evidence at paragraph  44  and  reached  a
    brief conclusion at  paragraph  45  but  failed  to  make  findings  on
    material matters.   The  judge  had  not  accepted  the  Appellant  had
    provided a credible account of her core situation but  it  was  unclear
    what the core situation was said to be.

 8. There were no specific findings in relation to the Appellant's  claimed
    activities with PG7 in Ethiopia, in the  UK,  or  in  relation  to  her
    claimed family problems.  The Appellant had been left  to  guess  which
    elements of her claim were considered to be core aspects  and  why  the
    claim had been rejected.

 9. Paragraph 44 contained both positive and negative factors, which  meant
    that paragraph 45 failed to clearly explain why the Appellant had  been
    found to be incredible on whatever the core situation was considered to
    be.

10. The judge failed to make  clear  findings  on  matters.   At  paragraph
    44(xii) the judge considers the section 8 issues, those  being  failure
    to claim asylum in Italy or France.  The judge  notes  the  Appellant's
    explanation but does not state whether the explanation is  adequate  or
    not.

11. The judge failed to take account of the  Appellant's  medical  evidence
    when considering credibility issues.  A letter from Dr Farrington dated
    17th December 2018 confirms the Appellant has a diagnosis of PTSD  with
    symptoms  including  poor  concentration  and  memory.   There  is   no
    reference  to  the  significance  of  this  evidence  in  relation   to
    credibility.  The reference to medical evidence  in  the  FTT  findings
    refers to a rule 35 report not  the  letter  from  Dr  Farrington.   By
    failing to consider the medical evidence  when  assessing  credibility,
    the judge had erred in law.

12. The judge failed to consider paragraph 276ADE.  Given  the  Appellant's
    medical conditions, and the finding by the judge that the Appellant "is
    very  ill"  this  was  relevant  and  material  and  should  have  been
    considered.

Permission to Appeal

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge L  Murray  in  the  following
    terms;

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge failed  to  adequately  consider
             the contents of the psychological report and grapple with  the
             diagnosis that the Appellant had a major  depressive  disorder
             and PTSD.  It is arguable that the judge failed adequately  to
             consider  this  evidence   in   coming   to   conclusions   on
             credibility.  The judge also did not consider paragraph 276ADE
             and this is also an arguably an error of law."

14. Following the grant of permission to  appeal,  directions  were  issued
    that there should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such that the decision  must
    be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. At the oral hearing before me Mr Bates  conceded  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law by failing to consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   It  was
    accepted that this was a material error.

16. Mr Bates argued that while that aspect of the decision would need to be
    made again, the remainder of the decision could be preserved.   It  was
    argued that the judge had made adequate findings and given  sustainable
    reasons for those findings.

17. Mr Sills relied and expanded upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  The findings by  the  judge  are
    contained in paragraph 44(i) - (xii).  There were no findings  in  that
    paragraph in relation to the aspect  of  the  Appellant's  claim  which
    related to her fear from another family because it was claimed that her
    brother had killed a member of that family.

18. I was asked to note paragraph 44(i) in which the  judge  considers  the
    failure by the Appellant to mention her political activity until nearly
    eight  months  after  her  initial  claim,  and   comments   that   the
    reasonableness of that explanation "falls to  be  considered  with  her
    credibility in the round."  Mr Sills pointed out that the judge made no
    further reference to that issue, but simply dismissed  the  Appellant's
    claim at paragraph 45, which is set out earlier in  this  decision.   A
    similar example was given by Mr  Sills,  with  reference  to  paragraph
    44(xii) in which the judge, when considering failure to claim asylum in
    Italy  or  France,  explained  that  he  had  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's explanation regarding  her  health,  and  being  under  the
    instructions of an agent, and stated that  "these  issues  fall  to  be
    considered in the round with her evidence  generally."   There  was  no
    further  consideration  of  that  evidence,  the  judge  concluding  at
    paragraph 45 that the Appellant's account "of her core  situation"  was
    not reasonably likely to be true.

19. I find that the  concession  by  the  Respondent  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in failing to  consider  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  was
    rightly made.  The judge recorded at paragraph 48  that  there  was  no
    doubt that the Appellant "is very ill".  The  medical  evidence  before
    the judge included a letter from  Dr  Farrington  dated  17th  December
    2018.  In this  letter  it  is  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    diagnosis of PTSD and her symptoms are  described  as  distressing.   A
    psychological report dated 28th February 2019 prepared by Peter  Thorne
    was also before the judge.  At paragraph 49 the Appellant is  described
    as "a deeply traumatised woman, emotionally numb a lot of the time  and
    requiring careful support and clinical assistance to process  her  past
    trauma and the loss of her  daughter  so  that  she  can  work  towards
    recovery."

20. Given the mental health issues disclosed in the medical evidence, which
    was not challenged, I find that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to
    consider whether there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration in Ethiopia given those mental health issues.

21. I am persuaded that the judge also materially erred in law  in  failing
    to  adequately  consider  the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's mental health when assessing credibility.  The Appellant is
    a vulnerable witness by definition because she suffers from PTSD.  This
    is explained in the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010.
    This makes it clear that the primary responsibility for  identifying  a
    vulnerable individual lies with the representative.   It  appears  that
    the judge was not assisted by the Appellant's  representative  in  this
    case.

22. However there was clear medical evidence  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The letter from Dr Farrington  confirms  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD, and also states that the Appellant "has  poor  concentration  and
    memory".

23. The psychological report at paragraph  30  states  that  the  Appellant
    "reported poor concentration and episodes of  confusion  regarding  the
    events of the last two and a half years."

24. At paragraph 32 it is stated that the Appellant meets the criteria  for
    a diagnosis of depressive disorder with anxiety at a moderate to severe
    degree.  At paragraph 42 the opinion is given that the Appellant has  a
    major depressive disorder to a moderate to severe degree with  comorbid
    post-traumatic stress disorder which is present  to  a  severe  degree.
    She is described as suffering from intrusive memories,  and  disturbing
    dreams.

25. There is no adequate consideration of  the  Appellant's  mental  health
    issues and how this may be  relevant  to  credibility  and  this  is  a
    material error of law.

26. I am persuaded that the judge  failed  to  make  specific  findings  as
    contended in the grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted,
    as it is not clear, from the decision, whether the Appellant's  account
    was rejected in its  entirety  or  whether  part  of  the  account  was
    accepted.

27. The errors referred to above, cumulatively, mean that the  decision  is
    unsafe and must be set aside.  Both representatives submitted  that  if
    there was an error of law as contended by  the  Appellant,  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the FTT to be heard again.

28. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements and concluded the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal
    back to the FTT to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.  This is
    because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be
    necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

29. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FTT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Knowles.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of  fact  preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             29th July 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             29th July 2019

