
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13657/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2019                     |On 18th March 2019                   |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                  miss g A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 13 August 2018  Judge  Shore  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a national of Sri
    Lanka, against the decision made by the respondent on 30 November  2016
    refusing her protection claim.

2.   The appellant's grounds contend that the judge erred in law in:

    (1)  failing to give adequate reasons;


    (2)  relying unduly on matters of (im)plausibility; and


    (3)  in failing to deal with the appellant's  health  problems  in  the
         context of Article 8.

3.    I  am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  well-presented
    arguments.

4.   I am persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.   If  one  looks
    at the judge's reasons as given in paras 79-96,  it  is  first  of  all
    striking that very little of it addresses the appellant's asylum claim.
     That claim was based on an alleged series of incidents  said  to  have
    taken place in Sri Lanka in 2010 leading to her receiving  threats  and
    police visits to her home  for  regarding  her  efforts  to  report  an
    abduction she had witnessed carried out by people dressed  in  military
    uniform.

5.    Paragraphs  79-90  are  confined  to  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's health problems (she has a  Factor  XI  deficiency  causing
    cystic fibrosis).  Paragraph 94 simply lists the risks  categories  set
    out in GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Thus  there  are  really
    only four short paragraphs (90-93) where the judge seeks to assess  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  In paragraphs 91-92 the judge stated:

         "91. Further, I find it implausible that she could get no  evidence
             whatsoever from Sri Lanka from her mother, who apparently  was
             threatened, or her sister or the family of the  neighbour  who
             was abducted.


         92.  The Appellant's appeal  is  damaged  and  her  credibility  is
             undermined by the events after she  states  she  reported  the
             abduction and gave evidence to the LLRC and  circumstances  of
             her arrival in the United Kingdom.  She says she  was  ignored
             by police and warned off by a mysterious man after  trying  to
             report the crime.  Yet she came to no  harm  and  received  no
             threats personally from January 2010  to  her  exit  from  Sri
             Lanka in July 2011.  I find it implausible  that  someone  who
             was so frightened by threats that she  left  Sri  Lanka  would
             make a statement to the LLRC when the police had ignored  her.
             I also find the appellant's account of how  she  was  able  to
             leave Sri Lanka to be implausible.  I find the assertion  that
             an arrest warrant was issued for  the  Appellant  three  years
             after she went to the police station to be implausible."

6.   As regards paragraph 91, the judge makes no reference to  the  evidence
    of the appellant which he recorded at paragraphs 40 and 42 that she was
    unable to obtain such evidence due to her mother's  and  her  own  ill-
    health.  It  would  have  been  open  to  the  judge  to  reject  those
    explanations, but they  should  have  been  considered;  see  paragraph
    339L(ii) of the Immigration Rules.

7.   As regards paragraph 92, it  is  difficult  to  follow  why  the  judge
    concluded it implausible that "someone ...  so  frightened  by  threats
    that she left Sri Lanka would make a statement to  the  LLRC  when  the
    police had ignored  her".   The  (Lessons  Learned  and  Reconciliation
    Commission)  LLRC  is  at  least  formally  speaking   an   independent
    commission  tasked  inter  alia,   with   investigating   extrajudicial
    kidnappings. Whilst it is within my judicial knowledge that it has been
    criticised by international human rights groups  for  failure  to  meet
    minimum international standards or to offer  protection  to  witnesses,
    there is nothing to suggest that the judge's assessment  drew  on  such
    sources.  The judge did not refer  to  any  background  information  to
    support his view that  persons  threatened  by  the  police  would  not
    approach this body.  Further on, in  paragraph  92,  the  judge  simply
    applied the label "implausible" to the appellant's account of  how  she
    was able to leave Sri Lanka, although that account was consistent  with
    the view reached in GJ & Others.  Again, no reasons were given.

8.   Ms Jones submits that a judge cannot be expected to  give  reasons  for
    each and every adverse finding.  That is correct as a matter of general
    principle, but on the facts of this case, paragraph 92  was  very  much
    the centrepiece of the judge's reasons for finding  the  appellant  not
    credible.  Paragraph 93 relies on her  later  application  for  asylum.
    Neither para 93 nor paragraph 91 were capable of providing  the  weight
    of reasons necessary for me to overlook the deficiencies  of  reasoning
    set out in paragraphs 91-92.

9.   As  I  have  found  the  appellant's  first  ground  made  out,  it  is
    unnecessary for me to rule on ground (2), but since it may  assist  the
    judge next dealing with the case I would observe that the guidance  set
    out in the case law cited therein on the dangers of undue  reliance  on
    (im)plausibility is pertinent in this case, since more than one of  the
    judge's (im)plausibility findings had no evident basis in fact.

10.  As regards ground (3), however, whilst I would  agree  with  Ms  Seehra
    that the judge's treatment  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  Article  8  was
    deficient because it failed to weigh in  the  balance  the  appellant's
    health difficulties, I do not  consider  such  deficiency  resulted  in
    material error since on GS [2015]EWCA Civ 40 principles  it  was  clear
    she could not meet the high Article 3 or the high Article 8 thresholds.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and his decision should be set aside.  I see no alternative to  the
    case being remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Shore).

12.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed:                                 Date: 12 March 2019

Dr H H Storey[pic]
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
