
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13328/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th August 2017                      |  On 1st September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                          mr Vijayakumar Veeramalai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah (counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver, promulgated on 20th February  2017  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross  on  4th January  2017,  in  which  the  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection
    grounds.




 2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued inter alia that  the  learned
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not engage properly with the contents  of
    the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad,  nor  the  medical  report  of  Dr
    Martin in respect of the scarring, when considering whether or not  the
    Appellant would be at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.




 3. Permission to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark
    Davies on 9th June 2017 who found it was arguable taking into  account
    the cursory examination the judge gave to the evidence of Dr Martin and
    Dr Dhumad and the briefness of the decision, that it was  arguable  the
    judge had not given anxious scrutiny to the evidence put before him.




 4. Within the judgment, when making his findings Judge Oliver took account
    of the fact that there was said to be differences in the accounts given
    regarding the psychiatric condition in the initial  interview  evidence
    as opposed to the details explained to  Dr  Dhumad,  but  Judge  Oliver
    considered that there were features suggestive of an  embellishment  of
    his account by the inclusion of commonly known features of PTSD.




 5.   In respect of the scarring and a report of  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  the
    judge found that the physical scars depicted in  the  photographs  were
    not severe and were not found to be typical or diagnostic of deliberate
    infliction and therefore he gave them little weight.  The point  raised
    within the Grounds of Appeal is that Dr Martin said that the scars were
    either consistent or highly consistent with the torture  said  to  have
    been suffered by the Appellant.




 6. I bear in mind in this case  that  the  Rule  24  reply  filed  by  the
    Respondent  on  25th  July  2017  does  not  oppose   the   Appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh hearing.




 7. Having heard from the legal representatives this morning,  Mr  Staunton
    on behalf of the Secretary of State concedes the appeal and agrees that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  sadly  has  not  adequately  or  fully
    considered the contents of the  psychiatric  report  and  the  scarring
    report  from  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  and  he  has  not   adequately   or
    sufficiently explained the  reasons  for  rejecting  or  giving  little
    weight to that evidence.

 8. In such circumstances given that the appeal has been  conceded  by  the
    Respondent I do find that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver thereby does contain a material error of law as  claimed  and  I
    therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver in
    its entirety and I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    rehearing de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.


Notice of decision

   1) The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  does  contain  a
      material error of law;
   2) I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver  in  its
      entirety and I remit the case back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      rehearing de novo before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver;
   3) No anonymity direction is made,  no  such  order  having  been  sought
      before me.



Signed                                  Date 31st August 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

