
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13530/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2019                          |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                LORD BECKETT
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HW
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Whilst no anonymity direction was made earlier in the  proceedings,  we  now
make an anonymity direction because the case involves a  child.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Allison, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) to uphold HW's (the claimant) appeal,  on  human  rights
    grounds, against the Secretary of State's decision of 5  December  2017
    to refuse his claim against a deportation order being maintained.

 2. The Secretary of State has sought to deport the claimant on  the  basis
    that he is a foreign criminal within the  meaning  of  UK  Borders  Act
    2007, section 32, and as such liable to automatic deportation.

 3. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan  born  in  January  1994  who
    entered the UK unlawfully on 30 March 2007 at the age  of  13.  He  was
    refused asylum but granted discretionary leave to remain and placed  in
    foster care in which context he repeatedly raped a boy of 7 who was  in
    the same foster placement. On 26 March 2008 he was  convicted  of  five
    counts of rape of a child under 13 and sentenced to a custodial term of
    detention of 4 years to be followed by 2 years subject to supervision.

 4. From March 2009  onwards,  he  began  to  be  served  with  notices  of
    liability to deportation. Ultimately in 2014, he was refused permission
    to appeal further against service of a notice, on 29  August  2012,  to
    make a deportation order.

 5. Having married and had children in August 2013 and July 2014, he sought
    a review of the previous decisions in light of the birth of his  second
    child. This was unsuccessful. A third child was born in June  2015.  In
    November 2016 the Secretary of State refused to revoke the  deportation
    order and on  17  March  2017  refused  his  human  rights  claim.  The
    Secretary  of  State  agreed  to  reconsider  that  decision  and  that
    reconsideration concluded with the decision of 5 December 2017.

 6. At the date of the hearing before her, the FtT Judge  (FtTJ)  was  made
    aware that a fourth baby was due in August 2018. We  learned  that  the
    baby was born, is now aged 5 months and is currently in hospital.

Determination of 28 May 2018

 7.  The claim for asylum and humanitarian protection was refused  and  the
    claimant made no cross appeal in that regard and it is not necessary to
    set out the associated reasoning.

 8. At paras 21 to 26 the FtTJ referred  to  relevant  law  including  ECHR
    article 8, part V of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    and associated Immigration Rules  before  noting  certain  case-law  in
    paras 27 and 28. At para 33 the evidence available and heard is set out
    and at paras 35 to  43,  under  the  heading  "Factual  Findings"  some
    evidence, assessment of it and the conclusions  reached  are  set  out.
    Following discussion  of  country  information  and  asylum,  the  FtTJ
    returned to consider the article 8 claim at paras 56 to 66.



Relevant facts - paras 35-43

 9. The sentencing judge had indicated that the offences  were  so  serious
    that, as an adult, he would have been sentenced to 12  years  but  also
    considered that there was considerable potential for rehabilitation.

10. In para 36  the  FtTJ  noted  that  there  was  uncertainty  about  the
    claimant's true age and records that the Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that he was 13 when he arrived in the  UK  and  at  the  time  when  he
    committed the offences. She reports that in the trial there was medical
    evidence which suggested a possible range of ages, but the trial  judge
    had treated him as being 14 at the time of the offences and 15  at  the
    date of conviction. The FtTJ concluded that whilst  he  may  have  been
    sexually mature, the claimant was socially and morally immature when he
    committed his crimes.

11. In December 2011, a social worker had reported that detention had  kept
    the claimant away from wider  society  such  that  he  had  no  regular
    contact with the Afghan community and he looked to British citizens for
    guidance and support so that when his personal identity was established
    during his significant teenage development, it took place with  British
    people in Britain.

12. Following release from custody, the claimant studied at  college  where
    he met his now wife JB who was 19 at a time when the claimant must have
    been almost 18. They developed a relationship which led  to  her  being
    assaulted by her father and made homeless. The couple moved in together
    in May 2012 and went through an Islamic marriage ceremony  in  November
    2012. Children were born in August 2013,  July  2014,  June  2015  (and
    August 2018.)

13. JB was born into a Bangladeshi family in the north of England, but  she
    is a naturalised British citizen. Her father is now  reconciled  to  JB
    and supports her, as does one of her siblings, but she has  no  contact
    with her mother and her other seven siblings. JB works in  a  shop  and
    the claimant looks after their children to allow her to do so.

14. The family was reviewed by social services  in  November  2016.  Social
    worker Sue Wells  noted  that  the  claimant  had  been  supervised  by
    probation teams on licence and had  been  compliant  in  revealing  his
    criminal history to  his  partner,  colleges  and  cricket  teams.  His
    education record was exemplary and he was well thought of by  those  he
    engaged with in clubs and other groups. Despite the claimant  being  in
    immigration detention for 15 months from March 2015 to  June  2016  the
    relationship endured and Ms Wells noted a close and mutually supportive
    relationship.

15. Ms Wells had been involved in a child protection case conference  after
    the birth of the first child which concluded that  the  claimant  could
    live in family with his child despite her being a  child  under  16.  A
    family support plan was put in place but  no  longer  deemed  necessary
    when the second child was born from which the FtTJ inferred that police
    and social services were confident that the claimant would not  offend,
    at least not against his own  children.  Ms  Wells  observed  a  strong
    attachment between the children and the claimant.

16. Other agencies concluded that the claimant presented low  risk  and  no
    longer needed supervision by the end of 2016 and  that  his  compliance
    with sex offender notification requirements had been good.

FtTJ assessment of article 8, paras 56-66

17. The FtTJ recognised that considerable weight must be  accorded  to  the
    gravity of the offences which will have caused lifelong damage  to  the
    victim. The custodial term of 4 years brought  the  claimant  into  the
    most serious category of offender in section 117C of the 2002 Act (para
    56). At para 57 she noted that the claimant continued to be  in  denial
    about having committed the crimes which she  recognised  could  inhibit
    rehabilitation.

18. At para 58 the FtTJ considered the risks of further offending which had
    been professionally assessed as being low. She noted that the  offences
    had been committed when the claimant had undergone a turbulent time  in
    which he had lacked guidance from family or others. General  sentencing
    principles  include  a  recognition  that  the  culpability  of   young
    offenders is lower than it is for adults and that rehabilitation  is  a
    more prominent consideration. Noting also that the claimant is now in a
    stable heterosexual relationship, she concluded that whilst reoffending
    cannot be excluded, it was  unlikely.  The  FtTJ  found  little  weight
    attached to the claimant's private life (para 59.)

19. At para 60, the FtTJ accepted that the  claimant  has  substantial  and
    enduring family life with  JB  and  their  children.  In  para  61  she
    concluded that for them to go to Afghanistan would  be  very  hard.  In
    para 62 she concluded that for JB to stay behind  with  three  or  four
    young children, cut off from her wider  family  and  without  moral  or
    practical report would be hard  both  financially  and  socially,  even
    allowing for state financial support.

20. It would be harsh for the children to stay with their mother in the  UK
    without the claimant and it would be in their best interests to be with
    both parents in the UK, (para 61).

21. We narrate paras 65 and 66 in full:

         "This tribunal must weight and then balance the various factors  of
         state interest and private and  family  life.  There  is  undoubted
         public interest in not permitting criminals to remain. The  offence
         was very serious as reflected  in  the  sentence  and  the  ongoing
         disability (in social and employment terms) of being on the  sexual
         offences register. It attracts considerable weight and  there  must
         be deportation unless there are compelling circumstances not to. In
         weighting  compelling  circumstances,  I  take   account   of   the
         appellant's youth at the time, his conduct  since  conviction,  the
         context  of  the   offending   behaviour,   the   unlikelihood   of
         reoffending, the lack of other trouble. This diminishes the  weight
         that might otherwise  be  attached.  Against  it  is  the  question
         whether he has a subsisting relationship with a qualified child: he
         does with three of them. The effect  of  his  deportation  will  be
         harsh; it is not in their interest to live in Afghanistan, for  the
         reasons already discussed. If they remain in the UK  without  their
         father they will suffer the disadvantages of coming from a numerous
         single parent family, with a  mother  struggling  to  cope  (as  on
         account of family  members  she  did  when  the  appellant  was  in
         detention) and without much other family  support,  and  they  will
         lose their relationship with a loving  and  involved  father.  This
         case is unusual for the  mother's  own  youth,  and  that  she  has
         forfeited her own family's sympathy and support, such that she will
         struggle more than most single mothers to be an adequate parent.

         66.      Balancing the diminished weight  of  the  public  interest
         with the harsh effect of deportation on the qualifying children,  I
         conclude that the interests of the  children,  do  amount  to  very
         compelling circumstances, that the public interest  here  does  not
         displace the right to family life, and that  the  appellant  should
         remain."

The Secretary of State's Challenge

22. In 9 enumerated paragraphs the Secretary of  State  contends  that  the
    FtTJ  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  there  were  very   compelling
    circumstances per section 117 C (6) of the 2002 Act.

       . Para 3 - Since the only mitigating circumstance founded on  by  the
         FtTJ was the position of the children, this  could  not  amount  to
         very  compelling  circumstances  without  more:  NA  (Pakistan)   v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 207.

       . Para 4 - with reference to Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] UKSC 60 paras 36-38 and AH  Jamaica  [2017]  EWCA
         Civ 796 at para 35, the absence of offending on  the  part  of  the
         claimant since 2007 was not a compelling feature of the case and it
         was an error to treat it as such.

       . Para 7 contains a related contention that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is multi-dimensional so  that  low  risk  of  offending
         and/or rehabilitation carries little if any weight; with  reference
         to PF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
         Civ 251, Taylor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
         EWCA  Civ  845,  Olarewaju  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] EWCA Civ 557.

       . Para 6 - conclusions that it would  be  harsh  for  the  claimant's
         children to remain in the UK without him and  his  departure  would
         not be in their best interests did not meet the threshold of  being
         unduly harsh far less very compelling.

       . Para 8 - the decision in Secretary of State for the Home Department
         v OP (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 316 showed that the position of  the
         claimant's children and partner could not amount to very compelling
         circumstances.

       . Para 9 - the FtTJ had erred in finding that there was diminution in
         the weight to be accorded to the public interest, and there  was  a
         failure to provide clear reasons for the conclusion that there were
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  harshness  and   undue
         harshness for them.



Submissions for the Secretary of State

23. Mr Tufan founded heavily on Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v OP (Jamaica) [2018] Civ 316 as  a  case  with  many  parallels  which
    tended to demonstrate that the FtTJ had  erred  in  her  assessment  of
    "very compelling circumstances." The decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    Ali vouched that it would only be a  very  strong  claim  indeed  which
    could prevail  over  the  public  interest  in  deportation  where  the
    sentence was 4 years or more.  The FtTJ had erred in finding  that  the
    effect  on  the  children  remaining  in  the  UK  on  the   claimant's
    deportation was unduly harsh.  The proper approach was explained by the
    Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273 at para 27.  Whilst their  life  might  be
    harder without their father, that is simply an ordinary consequence  of
    deportation; AD Lee v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348 at para 27. It must be doubtful whether the relative youth
    of the children's mother  was  a  material  consideration.  Insofar  as
    rehabilitation could have any relevance, the claimant's complete denial
    of his guilt pointed away from remorse and might be  seen  to  increase
    the risk he presented. The reference to very  compelling  circumstances
    in para 65 amounted to no more than lip  service  being  paid  to  this
    important provision.

Submissions for the claimant

24. Mr Allison founded on R (Kiarie) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 42 at para 55 where Lord  Wilson  had  indicated
    that it would be  legitimate  to  consider  the  risk  of  re-offending
    amongst other factors when considering the  issue  of  very  compelling
    circumstances. The relative youth of an offender was a germane,  though
    not conclusive, consideration in this context as vouched by  the  Court
    of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  JZ  (Zambia)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 116, citing Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47.

25.  Counsel  characterised  the  Secretary  of  State's   submissions   as
    disagreement on the reasons  but  since  the  FtTJ  had  addressed  and
    answered the  correct  questions  in  a  manner  consistent  with  that
    proposed by the Supreme Court in Ali , the only possible error  of  law
    could be whether adequate reasons were given.

26. On a proper analysis it was clear that the FtTJ knew  and  applied  the
    correct tests and gave adequate  reasons  for  her  decision.  She  had
    reviewed family life at paras 39-43 which informed what was written  at
    paras 62-65. Departing from written submissions presented as a Rule  24
    response, counsel recognised that on a reasonable view the FtTJ may not
    have determined that there would be undue harshness for the children on
    the claimant's deportation.

Analysis

27. The 2002 Act provides in section 117 C:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)      The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)      The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
         interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
         taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for which the
         criminal has been convicted."

28. These provisions, (or the almost identical Immigration Rules  398,  399
    and 399A in the case of Ali)  have  been  considered  by  authoritative
    courts on numerous occasions. We note in particular the observations of
    Lord Reed and Lord Thomas in Ali:

         "38      The implication of the new rules is  that  paragraphs  399
         and 399A identify  particular  categories  of  case  in  which  the
         Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the  offender  is  outweighed  under  article  8  by
         countervailing factors. Cases not covered by those rules  (that  is
         to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences of  at  least
         four years, or who have received sentences of between 12 months and
         four years but whose private or  family  life  does  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraphs 399 and 399A) will be dealt with on  the
         basis that great weight should generally be  given  to  the  public
         interest in the deportation of such offenders, but that it  can  be
         outweighed, applying a proportionality  test,  by  very  compelling
         circumstances: in other words, by a very strong  claim  indeed,  as
         Laws LJ put it in the SS (Nigeria) case [2014]  1  WLR  998  .  The
         countervailing considerations must be very compelling in  order  to
         outweigh the general public interest in  the  deportation  of  such
         offenders, as assessed by Parliament and the  Secretary  of  State.
         The  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  indicates   relevant   factors   to
         consider, and paragraphs 399 and 399A provide an indication of  the
         sorts of matters which the  Secretary  of  State  regards  as  very
         compelling. As explained at para 26 above, they can include factors
         bearing on the weight of the public interest in the deportation  of
         the particular offender, such as his conduct since the offence  was
         committed, as well as factors relating to  his  private  or  family
         life. Cases falling within the scope of section 32 of the 2007  Act
         in which the public interest in deportation  is  outweighed,  other
         than those specified in the new rules *4816 themselves, are  likely
         to be a very small minority (particularly  in  non-settled  cases).
         They  need  not  necessarily  involve  any  circumstance  which  is
         exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the
         Secretary of State  accepted,  consistently  with  the  Huang  case
         [2007] 2 AC 167 , para  20),  but  they  can  be  said  to  involve
         "exceptional circumstances"  in  the  sense  that  they  involve  a
         departure from the general rule."

    Lord Thomas proposed  that  an  FtT  judgment  in  a  "very  compelling
    circumstances" case might be structured in the following way:

         "83      One way of structuring such a judgment would be to  follow
         what has become known as the "balance sheet"  approach.  After  the
         judge has found the facts, the judge would  set  out  each  of  the
         "pros" and "cons" in what has been described as a  "balance  sheet"
         and  then  set  out  reasoned  conclusions  as   to   whether   the
         countervailing factors outweigh  the  importance  attached  to  the
         public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders."

29. In Kiarie, at para 55, Lord Wilson observed:

         "55      The third is that,  particularly  in  the  light  of  this
         court's decision in  the  Ali  case,  every  foreign  criminal  who
         appeals against a deportation  order  by  reference  to  his  human
         rights must negotiate a formidable hurdle before  his  appeal  will
         succeed: see para 33 above.  He  needs  to  be  in  a  position  to
         assemble and present powerful evidence. I must not be taken  to  be
         prescriptive in suggesting that the very compelling  reasons  which
         the tribunal must find before it allows an  appeal  are  likely  to
         relate in particular to some or all of the following  matters:  (a)
         the depth of the claimant's integration in United  Kingdom  society
         in terms of family, employment and otherwise; (b)  the  quality  of
         his relationship with any child, partner or other family member  in
         the United Kingdom; (c) the extent to which any  relationship  with
         family  members  might   reasonably   be   sustained   even   after
         deportation, whether by their joining him abroad or otherwise;  (d)
         the impact of his deportation on the need to safeguard and  promote
         the welfare of any child in the  United  Kingdom;  (e)  the  likely
         strength of the obstacles to his integration in the society of  the
         country of his nationality; and, surely  in  every  case;  (f)  any
         significant risk of his reoffending in the United Kingdom,  judged,
         no doubt with difficulty, in the light of his criminal  record  set
         against the credibility of his probable assertions of  remorse  and
         reform."

30. It is plain that in making this assessment, there is no restriction  on
    the circumstances which may be relevant albeit in some of the judgments
    there are indications of which factors are more likely to be  integral.
    At para 26 in HA, Lord Reed explained:

         "26.     In a well-known series of judgments the [European Court of
         Human Rights] has set out the guiding principles which  it  applies
         when assessing the likelihood that the  deportation  of  a  settled
         migrant  would  interfere  with  family  life  and,  if   so,   its
         proportionality  to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.  In  Boultif  v
         Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50 , para 48, the  court  said  that  it
         would consider the nature and seriousness of the offence  committed
         by the applicant; the length of the applicant's stay in the country
         from which he or she is to be expelled; the time elapsed since  the
         offence was committed  and  the  applicant's  conduct  during  that
         period; the nationalities of the  various  persons  concerned;  the
         applicant's family situation, such as the length of  the  marriage,
         and other factors expressing the effectiveness of a couple's family
         life; whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he
         or she entered  into  a  family  relationship;  whether  there  are
         children of the marriage, and if so, their age; and the seriousness
         of the difficulties which the spouse is likely to encounter in  the
         country to which the applicant  is  to  be  expelled.  Two  further
         factors were mentioned in �ner v The Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR  14
         , para 58: the best interests and well-being of  the  children,  in
         particular the seriousness of the difficulties which  any  children
         of the applicant are likely to encounter in the  country  to  which
         the applicant is to be expelled; and the solidity  of  the  social,
         cultural and family ties with the host country and with the country
         of destination. In Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 ,  paras  72-75,
         the court added that the age of the person  concerned  can  play  a
         role when applying some  of  these  criteria.  For  instance,  when
         assessing the nature and seriousness of the offences, it has to  be
         taken into account whether the person committed them as a  juvenile
         or as an adult. Equally, when assessing the length of the  person's
         stay in the country from which he or she is to be expelled and  the
         solidity of the social, cultural and  family  ties  with  the  host
         country, it makes a difference  whether  the  person  came  to  the
         country during his or her childhood or  youth,  or  was  even  born
         there, or whether he or she only came as  an  adult.  Some  of  the
         factors listed in these cases relate to the strength of the  public
         interest in deportation: that is to say, the extent  to  which  the
         deportation of the person concerned will promote the legitimate aim
         pursued. Others  relate  to  the  strength  of  the  countervailing
         interests in private and family life. They are not exhaustive."

31. This is consistent  with  the  approach  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  as
    exemplified in NA (Pakistan):

         "29      In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal  in  the
         JZ (Zambia) case [2016] Imm AR 781 applies to those provisions. The
         phrase used in section 117C (6), in paragraph 398 of the 2014 rules
         and which we have held is to be read into section 117C(3) does  not
         mean that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
         disentitled from seeking to rely  on  matters  falling  within  the
         scope of the circumstances described in Exceptions  1  and  2  when
         seeking to contend that "there are very  compelling  circumstances,
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". As  we  have
         indicated above, a foreign criminal is entitled to rely  upon  such
         matters, but he would need to be able to point to features  of  his
         case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and  in  paragraphs
         399 or 399A of the 2014 rules), or  features  falling  outside  the
         circumstances described in those exceptions and  those  paragraphs,
         which made his claim based on article 8 especially strong."

32. From the passages we have quoted, it is clear  that  rehabilitation  is
    not excluded from consideration and  nor  is  the  absence  of  further
    convictions following an offence; eg Lord Reed's reference  in  Ali  at
    para 38 to the conduct of an offender since he committed  the  offence.
    Low risk of reoffending can be considered according to Lord  Wilson  in
    Kiarie. Notwithstanding the appellant continuing to deny committing his
    crime, in this case the position before the FtTJ was that a  number  of
    agencies were in agreement that the claimant presents  a  low  risk  of
    reoffending which has been the position for some years now.

33. We recognise that a low risk of reoffending cannot be a complete answer
    as the protection of the public  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.  The  deterrent  effect  which
    deportation of foreign criminals should have in deterring  others  from
    offending is a material aspect of the public interest in  this  context
    along with ensuring that the public will have confidence that offenders
    will be properly punished. We note that in Ali Lord Wilson agreed  with
    Lord Kerr that the  emotive  language  he  had  used  in  referring  to
    reflecting public revulsion, OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2009] INLR 109 ought not to be used.

34. We are not convinced that considerations of general deterrence ought to
    be accorded particular weight in a case involving a crime committed  11
    years ago by a 13 or 14 year old.  It  appears  to  us  that  the  FtTJ
    recognised the gravity of the crime and  the  public  interest  in  not
    allowing criminals to remain.  We  consider  that  she  recognised  the
    strength of the public interest in deportation arising from this crime.

35. We do not agree with the submission that the FtTJ made a  finding  that
    it would be unduly harsh for the  claimant's  partner  or  children  to
    remain in the UK on his being deported to Afghanistan. The  FtTJ  chose
    her words carefully and referred to circumstances being hard and harsh,
    but she did not misapply the test. She  recognised  that  her  findings
    fell short of meeting Exception 2, but meeting Exception 2  would  not,
    of  itself,  have  availed  the  claimant  where  the  sentence   under
    consideration was for 4 years.

36. We note that some of the circumstances found in OP (Jamaica) bear  some
    resemblance   to some of the features relied on  by  the  FtTJ  in  the
    present case, but note also that the appellant in that case arrived  in
    the UK when he was almost 18 and  committed  his  qualifying  crime  of
    robbery when he was 27. The facts of  the  cases  are  different  in  a
    number of material respects and  the  evaluation  is  inevitably  fact-
    sensitive: KE (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] 1 WLR 2610 at paras 30 and 31.

37. We understand the FtTJ to have been undertaking an analysis of  all  of
    the circumstances of the kind proposed by the Supreme Court in  Ali  as
    described by Lord Reed at para 38  and  Lord  Thomas  at  para  83.  We
    consider this  to  be  clearly  illustrated  in  her  paragraph  65  in
    particular.

38. Seen in this light, we consider that the FtTJ recognised that the  best
    interests of the children did not of themselves necessarily amount to a
    very compelling circumstance.

39. In the House of Lords, Lady  Hale  explained  why  sentencing  children
    involves particular considerations which seem to  have  at  least  some
    relevance in the deportation context, in Regina (Smith) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] 1 AC 159.

         "23      On 1 March 2005, the United States Supreme Court decided,
         in Roper v Simmons , that the Eighth and Fourteenth amendments of
         the United States Constitution forbad the imposition of the death
         penalty upon offenders who were under 18 when the offence was
         committed. In doing so, the majority explained, at pp 15-16, three
         general differences between juveniles and adults:

             "First, as any parent knows and as the scientific and
             sociological studies respondent and his amici cite tend to
             confirm '[a] lack of maturity and an underdeveloped sense of
             responsibility are found in youth more often than in adults
             and are more understandable among the young. These qualities
             often result in impetuous and ill-considered actions and
             decisions.' [ Johnson v Texas (1993) 509 US 350 , 367] ... It
             has been noted that 'adolescents are overrepresented
             statistically in virtually every category of reckless
             behaviour.' Arnett, 'Reckless Behaviour in Adolescence: A
             Developmental Perspective' (1992) 12 Developmental Review 339
             ... The second area of difference is that juveniles are more
             vulnerable or susceptible to negative influences and outside
             pressures, including peer pressure ... This is explained in
             part by the prevailing circumstance that juveniles have less
             control, or less experience with control, over their own
             environment. See Steinberg & Scott, 'Less Guilty by Reason of
             Adolescence: Developmental Immaturity, Diminished
             Responsibility, and the Juvenile Death Penalty' (2003) 58 Am
             Psychologist 1009, 1014 ... ('[A]s legal minors, [juveniles]
             lack the freedom that adults have to extricate themselves from
             a criminogenic setting'). The third broad difference is that
             the character of a juvenile is not as well formed as that of
             an adult. The personality traits of juveniles are more
             transitory, less fixed. See generally E Erikson, Identity:
             Youth and Crisis (1968)."

         24 In the court's view, the first of these meant that a juvenile's
         irresponsible conduct was not as morally reprehensible as that of
         an adult; the second meant that juveniles had a greater claim to be
         forgiven for failing to escape the negative influences around them;
         and the third meant that even the most heinous crime was not
         necessarily evidence of an irretrievable depraved character.
         Furthermore, at p 19:

             "It is difficult even for expert psychologists to
             differentiate between the juvenile offender whose crime
             reflects unfortunate yet transient immaturity, and the rare
             juvenile offender whose crime reflects irreparable corruption.
             See Steinberg & Scott 1014-1016."

         25 These considerations are relevant to the retributive and
         deterrent aspects of sentencing, in that they indicate that the
         great majority of juveniles are less blameworthy and more worthy of
         forgiveness than adult offenders. But they also show that an
         important aim, some would think the most important aim, of any
         sentence imposed should be to promote the process of maturation,
         the development of a sense of responsibility, and the growth of a
         healthy adult personality and identity. That is no doubt why the
         Children and Young Persons Act 1933, in section 44(1) , required,
         and still requires, every court dealing with any juvenile offender
         to have regard to his or her welfare. It is important to the
         welfare of any young person that his need to develop into fully
         functioning, law abiding and responsible member of society is
         properly met. But that is also important for the community as a
         whole, for the community will pay the price, either of indefinite
         detention or of further offending, if it is not done."

40. We consider it to have been of particular importance that the  claimant
    was aged 13 (as accepted by the Secretary of State) or 14 (as found  by
    the trial judge) when he committed his series of rapes of a boy aged 7.
    He  had  found  himself  in  foster  care  in  a  substantially   alien
    environment. This does not excuse what  he  did,  but  it  is  relevant
    context which the FtTJ was entitled to weigh in the balance.

41. The age of the offender  is  a  relevant  consideration  as  Lord  Reed
    confirmed  in  Ali  at  para  26.  It  is  of  course  true  that  very
    considerable effect was given to the claimant's age by the trial  judge
    who indicated that had he been an adult  he  would  have  considered  a
    sentence of 12 years. However, in the particular circumstances of  this
    case, we do not consider that the trial judge giving  great  mitigating
    effect to the claimant's youth when he offended means that relevance of
    this consideration is thereafter exhausted.

42. As we have noted it is accepted that the possibility of  rehabilitation
    is accorded greater importance in the case of children than in the case
    of adults and, at least in the circumstances of this case, we  consider
    it to be of significant relevance in the deportation context  which  is
    concerned with the public interest, one aspect of which  is  protection
    of the public. In this case we consider that the FtTJ was right to give
    weight to the claimant's age, his conduct since he was  convicted,  his
    apparent rehabilitation and his low-risk of reoffending, the passage of
    time since he had  offended  and  what  had  happened  to  him  in  the
    meantime.

43. The FtTJ found that he was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a British partner and, more importantly, three young children with
    whom he had very close bonds. The  partner's  particular  circumstances
    which included a significant degree of ostracism from  her  own  family
    and  her  own  relative  youth  were  recognised  and  considered.  She
    recognised  that  those  circumstances  would  not  of  themselves   be
    sufficient to meet  the  threshold  of  the  exceptions  if  those  had
    applied.  However, the weight  of  the  family  life  and  the  factors
    relating thereto were relevant thereafter  to  the  balancing  exercise
    which the Judge had to conduct per Ali.

44. The FtTJ assembled the combination of circumstances we have  summarised
    and then analysed it against the obviously strong  public  interest  in
    the deportation of the claimant for committing a crime so  heinous  and
    which attracted a sentence bringing him within the scope of section 117
    C (6). The FtTJ conducted the sort of balancing exercise  advocated  by
    the Supreme Court in Ali, carefully balancing the weight to be given to
    the "harsh" effects on family life against the public  interest  which,
    although very weighty, fell to  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
    factors which we set out above; the background to  the  offending,  and
    the low risk/rehabilitation since the offence was committed  more  than
    11 years ago when he was 13 or 14.

45. We  recognise  that  another  Judge  might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion  having  conducted  the  same  balancing  exercise,  but  an
    evaluation of Article 8 is necessarily a matter of assessment  and  the
    conclusion which the FtTJ reached based on her assessment was  open  to
    her for the reasons she gives. Based on our foregoing analysis and  for
    the reasons we give, the grounds do not disclose any error  of  law  in
    the FtTJ's decision.

Notice of Decision
The decision of the FtT does not involve the making of an error of law.   We
uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodman  promulgated  on  3
October 2018 with the consequence that HW's appeal remains allowed.


Signed           [pic] Dated 1 February 2019

pp. Lord Beckett sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.

