
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13874/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th May 2019                         | On 22nd May 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                     I m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Heidar, AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 25th November 1988 is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    He had made application  for  asylum  on  2nd  January  2018  and  that
    application had been refused by the Respondent on 27th  November  2018.
    The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Harris sitting at Hatton Cross on 17th
    January 2019.  The judge had dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 2. Application for permission to appeal had been made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that application had been granted on 1st April  2019.   It
    was said that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    mistranslation of documents was unfair and whilst there was less  merit
    in the claim the judge had made a mistake of fact.  Permission was  not
    refused on the other grounds either.  Directions  were  issued  firstly
    for the Upper Tribunal to decide whether an error of law had been  made
    or not and the  matters  comes  before  me  in  accordance  with  those
    directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was submitted that the Appellant had provided documents  in  support
    of his case and that it had been accepted that his father  was  working
    for the American Forces but refused on the basis  his  father  was  not
    threatened by ISIS.  Ms Heidar referred to the documents which had been
    presented to the judge and what was said to be the  position  regarding
    the mistranslation.  It was submitted that the judge had  made  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of that mistranslation which had had an
    effect upon his assessment of credibility and therefore risk on return.
     It was submitted it was unfair to expect either the Appellant  or  the
    solicitor  to  know  about  the  mistranslation  matter  and  that   an
    adjournment should have been requested by Counsel at the hearing.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was submitted that the documents had been provided on behalf of  the
    Appellant and no issue had been taken at the time of  their  submission
    as part of the bundle.  It was said that the judge could only deal with
    the evidence available at the time and that the manner in which he  had
    dealt with matters was not unfair.  It was noted that  no  request  had
    been made for the adjournment even though  the  Appellant  was  legally
    represented.  It was submitted that  the  only  issue  in  reality  was
    whether there was a risk to  the  Appellant  from  ISIS  in  Kabul  and
    nothing else.

 5. At the close of the hearing I reserved  my  decision  to  consider  the
    submissions and evidence.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.



Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant's claim had been summarised by the judge at paragraph  3.
    His claim was that he was at risk from ISIS in Afghanistan because  his
    father had leased land he owned in Kabul to  an  American  company  and
    that in October 2017 ISIS had warned his father that if he did not  end
    the lease they would kill him, the Appellant and  the  Appellant's  two
    brothers.  Shortly thereafter the Appellant's  evidence  was  that  his
    father had gone to Russia whilst his mother and  other  family  members
    had gone to Pakistan.

 7. The judge had examined both the oral and written evidence provided  and
    had  given  reasons  for  his  findings  on  fact  and  credibility  at
    paragraphs 10 to 48.  In respect of documents produced by the Appellant
    the judge  had  noted  and  followed  the  guidance  at  Tanveer  Ahmed
    (paragraph 13).

 8. At paragraph 15 the judge had noted the Appellant's evidence  that  the
    threat to his father from ISIS had been made by a mobile phone call  on
    22nd October 2017 and followed by two more mobile phone calls the  next
    day.  The judge noted that the Appellant had initially produced to  the
    Respondent a letter said to be from a Kabul  police  station  commander
    confirming the said threat.  That letter had two  features  within  it,
    noted by  the  judge.   Firstly,  he  said  it  did  not  identify  the
    Appellant's father as the recipient of the warning but by inference and
    more importantly  the  letter  had  provided  a  different  date  (17th
    December 2017) as being the date of receipt of the threats.  The  judge
    may well have erred in  stating  that  the  letter  did  not  name  the
    Appellant's  father  as  recipient  although  he  correctly  noted  the
    inconsistency in the  date.   That  error  however  was  not  material.
    Firstly, as the judge stated "setting aside that this letter  does  not
    actually identify it was the Appellant's father".  Secondly,  and  more
    importantly the Appellant himself  did  not  seek  to  rely  upon  that
    letter, as he had, within his appeal bundle produced  a  second  letter
    from the police indicating that they had made a mistake in  that  first
    letter as to the date and correcting that date  to  read  22nd  October
    2017.  It was that  second  letter  therefore  that  was  substantially
    relied upon.

 9. The judge  had  noted  the  second  letter  referred  in  the  attached
    certified English translation to the Appellant's father receiving  from
    ISIS a "warning letter".  The judge noted the  inconsistency  with  the
    Appellant's evidence that such threat came by way of a telephone  call.
    He further noted that in  the  certified  English  translation  of  the
    Appellant's father's witness statement and the witness statement of the
    uncle both refer to a "warning letter".  The judge was  then  presented
    with an intervention by the court interpreter who said he knew Dari and
    that his reading of the father's original Dari witness  statement  only
    mentioned the word "threat".

10. It seems clear that  as  the  judge  indicated  at  paragraph  21,  the
    intervention by the court interpreter was unbidden.  The judge properly
    had not asked him to translate  or  offer  an  opinion.   There  is  no
    criticism of the interpreter.  The Appellant's Counsel  in  submissions
    argued that the judge should regard the words in the witness  statement
    as a mistranslation.  The judge did not do so for reasons given,  which
    do not disclose an error of law.  In summary the judge had noted:

      a) The court interpreter had been employed to interpret in the  Pushtu
         language rather than Dari with  accordingly  his  knowledge  of  or
         understanding of Dari being simply unknown.

      b) Nothing was said concerning the translation of the uncle's  witness
         statement or the police letter.

      c) All English translations had been certified and had  been  done  by
         the same translator and linguistic examples found by the  judge  at
         paragraph 24 indicated in his view that the  translator  understood
         meaning and nuance of word and phrases.

      d) The Appellant and his representatives relied upon  those  documents
         and translations and there had been no attempt to made corrections.



11. It may well be the case, as submitted, that neither the  Appellant  nor
    his solicitors understood Dari and therefore would not be in a position
    to note the alleged mistranslation and rectify the same.  However,  the
    judge had noted  at  paragraph  23  "the  discrepancies  are  obviously
    present on the face of the translations".   The judge can  only  decide
    the case on the evidence presented to him  and  correctly  noted  those
    documents with translations form part of the Appellant's case.  He also
    gave, as indicated above, proper reasons why he did not rely upon  that
    which was said by the court interpreter in respect of one of the  three
    documents.  There was no error of law in his approach nor in  rejecting
    the submission made by Mr Khan, which on  the  evidence  available  was
    merely speculative.

12. It was submitted by Ms Heidar that  the  judge  should  or  could  have
    adjourned for the matter to be  considered.   The  Appellant  had  been
    represented throughout by solicitors and was represented by Counsel  at
    the hearing.  No  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made  by  the
    Appellant's Counsel or indeed the Presenting  Officer  and  it  was  no
    error for the judge not to have adjourned in the circumstances of  this
    case.

13. It is clear from paragraph 27 that the  judge  took  the  inconsistency
    into account:

         "I would not expect such inconsistencies to be present in  reliable
         evidence.  As it concerns a central part of the Appellant's claim I
         find it raises serious doubts about the general reliability of  the
         police letters and the statements of  the  Appellant's  father  and
         uncle.  I am not satisfied I can treat them  as  reliable  evidence
         that asserts the Appellant's case  and  I  find  the  inconsistency
         present damages the credibility of the Appellant".

14. However, the judge thereafter looked at other evidential  matters.   He
    fairly said at paragraph 33 that he was not persuaded  by  all  of  the
    Respondent's challenges to the Appellant's  credibility  but  did  have
    some significant  concerns.   The  judge  thereafter,  particularly  at
    paragraphs 34 to 44 gave clear reasons for making  adverse  credibility
    findings upon the Appellant's  account  that  was  unconnected  to  the
    letters referred to above.  Those were not  insignificant  findings  of
    adverse credibility.  The  judge  had  concluded  at  paragraph  44  by
    finding that those significant concerns of  credibility  together  with
    the documentary evidence did not satisfy him  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated  a  real  likelihood  of  being  at  risk  from  ISIS   in
    Afghanistan.  That was essentially the sole basis  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to fear a return to Afghanistan.

15. The judge could only make a decision upon  the  evidence  presented  to
    him.  In respect of the intervention by the court interpreter that  may
    have cast a doubt upon a phrase within one of the three documents.  The
    judge dealt with that matter properly and gave adequate reasons why  he
    did not accede to the submission made by the Appellant's  Counsel.   He
    was thereafter entitled to find the inconsistency an  adverse  factors.
    It is also clear however that he had fully considered the  totality  of
    the evidence and had  found  several  other  evidential  features  that
    significantly  and  adversely  affected  the  Appellant's   credibility
    leading him to the conclusion that he reached.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made by the judge  in  this  case  and  I
uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
