

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13852/2018


|Heard at Field House                               |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 16 December 2019                                |On 13 January 2020              |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms C Litchfield instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Lindsay Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Wylie promulgated on 9  August  2019  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born  on  10  January
        1988.
     3. The appellant's immigration history shows she  entered  the  United
        Kingdom in 2008 as a visitor returning to  Pakistan  thereafter  in
        accordance with the terms of the Visa. The appellant re-entered the
        United Kingdom on 2 March 2011 lawfully as a student with leave  in
        that capacity being extended until 21 February 2015, although  such
        leave was curtailed on 20 October 2014. An application of 6 October
        2014 for leave to remain on the basis of family  and  private  life
        was refused on 17 December 2014 and an appeal against that decision
        allowed to the extent the matter was to be reconsidered by the Home
        Office. The application was refused on  20  November  2015  against
        which the appellant unsuccessfully appealed, becoming appeal rights
        exhausted on 13 September 2017. An application for leave to  remain
        on the basis of family and private life of 26  September  2017  was
        refused on 23 April 2018 with no right  of  appeal.  The  appellant
        contacted the respondent on 22 May 2018 and claimed  asylum  on  29
        May 2018 leading to the refusal which was upheld by the Judge.  The
        appellants status is the UK has, therefore, always been precarious.
     4. The Judge considered the appellant's evidence  before  setting  out
        findings of fact from [80], the relevant  parts  of  which  can  be
        summarised in the following terms:


                i. Account was taken of the evidence the appellant has  been
                   treated for mental health conditions  and  is  prescribed
                   medication for severe depression [84].
               ii. Given the ages of the  appellant's  children  their  best
                   interests are protected by being  in  the  care  of  both
                   parents. The parents are Pakistan nationals with no legal
                   status in the United Kingdom [86].
              iii. The Judge notes there had been previous appeals albeit on
                   human rights grounds rather than protection  grounds  the
                   last of which was taken as  the  starting  point  in  the
                   determination as per the Devaseelan principles [88].
               iv. In the determination made after a hearing on 27 July 2015
                   the appellant and her husband were found to  be  credible
                   and reliable witnesses [89].
                v. Return to Pakistan was  a  live  issue  in  that  earlier
                   appeal yet neither the appellant nor her husband made any
                   comment about fear on part  of  the  appellant  from  her
                   family  because  of  the  secret  wedding,  whereas   her
                   evidence now is that her father had severed contact  with
                   her and her sister had stopped contacting her because  of
                   a secret wedding in 2013, when this was obviously  before
                   her father died in December 2014,  and  would  have  been
                   known at the date of the appeal hearing in 2015 [90].
               vi. In the original determination at [60] the  judge  hearing
                   that appeal found "... I  therefore  do  not  accept  her
                   evidence as  shown  that  it  is  inappropriate  for  the
                   appellant to go and live with either her husband's family
                   or indeed other members of her own family. She  does  not
                   appear to have asked any of them whether it was  possible
                   or not. If she has she has not provided any  evidence  to
                   show that it is not possible. There do not appear  to  be
                   any  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
                   integration into Pakistan..." [92].
              vii. The Judge expected the  appellant  would  have  disclosed
                   concerns about family if she returned to Pakistan, relied
                   upon this  appeal,  in  the  early  appeals  if  she  was
                   genuinely aware of family concerns regarding her marriage
                   [93]. The fact such issues were not raised in  the  early
                   appeal is said to challenge the  appellant's  credibility
                   [94].
             viii. The Judge did not find it credible that the appellant had
                   not investigated the letter said to  have  been  received
                   from her  sister  or  with  her  a  friend,  even  having
                   received the letter and a picture message from an unknown
                   number of the FIR dated 18 February 2014 [96 - 102].
               ix. There is no explanation for how  the  appellant's  friend
                   obtained the documents and no  explanation  for  how  she
                   would have been able to obtain either the  Fatwa  or  the
                   appellant's brothers ID and Residence Card [103].
                x. The Judge  finds  the  FIR  narrated  false  information,
                   claiming to be from a person who claims to  have  married
                   the appellant in 2013 before she married her  husband  in
                   the presence of the family in 2014.   It  was  found  not
                   credible, if the FIR was genuine,  that  the  appellant's
                   family would not have been made aware of it and that  the
                   appellant would not have known about it at  the  relevant
                   time [104].
               xi. The Judge did not accept the FIR is genuine or  that  the
                   appellant had anything to  fear  from  it  on  return  to
                   Pakistan [105].
              xii. The Fatwa is dated 31 December 2018. The Judge  finds  it
                   simply states that if information upon which it is  based
                   is true the appellant's marriage to SA was unlawful,  but
                   as  the  information  is  not  true  the  conclusion   is
                   incorrect as the marriage is not unlawful [106].
             xiii. The Judge finds a newspaper advert stating the  appellant
                   is disowned from her  inheritance  is  based  upon  false
                   information about being married to another [107].
              xiv. The Judge gave little weight to the appellants  documents
                   and  finds  in  any  event  they  do  not   support   the
                   appellant's claim to be at risk to her life on return  to
                   Pakistan [109].
               xv. The Judge finds at its highest the appellant's  claim  is
                   based upon a letter from  her  sister  that  her  brother
                   would kill her if she came to Pakistan [110].
              xvi. The Judge finds the appellant has no evidence to  confirm
                   her brother was back living permanently in Pakistan.  His
                   residence card originates from South  Africa  showing  an
                   entitlement to live there  until  2026.  The  appellant's
                   evidence is her brothers run a business in South  Africa.
                   The Judge finds there was no information to show why  the
                   brother would have returned to Pakistan [110].
             xvii. The Judge finds if the brother has returned to  Pakistan,
                   even if the appellant does not wish to return to her home
                   area, she could internally relocate in Pakistan [112].
            xviii. The Judge  finds  there  was  no  reliable  evidence  the
                   appellant's  brothers  have  any   influence   with   the
                   authorities in Pakistan [113].
              xix. One of the appellant's brothers [Z] is a  police  officer
                   but the Judge did not find there was  evidence  he  would
                   have any power due to his position to enable him to trace
                   the appellant if she was  to  return  to  Pakistan.   Her
                   brother had never made any threats against her [115].
               xx. The Judge noted the appellant had previously stayed  with
                   her husband when he lived in Rawalpindi in a rented  flat
                   with his mother, in an area in which he has family, which
                   is a considerable distance from  the  appellant's  family
                   home [117].
              xxi. Issues appertaining to the appellant's  husband's  family
                   do not appear to be  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  own
                   family remaining in Pakistan [119].
             xxii. At [120 - 123] it is written:


                      120.     It seems to me that the appellant can return
                           with her husband and two children,  all  of  whom
                           are citizens  of  Pakistan,  and  live,  if  they
                           choose,   with   her   husband's   mother.    The
                           appellant's husband has completed  his  education
                           in the United Kingdom, and would be able to  find
                           employment commensurate  with  his  training.  It
                           would  have  been  his  intention  to  return  to
                           Pakistan after completing his degree. He has  had
                           part-time work in the United Kingdom,  and  could
                           utilise this experience as well as his  education
                           to obtain employment to support  his  family.  He
                           has   qualifications   to    obtain    reasonable
                           employment,  and  would  be  able  to   pay   for
                           accommodation if they lived separately  from  his
                           family home.


                      121.      The  appellant   has   been   treated   for
                           depression, and was closely monitored during  her
                           recent pregnancy  and  after  the  birth  of  her
                           second child. Prior to this pregnancy she had not
                           seen a psychiatrist. She was admitted to hospital
                           for five days in January 2019. She is  prescribed
                           medication. There was no medical  report  setting
                           out to the current position, the last  consultant
                           report to her GP was dated prior to the birth  of
                           her daughter.


                      122.     Antidepressant medication  is  available  in
                           Pakistan. She would be able to continue treatment
                           there.


                      123.     I am not satisfied, on the lower standard of
                           proof, that the appellant is at risk  of  serious
                           harm on return to Pakistan


                      124.      Therefore,  having   considered   all   the
                           evidence,   including   that   not   specifically
                           mentioned in my decision, and taking into account
                           the background evidence on Pakistan, I  find  the
                           appellant has not establish that she is  entitled
                           to the grant of asylum. I do not accept that  the
                           appellant has established that she is entitled to
                           refugee status.


            xxiii. The Judge rejects the claim for  humanitarian  protection
                   [125] and pursuant to articles 2 and 3 ECHR on protection
                   grounds 'in line'.
             xxiv. The Judge notes the appellant is being  treated  for  her
                   mental health condition but does not  find  that  reaches
                   the high threshold that may engage article 3  on  medical
                   grounds [126].
              xxv. The Judge finds that  although  the  appellant  has  been
                   resident in the UK for 8 years, since 2011, there will be
                   no very significant obstacles to the  appellant  and  her
                   family returning to live in Pakistan [128].
             xxvi. The Judge finds there will be no breach of article 8 ECHR
                   if the appellant is removed to Pakistan [129].


     5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal,  the  operative  part  of
        which is in the following terms:


             3.   The Judge's consideration of the best  interests  of  the
                  Appellant's children  is  restricted  to  three  lines  in
                  paragraph 86. Given the  appellant's  history  of  serious
                  mental ill-health, it is arguable that the Judge failed to
                  give proper consideration to it when  assessing  the  best
                  interests of the children. It is also  arguable  that  the
                  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to   the
                  documentary evidence from Pakistan, especially the  fatwa,
                  rejecting it on the basis that the allegations therein was
                  untrue. The Judge appears to ignore  the  claim  that  the
                  Appellant's brothers had made false claims against her  as
                  they did not approve of her marriage. It is arguable  that
                  the Judge's findings on  internal  relocation  ignore  the
                  requirement for landlords  to  provide  details  of  their
                  tenants to the police, and there is merit in the assertion
                  that the Judge's consideration of the mental  disorder  is
                  inadequate, given the background evidence of  the  paucity
                  of mental health provision in Pakistan.



Error of law


     6. The medical evidence before the Judge included a  letter  dated  22
        March 2019 from the Perinatal Parent Infant Mental Health  Services
        at Goodmayers Hospital showing a diagnosis of severe depression and
        a risk of postnatal relapse. A letter of 27 February 2019 from  the
        same source states the appellant suffers from hallucinations and  a
        letter of 6 March 2019  showed  the  appellant  being  admitted  to
        hospital with severe depression and suicidal thoughts  after  which
        she was discharged with the Perinatal Mental Health Care Plan which
        includes reviews by a perinatal practitioner, weekly  contact  with
        the perinatal mental health practitioner and  perinatal  consultant
        review every 4 - 6 weeks.
     7. It was argued on the appellant's  behalf  that  her  mental  health
        problems present in the United Kingdom are  despite  her  husband's
        support and that if she were to live in Pakistan with  her  husband
        this will be not be a protective factor against relapse.
     8. The Judge noted the reports provided were from the  perinatal  team
        with no report setting out the appellant's current position.  There
        had been nothing in particular  since  the  birth  the  appellant's
        daughter on 7 April 2019. The Judge clearly noted the appellant had
        been diagnosed with a serious mental health condition  specifically
        finding at [121]:


             121.     The appellant has been treated  for  depression,  was
                  closely monitored during a recent pregnancy and after  the
                  birth of her second child. Prior to this pregnancy she had
                  not seen a psychiatrist. She was admitted to hospital  for
                  5 days in January  2019.  She  is  prescribed  medication.
                  There was  no  medical  report  setting  out  the  current
                  position, the last consultant report to her GP  was  dated
                  prior to the birth of her daughter.


     9. The Judge specifically  finds  that  antidepressant  medication  is
        available in Pakistan which is said to give rise to  the  error  of
        law as what the appellant requires his antipsychotic medication.  I
        do not find it made out the Judge did not understand or  appreciate
        the full extent of the appellant's mental health difficulties.  The
        medication the  appellant  claimed  to  be  taking  in  her  asylum
        interview, Sertraline and Sumatriptan  are  an  antidepressant  and
        tablet for the treatment of migraine respectively. It was not  made
        out that similar drugs will not be available to  the  appellant  in
        Pakistan. It is also the case that antipsychotic medication such as
        Risperidone and Olanzapine  is  available  in  Pakistan  with  more
        limited use of other typical and atypical antipsychotics.
    10. Whilst the mental health services in Pakistan may be  more  limited
        than those in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Judge's  conclusion  that
        treatment is available and that the appellant had not established a
        breach of article 3 on medical grounds if returned,  has  not  been
        shown to be a finding outside the range of those available  to  the
        Judge on the evidence.
    11. The appellant asserts error in the manner in which the evidence was
        considered by the Judge. It is  specifically  suggested  the  Judge
        erred in law by finding  because  the  appellant  did  not  mention
        something in her 2015 claim that she now seeks to rely  upon,  this
        damages her credibility.  The Judge was aware that  the  appeal  in
        2015 was not a protection claim and was a human rights  claim,  but
        one in which the appellant had claimed she could not return to live
        with family in Pakistan yet failed to make mention  of  issues  she
        now seeks to rely upon which would have been material and  relevant
        to  her  claim  to  be  unable  to  return  or  the  existence   of
        insurmountable obstacles and which, if credible,  would  have  been
        known to her at the time.
    12. The Judge does not find against the appellant on  the  basis  these
        were issues not raised in a protection appeal although human rights
        appeal can include articles 2 and  3  ECHR  and  facts  that  could
        establish both an entitlement to protection and  the  existence  of
        insurmountable obstacles to return and reintegration. The assertion
        the Judge erred in failing to refer to any evidence giving  in  the
        2015 appeal which was inconsistent with the later asylum claim  has
        no merit. The Judge's criticism is that  matters  that  could  have
        been raised were not raised. This is the inconsistency between  the
        claims.
    13. On 27 July 2015 the appellant maintained she could  not  return  to
        Pakistan, as she did in the later protection claim, but  apparently
        not seeking to rely upon evidence at the heart of her current claim
        which, on the chronology identified by the Judge, would  have  been
        known to the appellant prior to her father's death in 2014.
    14. The grounds assert the Judge failed to make  adequate  findings  on
        whether the appellant was married in  secret  in  2013  failing  to
        consider the marriage certificate of that marriage provided in  the
        bundle. The Judge accepts the  person  to  whom  the  appellant  is
        currently married is her lawful husband and also finds the claim to
        have been married to another person before she married her  current
        husband in the presence of the family in  January  2014  is  false.
        This Judge did not find  the  appellant's  claim  to  face  a  risk
        credible is made out for which adequate reasons are provided in the
        determination.
    15. The Judge is criticised for failing to  deal  with  the  submission
        made at the hearing that if the  appellant  were  to  relocate  she
        would have to make herself known in the local community and that if
        she ever needed the help of the police there was a  real  risk  the
        previous FIR, fatwa, a newspaper notice will come to the  attention
        of the authorities which would cause to  be  investigated  and  the
        brothers notified of her whereabouts. The  actual  finding  of  the
        Judge is that the appellant can return with her  husband  and  stay
        with his family or relocate  together  elsewhere.  Pakistan  is  an
        intensely patriarchal society with the male being the head  of  the
        household and  it  therefore  more  likely  that  it  will  be  the
        appellant's husband who would have to give notice to a landlord  or
        deal with the authorities. The Judge  finds  the  FIR,  fatwa,  and
        related documents warrant no weight being placed upon them as  they
        are based upon information that is not true and that the  documents
        are therefore themselves not credible. It  was  not  made  out  the
        appellant would face a real risk as a result of any steps that  she
        may have to take if such things came to light.
    16. The Judge's view on the merits of the  appellant's  claim  is  that
        even taken at its highest the claim is based upon a letter from her
        sister that her brother would kill her if  she  came  to  Pakistan.
        This is a clear indication all other  aspects  of  the  appellant's
        claim were rejected as not being credible.
    17. It is not made out it is not a finding available to  the  Judge  on
        the evidence that  the  appellant  had  not  established  that  her
        brother who she fears has returned  to  Pakistan.  He  was  clearly
        living South Africa where they have established their business  and
        the reasons the appellant states they may have come to Pakistan and
        issued threats against her  are  those  reasons  the  Judge  found,
        sustainably, lack credibility.  It  is  not  made  out  because  an
        advertisement had been placed a brother was required to  physically
        be present in Pakistan to do so. The Judge considered the documents
        in the round and in light of the lack of credibility  in  the  core
        the appellant's protection claim the Judge was arguably entitled to
        place little weight upon the documentary evidence she  was  seeking
        to rely upon.
    18. In relation to the reasonableness of internal relocation, the Judge
        was aware of the extent  of  the  appellant's  mental  health.  The
        Country Guidance Information Note for Pakistan stated mental health
        is one of the  most  neglected  fields  in  Pakistan  with  limited
        services, but it was not established before the  Judge  that  those
        services that are available will not  be  sufficient  to  meet  the
        appellant's needs. Perinatal mental health (PMH) problems are those
        which occur during pregnancy or in the  first  year  following  the
        birth of a child which ties in with the material considered by  the
        Judge. It was not made out with the  treatment  that  is  available
        that the appellant will experience problems or issues sufficient to
        breach the article 3 threshold.
    19. The appellant, her husband, and children  will  be  returned  as  a
        family unit. The Judge's finding that it  had  not  been  made  out
        there were very significant obstacles to return and integration has
        not been shown to be a finding not available to the  Judge  on  the
        evidence. The appellant will not be returned alone,  and  treatment
        will be available both within the United Kingdom, in  transit,  and
        when she arrives back in Pakistan. The issue of internal relocation
        was raised by the respondent and the appellant  failed  to  provide
        sufficient evidence to show it would be  unreasonable  in  all  the
        circumstances for her to relocate if she was unable  to  return  to
        her home area. The evidence before the Judge  did  not  established
        that the best interests of the children can only be met if they are
        allowed to remain in the United Kingdom with their parents.  Family
        life will continue in Pakistan with the children  being  cared  for
        within the family unit with appropriate support.  Any  interference
        with the appellant's private life or those of  the  family  in  the
        United Kingdom has not been shown to be disproportionate  in  light
        of section 117B of the 2002 Act on the facts of this appeal.
    20. I find the appellant fails to make  out  that  the  decision  under
        challenge is flawed for the reasons set out in the grounds  seeking
        permission to appeal or at all. The Judge considered  the  relevant
        issues in the appeal with the appropriate degree of  care  and  has
        provided adequate reasons in support  of  the  findings  made.  The
        weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge.
    21. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the outcome and  seeks  a  more
        favourable conclusion to enable the family to remain in the  United
        Kingdom the grounds fail to establish arguable legal error material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the
        Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 6 January 2020
