
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/13686/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21st March 2018                        | On 01st May 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                    MR AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A A Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  January  1997.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on  26th  May  2016  and  he
    claimed asylum the following day.   The  Appellant's  asylum  interview
    took place on 21st  October  2016.   The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 24th November 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lingam sitting at Taylor House on 11th January 2017.   In
    a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 3rd February 2017 the Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and under Articles 3 and 8 of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 11th February 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on 22nd May 2017.   Renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal
    were lodged and on 1st  August  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
    granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  McWilliam  noted   that   the
    Respondent's position was that return of the Appellant was not feasible
    and that the judge was arguably correct  in  properly  identifying  the
    material issue, namely whether  the  Appellant  could  obtain  a  CSID.
    However,  Judge  McWilliam  considered  it  was  arguable   that   when
    considering this the First-tier Tribunal Judge conflated a CSID with  a
    laissez passer and that the judge did  not  engage  with  the  relevant
    issues when deciding whether the Appellant could obtain a CSID  as  set
    out in AA [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  It was on that basis  that  the  appeal
    comes before me to determine whether or not there was a material  error
    of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   For  the
    purpose of convenience throughout these proceedings, whilst noting that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State the Secretary of  State  is
    referred to herein as "the Respondent" and AH as "the  Appellant".   It
    is further recorded that AH was granted  anonymity  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appeared by his instructed  Counsel,  Mr
    Khan, the Secretary of State appeared by  her  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Nath.

 4. The issue that was outstanding before me was a discrete one and  turned
    on whether or not the Appellant by stating that he was unable to obtain
    the documentation relating to a CSID justified the judge  reaching  the
    finding that she did.  I was persuaded that the reasoning  put  forward
    by Mr Nath was valid and that the failure by the Appellant  to  produce
    such documentation did not mean that such documentation  could  not  be
    made available in the future and on that basis I was prepared  to  find
    that there was a material error of law.  However, I did point out  that
    it was going to be necessary for the Secretary of State to show me that
    the Appellant would be in a position to obtain such  documentation  and
    therefore be in a position to return.

 5. In such circumstances I  gave  directions  stating  that  there  was  a
    material error of law limited  to  the  question  namely  that  if  the
    Appellant did not have a CSID at  the  time  when  the  return  of  the
    Appellant to Iraq was not feasible was this a factor to be  taken  into
    account when assessing whether he would be at risk on return and as  to
    whether the fact that the Appellant may or may not be able to obtain  a
    document in the future was one that needed to be considered.

 6. The matter next came back before me on 19th January.  It  was  accepted
    therein  that  Mr  Nath   should   be   the   attending   Home   Office
    representative, albeit that he was not present  at  that  hearing,  and
    that it was incumbent upon the Secretary of State to  comply  with  the
    directions I had given.  By consent the matter  was  therefore  further
    adjourned and comes back before me today for rehearing  solely  limited
    to the point that is outstanding.  The legal representatives  are  well
    versed in this matter.  Mr Nath appears for the Secretary of State  and
    Mr  Khan  for  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  himself  is  also   in
    attendance.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. It was conceded by both legal representatives that the issues had to  a
    certain extent moved on due to the ever-changing  circumstances  within
    Iraq.  Mr Nath submits that  the  objective  evidence  is  not  in  the
    Appellant's favour and that it is possible  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    returned without a CSID to Iraq but he accepts that each case has to be
    looked at on a case by case basis.  He submits he is not in a  position
    to address me further with regard to the return of the Appellant to the
    Kurdish Region.  He refers me to the available and most  recent  up-to-
    date  objective  evidence  to  be  found  in  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information  Note  on  Iraq  relating  to  return/internal   relocation
    published in September 2017.  He submits that the current  position  in
    summary is reflected as follows:

       . A person can be returned without a CSID in that the CSID is  not  a
         travel document.

       . Whether a person is  at  risk  because  of  no  CSID  needs  to  be
         considered whether or  not  return  is  feasible.   AA  [2015]  was
         revised in 2017 to reflect this position.

       . That the fact that a person cannot obtain a document now  does  not
         mean that they cannot do so in the future.   This  is  because  the
         ability to obtain a CSID depends on what other documents  a  person
         has.  Once a person obtains a travel document then  they  are  more
         likely to be able to get a CSID.

 8. He therefore submits that the points raised in the  directions  I  gave
    were correct and that the Appellant is able to get a CSID in the future
    and can travel without one.  However, he acknowledges that  the  matter
    must be considered in the round dependent upon what other documents the
    Appellant may have.  He does however concede that the Appellant is from
    Kirkuk and that that is a contested area.

 9. Mr Khan submits that the Appellant must succeed based on  the  guidance
    given by the Secretary of State in her current Policy Note.  He reminds
    me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had previously concluded that the
    Appellant had no family or support to return to and that it is accepted
    that the Appellant is from Kirkuk which is a contested  area  and  that
    even on the Secretary of State's  current  position  it  would  not  be
    possible for the Appellant to relocate.  He further reminds me that the
    Appellant only speaks Sorani.



Findings

10. The starting  point  are  the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, namely that the Appellant is from Kirkuk,  that  Kirkuk
    is accepted as being a contested area and that  the  Appellant  has  no
    family or support to return to.

11. I turn  thereafter  to  the  policy  summary  on  internal  relocation.
    Paragraph 3.1.1 states:

         "A person cannot be returned or relocated  to  the  areas  of  Iraq
         which meet the threshold of Article 15(c)".

    Paragraph 3.1.2 sets out those areas to where a person can relocate but
    it is pointed out that a decision maker needs to assess  each  case  on
    its merits.

12. Thereafter, the feasibility of return is considered and  a  person  can
    only be returned to Baghdad if they have an Iraqi passport or a laissez-
    passer.  A lack of travel documents is a technical obstacle  to  return
    and it is accepted is not of itself a reason for granting protection.

13. It is appropriate to consider the section relating to documentation and
    to assess whether a person can obtain a CSID although a lack of a  CSID
    does  not  however  automatically  entitle  a  person  to   protection.
    Further, I accept that if a person is unable to obtain a CSID in the UK
    and their return is feasible, they may be able to obtain  it  from  the
    Civil Status Affairs Office in their home governorate using  a  current
    or expired Iraqi passport but that it will  be  more  difficult  for  a
    person to obtain a CSID if they are from one of the areas  to  which  a
    person cannot relocate because Article 15(c) harm is occurring.

14. In  this  matter  bearing  in  mind  the  preserved  findings  and  the
    acceptance that the Appellant is from a contested area, I am  satisfied
    that this appeal should, subject to the proviso set out hereinafter, be
    allowed in that  the  Appellant  meets  the  relevant  criteria.   That
    proviso is to be found at paragraph 3.3.8 of the 2017 Note.  It states:

         "If  a  person's  return  is  not  feasible,  and  they  have   not
         established a need for protection based on a risk  arising  from  a
         lack of documents, then decision makers should consider granting  a
         person  discretionary  leave,  pending  further  reviews  of  their
         ability to feasibly return to Iraq".

15. That would appear to fit  the  circumstances  entirely  of  this  case.
    Consequently, whilst I allow this appeal it is made with regard to  the
    proviso set out above.  It will be a matter  for  the  Home  Office  to
    consider in due course.  This, of course, is a  scenario  that  affects
    not just this Appellant but many Appellants.


Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is re-made allowing the appeal.

The Appellant has previously been  granted  anonymity.   No  application  is
made to vary that order and the  current  anonymity  order  will  remain  in
place.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 23rd April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 23rd April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

