
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13273/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2018                          |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                      mr tharindu jayaweera kankanamge
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley-Daley
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20th April  1992.   The
    Appellant was originally granted  leave  on  a  student  visa  on  16th
    September 2009 and claimed to have arrived in the  UK  on  5th  October
    2009 with leave to remain until November 2010.  That was extended until
    30th April 2014.  However the Appellant's leave was curtailed  on  10th
    July 2013 and expired on 8th September 2013.  Thereafter he was  served
    with an  IS151A  as  an  overstayer  but  failed  on  three  subsequent
    occasions to attend and report.  He claimed asylum on 9th May 2016.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum was based on purportedly having a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka on the basis  of  his  imputed
    political opinion.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 15th November 2016.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gibbs sitting at Manchester on 27th January 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 22nd February 2017 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. On 14th June 2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Astle  refused
    permission to appeal concluding that the decision was open to the judge
    on the evidence before him and adequately explained.   Renewed  Grounds
    of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 4th  July  2017  and  on
    14th September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In her reasons Judge Gill stated:

         "I am just  about  persuaded  that  the  judge  of  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  her  approach  to   assessing   the
         reliability of the documentary  evidence,  in  that,  she  arguably
         considered whether they were reliable after she  had  assessed  the
         credibility of the Appellant's own accounts."

 5. The Secretary of State has not  responded  to  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    pursuant to Rule 24.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes  before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed legal representative Mr Medley-Daley.   Mr  Medley-Daley
    is familiar with  this  matter.   He  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he is also the author  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Medley-Daley relies on both the Grounds of Appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the renewed grounds.  He starts by taking me to paragraphs
    20 and 21 of the judge's decision contending the judge has not followed
    the required holistic approach when considering the documents  provided
    by the Appellant purportedly from the Gampaha Police Station  and  when
    considering their reliability.  He  takes  me  through  the  paragraphs
    setting out that the Appellant had provided  an  explanation  regarding
    the documents and reminding me that when he makes reference  to  having
    been only given verbal instruction in 2008 the Appellant  was  at  that
    time only 16.  Further the judge is, he  points  out,  considering  the
    Appellant's minority at paragraph 14 and 15 which he acknowledges is an
    appropriate step providing that an assessment is made bearing  in  mind
    the Appellant's age.  His concern is that the judge has only gone on to
    consider the Appellant as an adult.  He considers the key phrase to  be
    the opening line to paragraph 21 where the judge has said:

         "Following this I am not persuaded that I can place weight  on  the
         documents ..."

    He reiterates that the judge has failed to take a holistic approach  to
    his analysis.

 7. Secondly, he turns to the future risk to the Appellant which he  states
    should have been considered under paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He submits that there was evidence of the  Appellant  being  of
    subsequent interest to the authorities in the finding he had to  report
    and therefore the conclusion at  paragraph  19  constitutes  an  error.
    Further he considers that the finding at paragraph  17  fails  to  take
    into account corruption at the airport which he reminds me is an  issue
    of country guidance and that the judge has consequently fallen  further
    into error in his analysis.

 8. So far as the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC)  are
    concerned he submits that the  judge  has  fallen  into  error  in  his
    assessment at paragraph 21 and that findings of  the  judge  failed  to
    provide the Appellant with a fair hearing and that it would  have  been
    open to the judge to have resumed or adjourned the hearing  if  he  had
    concerns regarding the documents but he chose not to do so.   He  asked
    me to find that there are material errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Judge and  to  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing with none of the findings of fact preserved.

 9. In response Mr Bates accepts that corruption is rife and  therefore  it
    is necessary for documents to be considered in the round.   However  in
    response to the specific arguments put forward by Mr Daley  he  firstly
    turned to the Appellant's age and points out that at paragraph  14  the
    judge has clearly given due and proper consideration to the Appellant's
    age, and has made perfectly reasoned  findings.   He  states  that  the
    judge's analysis at paragraph 17 is significant and  that  this  is  an
    Appellant who purportedly knowing the situation then delays in using  a
    genuine passport to escape and therefore the judge was entitled to make
    his credibility assessment  to  consider  how  the  Appellant  got  the
    passport and why he waited so long  to  use  it  assuming  that  he  is
    telling the truth.  He submits that the judge's findings  are  cogently
    reasoned.

10. Turning to documentary evidence he submits that the judge was always in
    a position to consider what documentary evidence  was  before  him,  to
    assess how credible the Appellant's testimony was and how  much  weight
    to give to the documents and at paragraph 21 he has thereafter gone  on
    and considered these documents  fully  and  properly.   So  far  as  Mr
    Daley's submissions regarding paragraph 21 and the LLRC  are  concerned
    he points out that the key issue is that the Appellant had not attended
    the Commission and merely letters had been sent  and  he  submits  that
    this is not sufficient to bring the Appellant within the head  note  of
    GJ and Others.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

11. In brief response Mr Medley-Daley submits that the judge has failed  to
    look at all the evidence in the round.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. I have listened thoroughly to the submissions made by  Mr  Medley-Daley
    on behalf of the Appellant.  However effectively they amount to  little
    more than a mere disagreement with the  assessment  of  the  judge.   I
    agree entirely with the approach adopted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Astle when refusing permission back in June 2017  in  that  whilst  the
    judge rejects the Appellant's  account  for  considering  all  relevant
    documents namely those from the police the decision has to be read as a
    whole and that it is quite apparent from paragraphs 14 and 15 that  the
    judge had the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  minority  firmly  in  mind.
    Further with regard to the passport Judge Astle concluded there is just
    not the Appellant's ability to leave using it,  issue  was  also  taken
    with his ability to obtain one whilst being a subject  of  interest  to
    the authorities.  On reading the decision it is clear from paragraph 20
    onwards as to why the judge found the documents unreliable.  Further  I
    am satisfied that the judge has taken a proper and correct approach  in
    addressing issues at paragraph 21 and that he  was  perfectly  entitled
    not to grant or even consider adjourning the matter.

15. The proper approach to credibility or as an assessment of the  evidence
    and of the general claim the relevant factors can include the  internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of  the  claim  and
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  This is a judge  who  has  looked
    generally at the consistency of the claim and has given cogent  reasons
    as to his findings on lack of credibility.  Contrary to the  submission
    made by Mr Medley-Daley I am satisfied on a full consideration  of  the
    decision that this is a judge who has considered all the issues in  the
    round.

16. This is a well constructed and well-reasoned judgment and discloses  no
    material errors of law.  For  all  the  above  reasons  the  appeal  is
    consequently dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

