
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13687/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2018                         |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     NL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge McAll (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 13th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen who arrived in the UK on 31st May
    2016 and claimed asylum the following day.  His asylum claim was  based
    upon political opinion, support for  the  LTTE  (Liberation  Tigers  of
    Tamil Eelam).

 3. The claim for international protection  was  refused  on  7th  December
    2017, and the appeal heard by the FtT on 27th July 2018.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and dismissed the appeal on
    all grounds.  The judge found at paragraph 52;

         "The Appellant claims that he fears persecution by  the  state.   I
         have not found the Appellant to be a  credible  witness  and  I  am
         satisfied that the Appellant has fabricated his  asylum  claim  and
         that he has not been detained  and  tortured  as  he  claims.   The
         Appellant left Sri Lanka in 2012 and returned back  there  in  2013
         and I am satisfied he has had no problems there  since  his  return
         and that he can safely return back there and be reunited  with  his
         family."

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted by Judge Scott-Baker of the FtT, and  I  set
    out the grant of permission in part below;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
             law in failing to  give  due  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant's sister died in battle and was  commemorated  as  a
             LTTE martyr; that a material error of fact had  been  made  in
             rejecting the  sister's  history  as  a  risk  factor  as  the
             Appellant had been deported from France  but  the  Appellant's
             evidence was that the claim had not been determined; that  the
             judge had erred in law in marginalising the medical report  as
             the evidence was inconsistent; that the judge  was  flawed  in
             finding that he had no evidence before him to show  that  LTTE
             members were rounded up in 2016.

         3.   At [29] to [30] the judge  considered  the  Appellant's  claim
             that his sister had fought for the LTTE and had been killed in
             battle and accepted  that  she  had.   However  there  was  no
             further consideration of any risk to the Appellant  by  virtue
             of that factor and further throughout  the  decision  findings
             have been made in isolation devoid of  any  reference  to  the
             background material.

         4.   The medical evidence has  also  arguably  been  considered  in
             isolation without consideration of the finding of PTSD by  the
             examining  doctor.   At  [33]  the  judge   found   that   the
             Appellant's evidence as to his torture was inconsistent and at
             [46] rejected the Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  sexually
             assaulted whilst in detention but gave  no  reasons  for  this
             finding.

         5.   Arguably the judgment contains errors of law.

         6.   Permission is granted."

 6. Following the grant of permission the  Respondent  did  not  provide  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Directions were subsequently issued that there  should  be
    an oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the  FtT
    had erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Ms Jegarajah relied upon the four  grounds  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal had been granted.

 8. Firstly it was submitted that the judge had erred by failing to  assess
    the risk to the Appellant caused by him having a sister  who  had  died
    fighting for the LTTE and was recognised as an LTTE martyr.

 9. Secondly it was contended that the judge had erred by making a  mistake
    of fact when considering the asylum claim  made  by  the  Appellant  in
    France.  It was submitted that the judge had erred by finding that  the
    asylum claim in France had been dismissed.

10. Thirdly it was submitted that the judge had erred by adopting a  flawed
    approach to the medical evidence.  The Appellant relied upon an  expert
    medical report prepared by Dr Goldwyn.  It was submitted that the judge
    had marginalised the medical  opinion  of  Dr  Goldwyn  and  had  given
    reasons for rejecting the opinion that the Appellant had been tortured,
    from  paragraph  40  onwards  of  his  decision,  well  after   adverse
    credibility findings had already been made.

11. It was submitted that the subjective evidence should be  considered  in
    the context of the clinical opinion and not after a decision to  reject
    the claim had already been made.  Reliance was placed  upon  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in which it was held;

         "Where there is medical evidence corroborative  of  an  Appellant's
         account of torture or mistreatment, it should be considered as part
         of  the  whole  package  of  evidence  going  to  the  question  of
         credibility and not  simply  treated  as  an  add  on  or  separate
         exercise  for  subsequent  assessment  only  after  a  decision  on
         credibility has been reached on the basis of  the  content  of  the
         Appellant's evidence or his performance as a witness."

12. It was submitted that the judge had made no  reference  to  the  actual
    clinical opinion of Dr Goldwyn, who had made findings that  scars  were
    "highly consistent", "typical" and "diagnostic of".  It  was  submitted
    that the error in considering the medical expert report  was  material,
    because if the torture claim  was  accepted,  given  that  the  torture
    occurred significantly post-conflict, this would have  been  indicative
    that the Appellant would still be at risk.

13. The fourth Ground of Appeal submitted that the judge had made an  error
    of fact at paragraph 36 in which he found that he had not been directed
    to any specific reference in the country information  to  suggest  that
    there was a roundup of former LTTE members taking place  in  2016  when
    the Appellant was arrested.  It was submitted that the Appellant's case
    was not that LTTE members were "rounded up", but that the Appellant was
    detained in 2016 specifically in respect of his LTTE sister, and he had
    previously  left  the  country  illegally,  and   previously   breached
    reporting conditions.

14. I then heard submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   Miss  Kiss
    submitted that the FtT decision disclosed no material error of law.  It
    was submitted that the judge was entitled not  to  accept  the  medical
    report in its entirety, as the  doctor  had  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account at face value, and Miss Kiss questioned whether the doctor  had
    in fact read the documents provided to her.

15. Miss Kiss referred to paragraphs 38, 41 and 43  of  the  FtT  decision,
    submitting that the judge had made findings in those paragraphs,  which
    were open to him to make on the evidence.

16. Miss Kiss submitted that when read as a whole, the judge had considered
    all the evidence, and had given adequate reasons for findings made.  It
    was accepted that the  judge  had  erred  at  paragraph  36  by  making
    reference to a "roundup" of former LTTE members  in  2016,  as  it  was
    accepted that this was not the Appellant's case, but it  was  submitted
    that this error was not in any way material.

17. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the decision was flawed and unsafe  because
    the starting point for the judge should have been consideration of  the
    independent evidence  of  torture,  and  the  judge  should  then  have
    considered any countervailing credibility factors.   It  was  submitted
    that the judge had erred by  making  adverse  findings  of  credibility
    first, and then considering the medical evidence.

18. It was submitted that the appropriate course would be to set aside  the
    decision of the FtT in its entirety and remit the appeal  back  to  the
    FtT to be considered afresh.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. Dealing with the first Ground of Appeal I find  no  material  error  of
    law.  In my view the judge assessed risk on return in  the  round,  and
    took into account the relevant case law, that being GJ and  Others  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 829.  The judge was aware that the Appellant's claim was based upon
    falling within the risk category set  out  at  paragraph  7(a)  of  the
    headnote to GJ.  The judge accepted that  the  Appellant's  sister  had
    died fighting for the LTTE, but that finding, without more,  would  not
    mean that the Appellant would be at  risk.   The  judge  was  aware  of
    paragraph 8 of the headnote to GJ which confirms that  an  individual's
    past history will be relevant only to the extent that it  is  perceived
    by the Sri Lankan authorities as  indicating  a  present  risk  to  the
    unitary Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

21. With reference to the second ground I find no material  error  of  law.
    The judge at paragraph 23 made  a  finding  that  the  outcome  of  the
    Appellant's French asylum  claim  "remains  unclear".   The  judge  was
    entitled to note that the Appellant claimed that he and his family felt
    it was safe for him to return  to  Sri  Lanka,  which  to  some  extent
    undermined his claim.  The judge recorded that the Appellant  had  also
    claimed that he was "deported" which is a finding open to him  to  make
    on the evidence.  It is common ground that the  Appellant  did  make  a
    reference to being "deported".

22. At paragraph 34 the judge sets out the evidence given by the  Appellant
    referring to his asylum claim in France and his return from  France  to
    Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 35 the judge concludes that the Appellant  had
    provided more than one account of his return to Sri Lanka from  France.
    Again in my view that is a finding open to  the  judge  to  make.   The
    Appellant had stated in his witness statement that  he  was  "deported"
    from France but it is clear that in his oral evidence he stated that he
    had in fact obtained false documents in order to  return  back  to  Sri
    Lanka from France.

23. I find that there is merit in the third Ground of  Appeal.   The  judge
    sets out the correct approach at paragraph 32 in which he records  that
    he has considered the medical report and conclusions in the round "with
    the rest of the Appellant's evidence".  In my view the  judge  errs  by
    not satisfactorily addressing the conclusion in the medical report, and
    not providing adequate reasons for rejecting that conclusion.  I do not
    accept that there is any merit in the suggestion made that  the  expert
    did not read the documents provided to her.  It is specifically  stated
    at page 1 of the report that those documents were read.  Dr Goldwyn  at
    paragraph 83 specifically states that on reaching her opinions "I  have
    not taken what he has told me at face value".

24. Dr Goldwyn sets out her conclusion at paragraph 113  in  the  following
    terms;

         "113.    The Istanbul Protocol requires that the  examining  doctor
             assesses the overall picture of scarring and mental effects of
             the alleged  torture  on  the  patient.   In  my  professional
             opinion Mr L's scarring together with the PTSD and  depression
             are diagnostic of the type of torture that Mr L describes."

25. Dr Goldwyn does describe many of the scars as  highly  consistent  with
    the account given by the Appellant.  Highly consistent  is  defined  in
    the Istanbul Protocol as "the lesion could  have  been  caused  by  the
    trauma described, and there are few other possible causes".

26. The conclusion at paragraph 113 is emphatic, in which Dr Goldwyn refers
    to "diagnostic" which is defined in  the  Istanbul  Protocol  as  "this
    appearance could not have been  caused  in  any  way  other  than  that
    described".

27. Therefore Dr Goldwyn has reached a definite conclusion.  The  judge  at
    paragraph 46 accepts that the  Appellant  has  sustained  the  injuries
    outlined by Dr Goldwyn, but finds taking all the evidence in the round,
    those injuries were not as a result of beatings  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in the manner outlined by the Appellant.   The  judge  also
    did not accept the Appellant's claim to have  been  sexually  assaulted
    during his detention in 2010.

28. The judge goes on to make reference to  other  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence given by the Appellant. It is  not  clear  whether  the  judge
    accepts the finding  in  the  medical  report  that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering from PTSD.

29. In my view the judge does not satisfactorily engage with the conclusion
    in the medical report that the injuries could not have been  caused  in
    any  way  other  than  described  by  the  Appellant,  and   does   not
    satisfactorily explain why that conclusion is rejected.

30. It is of course open to the judge not to accept an expert opinion,  but
    cogent reasons must be given for rejecting that opinion, which in  this
    report is firmly expressed by Dr Goldwyn.

31. I find that this amounts to a material error of  law,  although  it  is
    clear and I acknowledge, that the FtT decision has been  prepared  with
    considerable care.

32. I find that the flawed approach to consideration of the  conclusion  in
    the medical report, may have infected other credibility  findings  made
    by the judge, which means that the decision is unsafe.

33. Dealing with the fourth Ground of Appeal, it is conceded that the judge
    made an error as outlined in the grounds.  This  without  more  is  not
    material, but is relevant when  considered  together  with  the  flawed
    approach to the medical evidence.

34. This is an appeal where  credibility  is  very  much  in  issue  and  I
    conclude that the decision is unsafe and must be set aside and  remade.
    I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FtT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

35. The appeal will be heard at  the  Manchester  hearing  centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge McAll.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT discloses a material error of law and is set  aside.
 The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the FtT with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21st November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  The issue  of  any  fee  award  will
need to be considered by the FtT.


Signed                              Date 21st November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

