
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13241/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as 18 August 1982.  On 4 June 2017 he claimed international  protection
    as a refugee, immediately upon arrival in the  United  Kingdom.  On  30
    November 2017 a decision was made to refuse  that  application  and  he
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's case in short was that he was forcibly  recruited  into
    the LTTE in April 2009, his sister already having been recruited  about
    two years earlier. At the end of the hostilities  those  who  had  been
    involved  with  the  LTTE  were  asked  to  identify  themselves.   The
    Appellant's sister  was  identified  but  not  the  Appellant  who  was
    detained with other family members in a  camp  for  six  months  before
    being released in 2010. The Appellant's sister has disappeared. In 2014
    the Appellant began studies at Jaffna University where he took part  in
    demonstrations. Those demonstrations included a call for the government
    to be called to account at the Internal War Crimes Tribunal. There were
    two demonstrations in 2015. It was the Appellant's attendance at  those
    demonstrations and other events which brought him to the  attention  of
    the CID. In 2016 the Appellant went to the office of Mr  Shritharan  MP
    who was collecting information concerning missing people to pass on  to
    the United Nations in Geneva. The Appellant had agreed to give evidence
    concerning what he had witnessed in June 2009 and concerning the family
    attempts to locate his sister. In May 2017 the Appellant  travelled  to
    Mullivaikal for the Remembrance Day celebrations. After returning  home
    from that event he was detained by CID officials who took him to  their
    offices in Colombo where he was detained and later questioned.  He  was
    warned that his life was at risk if he continued to participate in LTTE
    activities. The CID were apparently  aware  of  his  contact  with  the
    United Nations through the Member of Parliament. The  detention  lasted
    ten days. The Appellant was released after his uncle paid a bribe.  The
    Appellant was told he needed to report monthly. These events led to the
    Appellant leaving Sri Lanka with the help of an agent with the  use  of
    forged documents.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  K
    Henderson, on 14  March  2018,  at  North  Shields.  She  rejected  the
    Appellant's account and dismissed the appeal.

 4. Not content with that decision,  by  Notice  dated  4  April  2018  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 16 May 2018 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane
    granted permission.

 5. There are two grounds. Ground 1 contends that there was  a  failure  to
    consider relevant evidence. Ground 2 contends there was  a  failure  to
    make findings of fact on relevant evidence and  in  each  case,  it  is
    submitted that there was a lack of reasoning.

 6. The grounds, helpfully, are very well particularised.

 7. The Appellant relied on a letter from Mr Shritharan MP. That letter  on
    the MP's letterheaded paper refers to the Appellant having been "called
    for witnessing the war crimes before the Commission  for  Investigation
    ...". That same letter refers to  the  "Presidential  Commission".  The
    Judge took the point that, "One would have expected  a  letter  from  a
    member of Parliament to have been more precise when  referring  to  the
    Commission and would have made mention of the United  Nations".  Though
    with respect to that letter it was the Appellant's account that he  had
    never reported to the CID after he had been released, the  letter  from
    the Member of Parliament states, "...Thus, he had  informed  about  the
    life threats he was facing by them to the Presidential Commission. As a
    result, he was called to 4th floor of army intelligence  personnel  and
    investigated about his revelations at the commission.  Further  he  was
    conditioned to sign at 4th floor every month. During these  visits,  he
    was being hindered and tortured in the name of investigation."

 8. The apparent inconsistencies were such that the Judge was unwilling  to
    attach any weight to the letter from the Member of Parliament which was
    described by Judge Henderson as being completely inconsistent with  the
    Appellant's account.

 9. It is submitted in the grounds that it was not open  to  the  Judge  to
    attach no weight to the letter.

10. As Judge Keane in granting permission points out,  that  the  Appellant
    was "called to report to the 4th floor of  Army  Intelligence"  is  not
    necessarily inconsistent with the Appellant not attending, however what
    is of note is  what  appears  at  paragraph  73  of  Judge  Henderson's
    Decision and Reasons in italics, because the letter of Mr Shritharan MP
    speaks of it being "during these  visits  he  was  being  hindered  and
    tortured in the name of investigation...".

11. Ms Harris however submitted that one could not say that the letter  was
    completely inconsistent. It was always the Appellant's case that he had
    been taken by the CID and had been detained for a period  of  ten  days
    before being released. If one then looked at the  letter  such  that  a
    Member of Parliament had made an error but only about when it was  that
    the Appellant was mistreated, the core of the  letter  was  capable  of
    being read consistently with the core of the Appellant's account. Still
    further the grounds contend that as the Appellant had  been  consistent
    in other aspects  of  his  claim  the  Judge,  inferentially  from  the
    grounds, ought not so easily to have dismissed the letter, giving it no
    weight.

12. The second point taken under ground 1 relates to paragraph  69  of  the
    Decision and Reasons in which the Judge held against the Appellant that
    in the screening interview he made  no  mention  of  his  having  given
    evidence  to  the  United  Nations  about  his   experience   and   the
    disappearance of his sister when this was held to the at  the  core  of
    the Appellant's account. The point is taken in the grounds that at  his
    initial interview the Appellant  was  invited  only  to  give  a  brief
    account of the reason why he was claiming "asylum". Still  further  the
    Appellant was interviewed at the airport with an interpreter  over  the
    telephone and the Appellant was made to understand  that  he  would  be
    able to provide a more detailed account in the later interview.

13. What the Appellant did say however is recorded at 4.1  of  the  initial
    contact and asylum registration form. The Appellant made mention of his
    involvement in Memorial Day celebrations; that he was taken by a  white
    van; that he feared the Army and CID; that he was forcibly recruited by
    the LTTE; that he was detained for ten days  and  threatened  with  his
    life.

14. References made to the case of JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450 and
    in particular to paragraphs 24 and 25 of that Judgment where  reference
    is made to interviews where it is said:

         "Such evidence may be entirely reliable,  but  there  is  obviously
         room for mistakes and misunderstandings, even when the person being
         questioned  speaks  English  fluently.  The  possibility  of  error
         becomes greater when the  person  being  interviewed  requires  the
         services of an interpreter, particularly if the interpreter is  not
         physically present. It becomes greater still if  the  person  being
         interviewed is vulnerable  by  reason  of  age  or  infirmity.  The
         written word acquires a degree of certainty which the  spoken  word
         may not command. The "anxious scrutiny"  which  all  claimants  for
         asylum are entitled to expect begins with a  careful  consideration
         of the weight that should properly be attached to answers given  in
         their interviews. In the present case the decision-maker would need
         to bear in mind the  age  and  background  of  the  applicant,  his
         limited command of English and the circumstances  under  which  the
         initial interview and screening interview took place.

         In my view the common law principle of fairness which underpins the
         decision in Dirshe requires the Tribunal to consider with care  the
         extent to which reliance can properly be placed on answers given by
         the appellant in his initial and screening  interviews  and,  as  I
         have already indicated, I do  not  think  that  it  is  a  foregone
         conclusion that the Upper Tribunal would  decide  that  they  could
         properly be  given  the  degree  of  weight  which  the  First-tier
         Tribunal gave them..."

15. Ms Harris amplifying the  grounds  in  relation  to  the  first  ground
    submitted that the letter from the Member of Parliament  confirmed  the
    Appellant's evidence and gave weight to it and was consistent with  the
    core of the case. It was not open to the Judge to give no weight to  it
    at all.

16. The second ground submits that the Judge having attached no  weight  to
    the letter of the Member of Parliament  went  on  then  immediately  to
    reject the  Appellant's  evidence  in  respect  of  his  detention  and
    subsequent release on payment of a bribe.  Though  there  was,  it  was
    accepted, what is submitted to have been minor discrepancy  as  to  the
    date  upon  which  the   Appellant   attended   the   Remembrance   Day
    commemoration which the Appellant had said had been 19  May  2017  when
    the evidence supported it being on 18th May 2017,  there  was,  it  was
    submitted, no sufficient reasoning, indeed no reasoning  for  rejecting
    the Appellant's attendance at the Remembrance Day events at all.

17. At paragraph 75 of the Decision and Reasons the Judge does deal  rather
    more with the Appellant's account of being released with  a  bribe  but
    the Judge held as inconsistent the Appellant's account with  background
    material provided by the Respondent in a fact-finding mission  document
    dated July 2016.

18. At paragraph 60 of the Reasons for Refusal  letter  dated  30  November
    2017 reference  was  made  to  paragraph  8.1.18  and  8.1.19  of  that
    document. 8.1.18 reads as follows:

         "A person who is being detained will be told they can leave if they
         pay a certain amount of money. The starting price for a 'bribe'  is
         1 million LKR [Approximately 5.3 million GBP] - but  based  on  the
         background of the person, this can  either  go  up  or  down.  Most
         people will sell their property to pay bribes. A mediator - a third
         person will act for both sides, but the mediator may make money  in
         the process - they could say the amount was 1.5 million  LKR,  when
         in fact the original price was 1 million, and keep the balance.  It
         is also very likely that people  higher  up  in  command  may  also
         receive a cut of the bribe money. The money is deposited  into  the
         'guard's bank account."

19. As to whether or not reporting conditions are set for people who  leave
    detention it reads at 8.1.19:

         "People who leave detention on a bribe  do  not  report  when  they
         leave".

20. The point is taken that the document relied upon by  the  Secretary  of
    State was selective because at 8.1.22 it reads:

         "People returning from the UK with a previous LTTE connection would
         be subject to torture and harassment and  their  families  will  be
         harassed, particularly if there is no male present".

21. What I note however is that the Appellant's bundle did contain selected
    passages such that paragraph 8.1.22 was not included.  That  particular
    passage referred to in the grounds 8.1.22 was not before the Judge that
    is clear from the Home Office bundle which is paginated in a  way  that
    demonstrates that that was the case.

22. On that point Ms Kenny for the Secretary of State submitted that it was
    open to the Appellant to submit  evidence  to  rebut  the  Home  Office
    evidence which was being submitted for the purpose of dealing with  the
    question of the bribe not for the issue of whether  a  person  with  an
    LTTE connection would be  subject  to  torture  or  harassment  etc  on
    return.

23. Certain it is that the Judge cannot be criticised for not having regard
    to evidence that was not put before her. There is no suggestion in  the
    grounds nor indeed in the Decision and Reasons that any point was taken
    by the Appellant at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    respect to the requirement for the Respondent to produce the  whole  of
    the document relied upon nor any application to  produce  upon  by  the
    Appellant the rest of that evidence.

24. The final point in the grounds relates to paragraph 77 in which  it  is
    said that the First-tier Tribunal failed to make any  findings  on  the
    evidence from the Appellant's father,  set  out  in  a  letter  in  the
    Appellant's bundle, which letter in the grounds was said only  to  have
    had passing mention of paragraph 77 of the Decision  and  Reasons  what
    the reference at paragraph 77 of the Decision and Reasons shows however
    is that the Judge did read that letter.

25. At paragraph 12 of VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 McCombe LJ said:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect, that is
         no basis on which to  sustain  a  proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact ...".

26. The basis for challenge was considered, helpfully  in  the  case  of  R
    (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 the factors that I should bear  in  mind  in
    summary are set at paragraph 9 of that case and they are as follows:

         "i)  Making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
         that were material to the outcome;

         ii)  Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
         on material matters;

         iii) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact
         or opinion on material matters;

         iv)  Giving weight to immaterial matters;

         v)   Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         vi)  Committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
         capable of making a material  difference  to  the  outcome  or  the
         fairness of the proceedings;

         vii) Making a  mistake  as  to  a  material  fact  which  could  be
         established by objective  and  uncontentious  evidence,  where  the
         appellant and/or his advisers were not responsible for the mistake,
         and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a  mistake  was
         made".

27. It is the point taken at paragraph 7 of  the  grounds  under  ground  2
    which  in  my  judgment  means  that  this   decision   cannot   stand,
    notwithstanding the observations  I  have  made  above  concerning  the
    willingness on the part of some representatives to tease out errors  of
    fact. The  Judge  appears  to  have  come  to  conclusions  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility before consideration of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence. That is clearly an error of law, though  there  was,  as  was
    pointed out in the grounds, no sufficient consideration before making a
    finding on the Appellant's credibility of the impact of the Appellant's
    father's evidence nor did the  Judge  stand  back  from  rejecting  the
    letter of the MP to see where she was left.

28. If no weight was to be attached to the letter of the  MP  then  it  was
    still incumbent upon the Judge to look at the core of  the  Appellant's
    account as given  from  the  initial  screening  interview;  subsequent
    interview; and other evidence and apply the lower  standard.  Add  into
    the mix those concerns raised in the grounds about there being, on  one
    view, no inconsistency between being called and actually not attending.
    (I recognise the inconsistency upon which considerable  weight  appears
    to have been given by the Judge at paragraph 73 in which the Member  of
    Parliament appears to be reporting that the  Appellant  did  return  to
    answer to his "bail" conditions). Notwithstanding that, for the reasons
    I have stated the decision is flawed and must be set aside.

29. I have considered whether it is possible to remake to the decision, but
    it seems to me that it is beyond repair such that it will  need  to  be
    reheard before a Judge other than Judge Henderson at North Shields.



Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  error  of  law.  The
decision is set  aside  to  be  remade  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Henderson.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 27 February 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker








