
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/13293/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 September 2018                    |On 01 November 2018                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    m n a
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Secretary of State

Representation:

For the Claimant: Ms Pollard, Counsel
For the Secretary of State:     Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal I refer to the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal
    as the Claimant and the Respondent before the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State. The  Claimant  is  a  national  of  Iraq.   The
    Secretary of State refused his application for asylum and  humanitarian
    protection in a decision letter dated 1 December 2017.   The  Secretary
    of State also decided that he failed to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the basis of his  family  life
    or private life in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Claimant appealed the Secretary of State's decision and his  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge B Lloyd, who in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 21 February 2018 dismissed his appeal on  asylum
    grounds and allowed his appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  and
    Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

3.   The Secretary of State then sought permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge  Lloyd  and  permission  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Froom who  concluded  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    decision lacked adequate reasoning as to why, having found the Claimant
    had fabricated a claim to be at risk of honour killing, the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge nonetheless accepted his claim to have lost  touch  with
    his family. Any such error was material to the question of whether  the
    Claimant could obtain a CSID and access support on return to Iraq.

4.   The Claimant was also granted permission to appeal  on  a  cross-appeal
    by C M G Ockelton, Vice President of the Upper Tribunal, on  the  point
    made in his grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  perverse
    finding that his hometown was seemingly  agreed  as  a  "non-contested"
    area. It is argued in the grounds  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    contended that the Claimant's home area was non-contested and  most  of
    the submissions at the hearing centred on the Claimant's case  that  it
    was contested.

The Grounds for the Secretary of State

5.   In brief, the grounds allege that the First-tier Tribunal, in  allowing
    the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons why the Claimant had discharged the burden of proof in
    the light of the case law. The Tribunal's findings  that  the  Claimant
    was unlikely to be able to obtain a CSID due to lack of support or  any
    family, it is argued, are inadequately reasoned in  the  light  of  the
    fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Claimant   had
    fabricated his account. Further,  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ignored the cogent evidence that  the  security  situation  in
    Iraq had improved and that indiscriminate violence against citizens did
    not meet the Article 15 (c) threshold. It is argued that the First-tier
    Tribunal's findings were contradictory and the  finding  that  internal
    flight was not feasible on the basis that he had no family or  sponsor,
    did not have the relevant paperwork or CSID  or  could  not  return  to
    Baghdad or the IKR as this would be unduly harsh, was at odds with  the
    background evidence. It is said that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    adequately explain why the Claimant could not get CSID on the objective
    evidence alone. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to
    consider that the Claimant could reasonably attend the Iraq embassy  in
    the UK and attempt to obtain a CSID or  alternatively  at  the  CSA  or
    national court in Baghdad. In conclusion, it is submitted that  as  the
    Claimant had been found not to be credible, there was no reason why  he
    could not return to Iraq as he did not fall within any particular group
    at risk of harm under the Refugee Convention nor had he discharged  his
    burden of proof in respect of this humanitarian protection claim.

The Grounds for the Claimant

6.   The Claimant  argues  that  the  Judge  erred  in  accepting  that  the
    Claimant's home was not a contested area in the absence of any  finding
    to this effect because this was a matter in issue between the  parties.
    The Secretary  of  State  accepted  in  the  refusal  letter  that  the
    Claimant's home town was within  Kirkuk,  a  contested  area,  and  had
    argued in the refusal letter that the country guidance  in  respect  of
    Kirkuk being a contested  area  should  be  departed  from.  The  Judge
    clearly was unaware that  this  was  a  matter  in  issue  between  the
    parties.

The Hearing

7.   The appeal therefore  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    determine whether there was an error of law in the  decision  of  Judge
    Lloyd and if so whether to set that decision aside.

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Howells amplified  on
    the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State was  entitled  to  know  why  the  Judge  completely
    disbelieved  the  Claimant's  account  and  found  that  it  had   been
    fabricated and yet gave no reasons why he accepted  that  the  Claimant
    was no longer in contact with his family. In  circumstances  where  the
    Judge made adverse findings in relation to the claim  that  he  was  at
    risk of an honour killing and found that  the  Claimant  had  tried  to
    mislead the Secretary of State and the Tribunal by fabricating his case
    it was all the more important that reasons should have been  given  for
    accepting his claim to have lost contact with his family. Arguably  the
    findings were irrational because no reliance could  be  placed  on  the
    Claimant's claim that he had lost contact with his  family.  The  Judge
    should have been mindful that an Iraqi who  made  a  fabricated  asylum
    claim might also find it convenient to fabricate his claim in  relation
    to his contact with his relatives. The error was  material  because  it
    related to his returnability and also because infected his findings  in
    subsequent paragraphs namely 53, 54, 56  and  59.  The  Judge  did  not
    consider the steps he  had  taken  obtain  a  CSID  and  therefore  his
    conclusion at paragraph 52 was flawed. He did not consider that a power
    of attorney could be provided to obtain a CSID.

9.   Miss Pollard submitted that when looking  at  the  determination  as  a
    whole adequate reasons were provided. The Judge heard evidence and  was
    best placed to say what he accepted. Even based on the summary  of  the
    evidence, there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  make  the  findings  in
    relation to his family. At paragraph 50 the Judge accepted that he  was
    not in possession of a passport and accepted that he  did  not  have  a
    CSID and was not in contact with his family. There were  references  to
    the fact that due to the distance of time he would have ceased to  have
    contact with his family and references to attacks in Kirkuk. The  Judge
    was entitled to accept some evidence and reject other evidence. It  was
    important that at paragraph 28 he specifically considered the fact that
    the Secretary of State took issue with the Claimant's  credibility.  He
    accepted that the Claimant had to travel across Europe and  noted  that
    there was no evidence to undermine the assertion  that  he  had  no  ID
    documents. The Judge was entitled to find  there  was  no  evidence  to
    undermine the Claimant's assertion in relation to  this  and  to  infer
    from the fact that he left in July 2015 that he no longer  had  contact
    with his family. It was not speculative or  inadequately  reasoned  but
    was based on evidence provided by the  Claimant.  The  Judge  noted  at
    paragraph 35 of the decision that he had taken all  the  evidence  into
    account and one was entitled to infer that he  had  read  the  evidence
    including the objective evidence on  an  attack  in  Kirkuk  which  was
    consistent with the Claimant's account. He was entitled  to  infer  and
    accept that this attack would have contributed to the  Claimant  losing
    contact with  his  family.  The  Judge  considered  the  whole  process
    required to obtain a CSID in accordance with AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ
    944. The Judge carried out  a  clear  consideration  of  the  objective
    position. It was important that he did not state that the Claimant  was
    unable to go to his home governorate but that it was likely to  present
    him with some difficulty. The Secretary of State was wrong  to  say  at
    paragraph 7 of the grounds that the Judge concluded  he  could  not  go
    there because that is not what he found. He found as a  result  of  the
    deficiencies of knowledge in the country  guidance  that  the  Claimant
    could not do this. After  finding  that  the  Claimant  had  no  formal
    documentation he did not need to consider whether he should go  to  the
    UK Iraqi embassy because he had no access  to  instruct  a  proxy.  The
    Judge had properly considered AA and applied it to the facts.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal found that Kirkuk  was  a  non-contested  area.
    This was wrong in principle as  it  was  not  in  accordance  with  AA.
    However, whether it was contested or not  had  limited  impact  on  the
    considerations in the appeal. Regardless of whether it was contested or
    not the First-tier Tribunal's findings still stood.

11.  In relation to the issues surrounding  relocation  the  Judge  properly
    considered all of the factors in AA and looked at whether the  Claimant
    could avoid undue harshness. It was submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal
    could make the decision that it was a contested area and in  accordance
    with paragraph 12 of the skeleton  there  were  no  strong  grounds  to
    depart from AA. Even if the Judge erred in law in finding that it was a
    non-contested area it did not  stop  the  Claimant  succeeding  in  his
    claim. It was important that it was the Secretary of State's case  that
    it was a non-contested area but that it was not  a  viable  option  for
    return and it was suggested he could be returned to the KRI. Therefore,
    the Secretary of State could not go behind  that  proposition  and  the
    Claimant could only safely return to the KRI. Return to Kirkuk was  not
    put before the Judge. Secondly,  in  relation  to  its  impact  on  the
    Claimant's ability to obtain a CSID, the First-tier  tribunal  did  not
    find he could not get one because he could not go  to  his  office  but
    considered that he could go to that office but would be unable  to  get
    one due to the absence of a network. She  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    reasoning in relation to the Claimant's inability to obtain a CSID  and
    the unreasonableness of return was good. She asked me  to  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal and to remake the decision in  relation  to
    the cross-appeal.

12.  Mr Howells replied that at paragraph 47 of the decision the Judge  gave
    no reason as to why he accepted that the Claimant  did  not  have  easy
    access to family network. It should not be  for  the  reader  to  infer
    reasoning. It should be clear. The contrast between  his  two  sets  of
    findings made it more important that the  reasoning  should  be  clear.
    Just because there was an attack in Kirkuk did not mean that one  could
    infer from this that the Judge considered that this was  the  cause  of
    the loss of contact. If the Claimant  did  have  contact  it  would  be
    easier for him to obtain a CSID. It was a key  issue.  In  relation  to
    whether Kirkuk was a contested area,  the  Judge's  findings  could  be
    clearer and it was rather unclear from the  determination  whether  the
    Judge found that the Claimant's area was contested or not. At paragraph
    58 he seemed to say that the Claimant had no claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and was not at Article 15 C risk. If that was the  case,  he
    had no need to consider relocation unless there was a risk in his  home
    area. He made reference to the IKR as if it was a place of  relocation.
    It was an additional reason why the decision should be  set  aside  and
    listed for a de novo hearing. He  asked  me  to  preserve  the  adverse
    findings in relation to the honour killing. The other issue  should  be
    the subject of a further hearing.

13.  Miss Pollard replied that at no point had the Secretary of  State  said
    that he could be safely return to Kirkuk and the Judge  had  considered
    the case in accordance with the Secretary of State's position. He could
    not be criticised  for  determining  the  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    Secretary of State's position. It was the Secretary of State's position
    that he could only be returned to the KRI. With regard to the Secretary
    of State's point that he should have a de novo hearing only in relation
    to the humanitarian protection ground she submitted that if it  was  to
    be a de novo hearing it should be in relation to the  entirety  of  the
    Claimant's claim.

Discussion

14.  I deal firstly with  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.  It  was  the
    Claimant's case that he would be at risk on return to  Iraq  due  to  a
    threatened honour killing arising out of his relationship with a  young
    woman. The First-tier Tribunal's findings in relation to this claim are
    at paragraphs 43 to 46. The Judge found, at paragraph 44 and 45:

    "44. He has given what I believe is a speculatively prepared story that
    is full of inconsistencies and which has  been  composed  purely  as  a
    means of supporting an otherwise un-meritorious asylum claim.


    45. I do not believe that it is credible that  his  family  would  have
    proposed his marriage to a girl whom he had little more  than  seen  in
    the street and of whose family they had no knowledge at all".

15.  The Judge found that the relationship  between  the  Claimant  and  the
    young woman was not genuine and that he was not at risk  of  an  honour
    killing. The Judge then addressed the issue of whether or not he  would
    have access to  a  family  network  in  Kirkuk.  This  was  clearly  of
    relevance  to  the  Claimant's  ability  to  obtain  a  CSID  and   his
    returnability.

16.  The Judge found at paragraph 47:

     "I tend to believe, however, applying  the  lower  standard  of  proof,
    that he does not have any or any easy access to  a  family  network  in
    Kirkuk. That leads me to consider the findings  I  should  make  as  to
    whether he can be safely return to Iraq given his accepted status as  a
    Kurd from Kirkuk. That  will  present  critical  difficulties  for  the
    Claimant's return, some three years after leaving Iraq and  his  onward
    journey to the UK under the control of an agent."

17.  I have considered all of  the  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant in  the  Rule  24  response,  the  skeleton  argument  and  in
    submissions. Whilst it is of course not  an  error  of  law  to  accept
    aspects of an individual's evidence and disregard others,  it  is  also
    trite law that adequate reasons must be  given  for  material  findings
    such that each party knows why it  has  won  or  lost.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraph 31 set out the Claimant's evidence in relation to
    his claim in relation to his contact with his family. The  Judge  noted
    that the Claimant claimed that his family did not  have  mobile  phones
    but that he had been in contact with them until relatively recently. He
    recorded the Claimant's evidence that he had not heard from his  family
    since there was an attack on Kirkuk on  16  October  2017.  He  further
    noted his evidence that he had no friends remaining Iraq and was not in
    contact with anyone in his home country now.

18.  The issue of whether or not  the  Claimant  was  in  contact  with  his
    family was clearly a material  one  because,  as  the  Judge  noted  at
    paragraph 55 of the decision, a CSID was required by an Iraqi  national
    to  access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,  employment,
    education, housing and medical treatment.  Further,  the  Secretary  of
    State acknowledged in principle that if there was no  family  or  other
    members likely to be able to provide a means of support  and  applicant
    was in general likely to face a real risk of destitution  amounting  to
    serious harm if by the time any funds provided to him by the  Secretary
    of State to assist his return had been exhausted and it was  reasonably
    likely that he still would have no CSID. At  paragraph  62,  the  Judge
    found that there was no evidence that the Claimant  would  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID on return.

19.  It is clear from the  decision  that  the  Judge  wholly  rejected  the
    Claimant's account in relation to the core of his claim to be at  risk,
    such that he found that it was  a  complete  fabrication.  However,  in
    paragraph 47, the Judge gave no reasons why he found that the  Claimant
    would not have any access to his family network in Kirkuk. It cannot be
    inferred from the  fact  that  the  Judge  recorded  that  it  was  the
    Claimant's evidence that there was an attack on Kirkuk in October  2017
    that he concluded this was the reason the Claimant did not have contact
    with his family. In view of the fact that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Claimant had given a fabricated account it was all the  more  incumbent
    on him to give clear reasons why he accepted that the Claimant  was  no
    longer in contact with his family. In the  circumstances,  I  therefore
    find that the Judge gave inadequate reasons in relation to  a  material
    matter, as these findings led to his conclusion at  paragraph  63  that
    the Claimant would be at risk of serious harm  on  return.  It  follows
    therefore that the Secretary of State succeeds in his appeal.

20.  I also find that the Judge erred in law in  failing  to  determine  the
    matter in issue between  the  parties,  namely  whether  Kirkuk  was  a
    contested area for the purposes of Article 15 (c) of the  Qualification
    Direction. He states at paragraph 48 that  his  home  area  is  a  non-
    contested area. In so doing he failed to consider  whether  there  were
    very strong ground supported by cogent evidence for departing from  the
    conclusions in AA that Kirkuk was a contested area (SG  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940.

21.  In the circumstances I find that the decision that the Claimant  should
    be granted humanitarian protection must be  set  aside.  There  was  no
    cross-appeal in relation to the asylum decision and consequently  those
    findings must stand.  I have had  regard  to  Ortega  (remittal;  bias;
    parental relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC).  In the  light  of  the
    fact finding required in relation  to  the  Claimant's  entitlement  to
    humanitarian protection in accordance with part  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement  I  remit  this  matter  for  a  hearing  to  determine   the
    Appellant's claim for humanitarian protection before a Judge other than
    Judge B Lloyd.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the Claimant's  claim
to humanitarian protection contained a material error of law and  I  set  it
aside.  The dismissal of the asylum claim stands.

I remit this matter for a hearing to determine  the  Appellant's  claim  for
humanitarian protection before a Judge other than Judge B Lloyd.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

