
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:    |
|On 29 July 2019                    |On 21st August 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      Z
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from  a  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal)  which  it  made  on  11
         February 2019 following a hearing of 4 February 2019. The tribunal
         decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal  from  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision of  13  November  2018,  refusing  to  grant  him
         international protection.

      2. Although the tribunal did not grant the claimant anonymity I  have
         decided to do so.

      3. The claimant has given his date of  birth  as  1  April  1991.  He
         claims to be a national of Iran. He is Kurdish. He says  he  is  a
         Sunni Muslim. He speaks Kurdish Sorani and also  claims  to  speak
         Farsi. The tribunal (unusually) did  not  set  out  the  claimants
         immigration history and the paperwork in front of me  is  somewhat
         confused and contradictory as to that. But  it  appears  that  the
         claimant has  indicated  that,  having  left  Iran,  he  travelled
         through Turkey and Greece before arriving in Croatia where he  was
         detained. He says that, whilst there, he asked that he be sent  to
         Iraq (despite saying that he is a national  of  Iran)  because  he
         feared being sent to Iran. He says that having secured some  false
         documents he was able to go from Croatia to Iraq before  departing
         that country and making his way to the United Kingdom. In claiming
         asylum, the claimant said that he  had  become  involved  with  an
         oppositionist pro-Kurdish group in Iran, that he  had  distributed
         leaflets for that group, that his family  home  was  raided  as  a
         result, that leaflets kept at his  home  were  discovered  by  the
         authorities, that his  father  was  arrested  albeit  subsequently
         released,  and  that  he  will  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
         authorities if he is returned to Iran.

4.    The Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant  had  given  a
truthful account of events and did not even accept that the  claimant  is  a
national of Iran. As to all of that, the Secretary  of  State  set  out  his
position in a decision letter of 13 November 2018. In that  decision  letter
the Secretary of State identified  what  he  perceived  to  be  elements  of
inconsistency in the account. As to  nationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
expressed  the  view  that  the  claimant  had,  when   interviewed,   given
inaccurate or incorrect information  about  Iran.  The  Secretary  of  State
clearly took the view that there was a likelihood that the claimant  is,  in
fact, a national of Iraq but did not actually  assert,  in  terms,  that  he
thought that to be the case. But it is clear  Iranian  nationality  was  not
accepted.

5.    The tribunal heard the appeal on 4 February  2019.  It  received  oral
evidence from the claimant. Both parties were represented before it.  It  is
clear from what it said that it, like the Secretary of State, did  not  find
the claimant to be a witness of truth. This is what it initially had to  say
with respect to that:

    "Introduction

      1. The appellant's nationality is disputed but  he  claims  to  be  an
         Iranian citizen of Kurdish ethnicity. His date of birth is 1  April
         1991. As will become clear, the issue around his  nationality  will
         be key to the determination of this appeal.

      2. The appellant says he is a Kurd from Iran, that  he  is  illiterate
         and  that  he  was  educated  predominantly  in  Farsi.  Until  his
         involvement in  the  matter  to  which  this  appeal  relates,  the
         appellant says he had not suffered any personal difficulties  as  a
         result of his  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He  says  he  speaks  Farsi  in
         addition to Kurdish Sorani, the latter being a language spoken both
         in Iran and Iraq. Given that his claimed  Iranian  nationality  was
         disputed, it was surprising that he provided no  credible  evidence
         to show that he could speak Farsi.  He  gave  evidence  in  Kurdish
         Sorani.

      3. The issues around his nationality create a stark choice: the asylum
         claim has prospects only if he is found to be an Iranian. If he  is
         found to be an Iraqi, the claim falls away. It goes without  saying
         that establishing that he is Iranian was fundamental to his case.

      4. The appellant's account is that he worked as  a  shepherd  for  his
         father who had a herd of 50 to 60 sheep. He  was  friendly  with  a
         shopkeeper by the name of Jamal who  he  tended  to  visit  in  the
         evenings after completing his shepherding  duties.  He  says  Jamal
         spoke to him regularly of the injustices visited upon  the  Kurdish
         people by the Iranian authorities and persuaded  him  to  become  a
         supporter by helping him to collect leaflets for  distribution  and
         to distribute them, thus highlighting the Kurdish cause. He gave an
         inconsistent account of the age  that  he  got  involved  in  these
         activities ranging from 17 to 22, was  inconsistent  about  whether
         the material was  brought to him  in  the  fields  or  he  went  to
         collect it, was inconsistent  about  delivering  all  the  material
         collected to Jamal or whether, despite the dangers to  his  family,
         he retained some at home, was inconsistent about where he kept  the
         leaflets at home - in his substantive interview, he said he kept it
         under the wardrobe and in his oral evidence said he kept it between
         the bed and the mattress - and despite claiming to  be  illiterate,
         explained the discrepancy on the dates he provided  was  caused  by
         his using both the Gregorian and  Farsi  calendars  interchangeably
         during the interview  which caused the  interpreter  to  fall  into
         error. He was  asked  about  his  Shenasnameh,  the  Iranian  birth
         certificate in  his  screening  interview  to  which  his  recorded
         response was 'what is a Shenasnameh?' He has  since  said  that  he
         thought the interpreter had said 'Shenasnumber?' but did  not  seek
         to check this with the interviewer as  the  normal  response  would
         have been. The Secretary of State's version of events is  supported
         by the interview record and the fact that the  appellant  confirmed
         at the end of the screening interview that he  had  understood  all
         the questions that he had been asked. If he had had a  doubt  about
         the Shenasnameh, this was the time to raise it if  not  immediately
         after the question had been  asked.  I  am  satisfied,  taking  his
         overall credibility into account, that the appellant's response  as
         captured in the Screening interview was the response that he gave.

      5. When distributing leaflets, he, Jamal and the other person involved
         took precautions to ensure they were not caught. The appellant says
         he was conscious of not creating any danger for his family. However
         this is exactly what he did for after distributing the leaflets for
         the first time, he took the remaining leaflets home where they were
         subsequently found by the Iranian authorities. This was against all
         his evidence of the lengths he  had  gone  to  to  ensure  that  he
         delivered the leaflets that he had been given or collected to Jamal
         the same day.

      6. On the second occasion that he, Jamal and the other person went  to
         distribute leaflets, he says Jamal did not return. The  arrangement
         between them had been that if  one  did  not  return,  they  should
         assume that he had been captured and  they  should  not  return  to
         their homes. Relying on this arrangement,  the  appellant  says  he
         went to his cousin Ali's house. Ali thought it  was  too  dangerous
         for him to remain with him and sent him on further to stay with his
         mother in law.

      7. Ali worked on his family's chicken farm. The appellant's house  was
         raided and the authorities found the leaflets that he had  kept  at
         home and duly arrested his father. He was asked  what  happened  to
         his father after  his  arrest  and  at  first,  denied  having  any
         knowledge despite having been in regular contact  with  his  cousin
         Ali since the arrest and during his journeys  through  Europe.  The
         appellant changed his story when pressed and confirmed that Ali had
         told him in subsequent conversations after he had left the country,
         that his father had been detained but released and that no  further
         action had bene taken against him since, this, I add,  despite  the
         'hair-trigger' approach of the  Iranian  authorities  to  even  low
         level Kurdish activism involving even the possession  of  leaflets,
         as identified in HB (Kurds) Iran CB [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).

      8. According to the appellant, his cousin  Ali  arranged  for  him  to
         leave the country paying a large amount of money  to  an  agent  to
         enable this to  be  done.  The  appellant  was  not  party  to  the
         arrangement or how or where the money was paid over.

      9. The appellant got as far as Croatia  where  he  was  detained.  The
         appellant says he did  not  wish  to  be  sent  back  to  Iran.  He
         contacted his cousin Ali again. Apparently the other detainees  had
         told him that a Croatian man could, for $3000,  provide  papers  to
         get him into Iraq. It was not explained  how  but  Ali  managed  to
         contact the Croatian directly, paid  him  the  money  and  the  man
         turned up as a visitor to see the appellant two days later with the
         Iraqi papers which enabled him  to  leave  Croatia  for  Iraq.  The
         appellant did not say what the Iraqi papers were but in his witness
         statement identifies these as his CSID document. His account of the
         event is however inconsistent. In his  substantive  interview,  the
         account was that the man and Ali had an arrangement. In his witness
         statement, he says he was introduced to the man who assisted him in
         obtaining the CSID documents and that he had to  pay  him  for  the
         documents. There is no mention of Ali's involvement in the  witness
         statement.

     10. Following receipt of the papers, the appellant was returned without
         difficulty to the IKR. He says,  implausibly,  that  the  Croatians
         took the CSID off him. But this is a document that they would  know
         he needs to sustain himself in Iraq and it is  unlikely  that  they
         would have done  so.  Likewise,  as  it  is  clear  from  objective
         evidence, entry to the IKR can  only  be  obtained  for  those  who
         originate in the IKR whose identity has been pre-cleared  with  the
         IKR authorities in the absence of an expired or  current  passport.
         As the appellant, on his account, did not have an  Iraqi  passport,
         current or expired, he could only have been allowed  entry  on  the
         basis of his CSID and that his identity had been pre-cleared.  This
         is further confirmed by the fact that the appellant, upon  arrival,
         was allowed to leave the airport without restriction after which he
         went to seek help directly from the KDPI at their headquarters. The
         appellant says, again implausibly, that he was  maintained  by  the
         KDPI for some months until such time, that he says  he  refused  to
         become a Peshmerga. With support being withdrawn at which time,  he
         again  contacted  his  cousin  Ali  who  made  arrangement,   again
         implausible, in my judgement that someone working on a chicken farm
         in Iran would have the contacts and the very large amounts of money
         involved, to make the arrangements and make the payments  that  the
         appellant says that  Ali  was  able  to  do  remotely  with  agents
         operating in Iraq and Croatia and to be able to pay them the  large
         amounts of money  involved  almost  instantly  and  across  borders
         directly.

     11. The appellant's account that  he  was  supported  by  the  KDPI  is
         implausible. He after all had  a  CSID  that  was  accepted  to  be
         genuine. A CSID would have enable him to obtain employment,  health
         care, accommodation etc. He did not need to rely  on  the  KDPI  so
         that his reasons for leaving Iraq  do  not  stand  up  particularly
         given the enormous costs he kept putting on his cousin Ali.

     12.  As  I  hope  I  have  demonstrated,  the  appellant's  account  is
         implausible and littered with inconsistencies. He did  not  provide
         what was easily obtainable evidence to show  that  he  could  speak
         Farsi, or obtain  supportive  evidence  from  the  KDPI's  European
         office to confirm his involvement in their activities  in  Iran  or
         even evidence from someone  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  show  his
         involvement in UK KEPI activities such as  the  event  he  says  he
         attended in Manchester in January 2018. I found the  appellant  was
         not credible. I am satisfied  that  the  photographs  provided,  in
         light of his lack of credibility, are  self-serving  in  that  they
         were taken to bolster a false claim.

6.    But the tribunal did not then to go on  to  simply  say  that  it  was
dismissing the appeal in light of its adverse credibility finding. In  fact,
it moved on to consider what it thought to be  a  culpable  failure  of  the
claimant to approach the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom and  obtain  or
try to obtain documentation from it which would indicate whether  he  is  or
whether he is not a national of Iraq. In concluding that  the  claimant  was
essentially obliged to make such an attempt, it relied upon  what  had  been
said in MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289. This is what it  said  about  all
of that.

    "13.   However, this is not the  primary  reason  for  my  decision.  I
         mention it to put things in context  and  to  illustrate  that  the
         appellant is not credible. In arriving at this conclusion,  I  have
         not ignored the points identified by Mr Sills in his submission but
         despite the low civil standard involved, they  do  not  affect  the
         overall conclusion that  I  have  come  to.  The  main  reason,  in
         addition to his lack of credibility that his appeal fails  is  that
         he is not Iranian as he claims.

    14.    He came to the United Kingdom form Iraq. The Secretary of  State
         says he is Iraqi. The appellant says he is not  Iraqi.  As  against
         that contention is the fact that he has a CSID which  was  accepted
         as genuine by the Iraqi authorities and on the basis  of  which  he
         was able to be returned to the IKR  where,  upon  arrival,  he  was
         allowed to leave the airport and do as he wished. He says the  CSID
         he obtained was false. Given my view of his credibility, I  do  not
         accept that - not least because  it  is  implausible  that  a  fake
         document created within two days would have managed to dupe not one
         but two national authorities, those from Croatia and  the  IKR.  Be
         that as it may, even if what he says is true, all he had to do  was
         to attend at the Iraqi embassy in the United  Kingdom  and  make  a
         bona fide application and take all reasonably  practical  steps  to
         try to obtain Iraqi nationality papers in  line  with  the  process
         identified in MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289 to show that he was
         unable to do so and that therefore he was no6t an Iraqi. Neither he
         nor his family face a persecutory  risk  in  Iraq  as  he  has  not
         identified any. As the Court of Appeal said at [51]

             "there is no injustice to the appellant in this  approach:  it
             does not put her at risk. The real risk  test  is  adopted  in
             asylum cases because of the difficulty of predicting what will
             happen in the future  in  another  country,  and  because  the
             consequences of reaching the wrong decision will often  be  so
             serious for the applicant. That is not the case  here.  As  Ms
             Giovannetti pointed out, there is no risk of ill treatment  if
             an application to the embassy is made from the United Kingdom,
             even if it is refused"

         And at [79]

             "... there may be  cases  in  which  the  application  to  the
             foreign embassy may put relatives or friends who  are  in  the
             country of origin at risk of harm. If here is a real risk that
             they will suffer harm as a result of such an  application,  it
             would not be reasonable for the person claiming asylum to have
             to make it". The present is not such a case.

    15.    There is no reason why the  appellant  could  not  himself  have
         visited the embassy to seek to obtain the relevant  papers  and  no
         explanation has been put forward as to why he was not able to do so
         or that if was unreasonable to expect him to do so. As the court of
         appeal said at [52],

             "this approach to the issue of return is  entirely  consistent
             with the well-established principle that, before an  applicant
             for asylum can claim the protection of a surrogate  state,  he
             or she must first take all steps to secure protection from the
             home state"

    16.    And at [53]

             "it would be strange if by the appellant's wilful inaction she
             could prevent the Tribunal from having the best evidence there
             is of the state's attitude to her return".

    17.    There is no evidence that  the  appellant  has  been  unable  to
         obtain Iraqi papers, let alone evidence that he is unable to do  so
         for Convention reasons.

    18.    The appellant has not shown on a balance of probabilities,  that
         is to say, the standard established in MA, that  he  has  not  been
         able to obtain Iraqi travel documents thereby  giving  credence  to
         his evidence that he is an Iranian national. Refugee status is  not
         a matter of choice. A person cannot be entitled to  refugee  status
         solely because he or she refuses to  make  an  application  to  her
         embassy, or refuses or fails to take  reasonable  steps  to  obtain
         recognition and evidence of their nationality. In the circumstances
         I am not satisfied that the appellant is  an  Iraqi  national.  The
         persecutory risk that he has identified does not  therefore  arise.
         If it turns out  that  he  cannot  obtain  papers  from  the  Iraqi
         embassy, he can make a fresh claim based on  the  refusal  provided
         that he has taken all reasonably practical steps  to  make  a  bona
         fide application for them. Telling the Iraqi  embassy  that  he  is
         Iranian will undermine the requirement that  he  has  a  bona  fide
         application."

7.    The appeal having been dismissed, an  application  for  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal followed. The grounds of  appeal  (I  summarise
and truncate) provided to the Upper Tribunal may be summarised as follows:

    Ground 1 -  The  tribunal  had  misunderstood  MA  (Ethiopia)  and,  in
    consequence, had failed to appreciate that the principles  set  out  in
    that judgment only apply "when an individual is not recognised by their
    country of nationality". So, it had wrongly applied that judgement  and
    had, in consequence,  wrongly  thought  the  claimant  was  obliged  to
    approach the Iraqi embassy to obtain evidence that he is not  an  Iraqi
    national.

    Ground 2 - even if the above is  not  correct,  the  tribunal  had  not
    raised an issue regarding the lack of any approach to the Iraqi embassy
    at the hearing. In those circumstances it was procedurally  unfair  for
    it to subsequently rely upon the claimant's  failure  to  approach  the
    Iraqi embassy.

    Ground 3 - the tribunal had, with respect  to  credibility,  failed  to
    take a structured approach such that its conclusions as  to  that  were
    "unclear and the reasons inadequate".

8.    Although not a ground as such, it was  contended  that  if  error  had
been made with respect to the application of MA (Ethiopia) or  the  fairness
of relying upon it, such  would  necessarily  be  material  because  of  the
tribunal's own indication that its view as to that was  the  basis  for  its
decision.

9.    A careful and quite detailed grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal followed. That grant was unlimited.  Permission  having  been
granted the case was listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before
me) so that it could be decided whether the tribunal had erred in  law  and,
if it had, what should flow from that. Representation at  that  hearing  was
as stated above and I am grateful to each representative. I have taken  full
account of what was said by the representatives in  deciding  the  error  of
law issue. I have concluded, though, that the tribunal  did  not  materially
err in law. What follows is my explanation as to why.

10.   Mr Hussain argued that there was merit in the view (though he had  not
drafted the  grounds)  that  MA  was  only  applicable  in  cases  involving
deprivation of nationality. But he did not seek to take  the  point  further
than had the written grounds. In any event, although the  contention  is  an
interesting one, it has not been necessary for me to decide it.

11.   Mr Hussain argued that there had, indeed, been  procedural  unfairness
whatever view ought to be taken as  to  what  the  principles  were  in  MA,
through the failure of the tribunal to indicate that  it  was  contemplating
taking a point against the claimant in consequence of a failure to  approach
the Iraqi embassy. Mrs Pettersen, did not, in fact, make a  serious  attempt
to dissuade me from that view. I note that the Secretary of  State,  in  his
detailed written decision of 13 November 2018, did not take a point  against
the claimant through his not approaching the  Iraqi  embassy.  There  is  an
argument to say that the claimant's own representatives should have  advised
the claimant  to  approach  the  embassy  anyway,  given  the  quite  strong
indication in the Secretary of State's written reasons that he  thought  the
claimant probably was Iraqi. Indeed, Mr  Hussain  very  fairly  acknowledged
that there might be some merit to that argument. I have hesitated over  that
but, in the end, I have concluded that given the absence  of  any  reference
to MA and the absence of any suggestion that the claimant  might  have  been
under a duty to approach the Iraqi embassy,  there  was  unfairness  in  the
tribunal taking the  point  without,  at  least,  making  it  clear  to  the
parties, at the hearing, that it was contemplating doing  so,  and  inviting
views as to whether, in those circumstances, it might be fair to adjourn  in
order to give the claimant an opportunity either to  make  the  approach  to
the embassy or to deal with what would have been, if raised,  a  new  issue.
So, I would conclude that the tribunal did, in that respect, err in law.  It
matters not whether MA is limited in its application to the extent that  the
claimant says it is because error with respect to MA is made out  anyway  on
the procedural unfairness basis.

  12. The next point I have had to consider is whether or not  the  error  I
      have identified is a material one. That was a  point  which  I  raised
      with Mr Hussain and which he had  clearly  anticipated  I  might.  His
      argument as to that was to the effect that the tribunal's  credibility
      assessment (excluding what it had to say about MA) was  thin.  It  was
      only encapsulated, argued Mr Hussain, at paragraphs 12 and 13  of  the
      written reasons. However, I am not able to agree with that submission.
      I have set out, above, what the tribunal had to  say  in  the  passage
      from paragraph 1 to paragraph 12 of its written reasons. There  are  a
      number of different credibility concerns set out there.  Whatever  the
      tribunal itself might have thought as to what was the  most  important
      basis for its dismissing the appeal, that credibility assessment  was,
      on any view, careful, thorough and substantial.

13.   There is then the criticism in the written grounds to the effect  that
the credibility assessment was unclear and inadequate. But that argument  is
barely developed in the written grounds and was not developed before me.  It
is right to say, though, that the tribunal did set out a number  of  adverse
credibility points under the heading "Background to the case".  That  is  an
unusual and potentially confusing way of doing things. Ordinarily one  would
expect to see, under such a heading, agreed facts  and  an  account  of  the
claim for international protection as it had been put. But I  have  to  look
at the substance  of  the  written  reasons.  It  is  clear  that  in  fact,
notwithstanding the heading it had chosen to use, it  was  carrying  out  an
evaluation as to the truth or otherwise of  the  account  which  underpinned
the claimant's application for international protection. There  is  to  some
extent, as the grounds suggest,  a  mixing  of  "recitation  of  facts  with
comments and criticisms" but it is, nevertheless, clear  that  the  tribunal
was disbelieving key aspects of the account and  it  is  clear  why  it  was
doing so. I base that conclusion on  what  was  said  from  paragraph  1  to
paragraph 12 of the written reasons.

14.   There is then the point, again made in the written grounds,  that  the
tribunal itself had highlighted the importance of its view with  respect  to
the applicability of MA. Having said what it had to say at paragraphs  1  to
12 of its written reasons it did immediately say  that  that  was  "not  the
primary reason" for its decision, before going on to say what it  did  about
MA  and  what  it  thought  to  be  the  considerable  significance  of  the
claimant's failure to approach the Iraqi  embassy.  But,  nevertheless,  the
tribunal's adverse credibility assessment, ending at paragraph 12,  was,  in
my judgment, legally sound. It had concluded, by the end  of  paragraph  12,
that the claimant had made a false claim and the tribunal had  reached  that
view, on my reading, prior to its considering the failure  to  approach  the
Iraqi embassy. So, I would reject  any  argument  to  the  effect  that  the
failure to approach  the  embassy  was  an  integral  part  of  the  overall
credibility  assessment.  In  truth,  notwithstanding  the  MA  point,   the
tribunal had given other clear reasons as to why  it  did  not  believe  the
claimant. Those reasons were open to it and have been adequately  explained.
That disbelief, of itself, meant the claimant did not make out his claim.

15.   Finally, Mr  Hussain  sought  to  argue  that  the  tribunal  had  not
properly considered the question of whether or not the claimant still had  a
CSID card. That is an important identity document in the  context  of  Iraqi
returnees. The point had not been taken in the written grounds but,  in  any
event, the claimant's  application  for  international  protection  and  his
appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been put on the basis that he  is  Iranian.
The tribunal, correctly, dealt with the appeal before it on that basis.  His
claim and never been put on the basis that he is Iraqi and without  identity
documents.

16.   For all of the above  reasons  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed. That is because although the tribunal  erred  in  law
it did not materially do so.



Decision

The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I grant  the  claimant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  Accordingly,  no  report  of  these
proceedings shall identify the claimant or any member of  his  family.  This
grant applies to all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


      Signed

                             M R Hemingway
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal

      Dated                               14 August 2019

