
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13505/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                                         Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 01 October 2018                                                On 31
October 2018


                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR R.Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Candola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1
    January 1995. I shall however for sake  of  convenience  refer  to  the
    parties as they were referred to, at the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ruth dated 25 June 2018  from  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian protection in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the first-tier  Tribunal
    Kelly on 13 July 2018 stating that it is arguable that the Judge having
    found at paragraph 60 that the appellant faces no risk of harm from the
    Taliban in Kabul, would be unable  to  benefit  from  the  process  for
    formal reconciliation with the Afghan authorities.

    First-Tier Tribunal's Findings

 4. The First-tier Tribunal's findings were as follows which  I  summarise.
    The appellant's claim is that  he  was  born  and  grew  up  in  Kundus
    province where he  lived  with  his  parents,  four  brothers  and  two
    sisters. The appellant's father had been a farmer but also worked as an
    intelligence operative for the Taliban and was known in the local  area
    as Mullah Nasrullah. After the Taliban were defeated his father fled to
    the southern provinces and the appellant and his family  members  moved
    in with an uncle in a different part of Kundus province and lived  with
    him, his wife and children.

 5. The appellant helped him on the farm and had no problems until 2008. In
    the first part of  2008  the  appellant  was  informed  that  his  four
    brothers had been kidnapped and he believed it was by the  Taliban  and
    the kidnappers asked for the appellant,  saying  that  they  would  not
    spare him because he was his father's son. One of  his  brother's  body
    was found strangled with a wire. After the funeral  the  appellant  was
    driven to an unknown city where he remained for around  two  weeks  and
    then travelled for two months with a neighbour until  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The  respondent  alludes  to  many  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence which shows that  he  is  not  a  witness  of  truth  but  his
    representative, asks that I consider  these  discrepancies  within  the
    context of his youth as he was only 12 years old at the time.

 7. The material  and  central  discrepancy  which  arose  is  whether  the
    appellant had ever previously mentioned the men who attacked his family
    home were from the Taliban. The appellant maintained  although  he  did
    not know for certain, but  he  believes  they  were  from  the  Taliban
    because of  his  father's  involvement  in  that  organisation  and  an
    argument between his mother and father as to whether the appellant  and
    his siblings should similarly become involved with the Taliban.

 8. The Judge considered Dr  Guistozzi's  expert  report  and  the  overall
    evidence and found that the appellant has consistently maintained  that
    although he does not know who the alleged attackers were,  he  believed
    them to be from the Taliban, because there  had  been  a  long-standing
    disagreement between his parents as to  whether  he  and  his  siblings
    should  follow  their  father's  involvement  with  the  Taliban.   The
    appellant was 13 years of age when he arrived in the United Kingdom and
    therefore it not expected that he would have a perfect understanding of
    the events and provide a perfectly consistent description as  his  age.
    In fact, having read the interview record  and  his  initial  statement
    each of his subsequent statements reveals that the appellant's  account
    as being appropriately coherent, consistent and detailed,  despite  his
    age at the time, at each point.

 9. The appellant's evidence is accepted that unknown armed men raided  his
    family home in 2008, killed his brother and that  his  three  remaining
    brothers have since disappeared. He believes that the raid was  carried
    out by members of the Taliban, whereas  Dr  Guistozzi  in  his  reports
    considers it may have been carried out by anti-Taliban militia  aligned
    with  the  authorities,  taking  revenge  because  of  the  appellant's
    father's role in the Taliban. It is however not  necessary  to  resolve
    this question as to whether it was the Taliban or militia  because  the
    respondent clearly states that the areas controlled by armed  militias,
    the Afghan State will be unable to  provide  effective  protection  and
    that in other districts the authorities will  generally  be  unable  to
    offer an effective protection.

10. Taking into account all the evidence  and  the  respondent's  own  view
    about effective protection in contested areas there remains a real risk
    to the appellant of being targeted by armed groups  in  his  home  area
    whether it is  by  the  Taliban  are  by  government  linked  militias.
    Therefore, the appellant faces risk of harm of  sufficient  seriousness
    to amount to persecution, including a risk of death.

11. In respect of possible relocation to Kabul, the  Judge  considered  the
    country guidance case of AS. The Judge found that the appellant will be
    of low-level interest to the Taliban in Kabul as he will not be at real
    risk from the Taliban in Kabul.

12. The Judge stated that the expert report of Dr Guistozzi states that  if
    the appellant was to be detained by the Afghan authorities  because  of
    his family links to the Taliban, he would be at high  risk  of  various
    forms of abuses at the  hands  of  the  security  services.  The  Judge
    concluded that the appellant has discharged  the  burden  upon  him  to
    demonstrate a real risk of lack of safety in Kabul.

    The Grounds of Appeal

13. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The  Judge
    found that the appellant being a son of a Taliban commander would be at
    risk from the Afghan authorities if he was to relocate  to  Kabul.  The
    Judge placed a lot of reliance on to expert report of Dr  Guistozzi,  a
    recognised expert on Afghanistan. The background evidence  states  that
    even though they are  confirmed  incidences  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
    detention alongside numerous appearances attributed to Afghan  security
    forces with an overall lack of accountability, it does not mention that
    family  members  of  the  Taliban  are  routinely   targeted   by   the
    authorities. Therefore, it is unclear on what basis the Judge made such
    a finding.

14. The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the
    reconciliation process of the Afghan authorities, but the expert report
    states the appellant could greatly reduce the risk from the authorities
    if he acceded to formal reconciliation with them, but that  would  then
    expose him to risk from the Taliban. In light of this it is unclear how
    the Judge was able to come to this conclusion. The expert  states  that
    the appellant could still reconcile with the government, but to  do  so
    that he should formally admit that he was involved  in  the  insurgency
    and would then be exposed to the risk of being targeted as a defector".
    The Judge found that the country guidance case of PM  is  more  than  a
    decade old, so this should have been be applied to the appellant as  it
    is still a country guidance case.




    The hearing

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an    error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. Mr Candola said that the appellant has provided evidence to show
    that the Taliban does punish children of adversaries but  the  question
    it is whether he would be identified as the son of his  father  on  his
    return to Afghanistan. Therefore, the appellant faces no risk from  the
    Taliban but the question to be determined was  whether  he  faces  risk
    from the Afghan authorities given that  the  events  occurred  some  10
    years ago. He asks that the appeal be allowed.

16. Mr Foot adopted his grounds of  appeal  and  said  that  the  appellant
    remains at risk from Afghan security agencies who  operate  outside  of
    the Taliban and if they think that the appellant would  be  useful  for
    them they will arrest him. Any reconciliation would be ignored  by  the
    authorities. The appellant does face risk from the Afghan authorities.

    Discussion and findings as to whether there is an error of law

17. I have considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  with  care.
    The Judge considered  all  the  evidence  carefully  and  accepted  the
    appellant's claim that his father was a commander of  the  Taliban.  He
    also accepted that the appellant would be at risk in his home  area  of
    Kundus. The Judge's findings were made on the evidence before  him  and
    there is no indication that he fell into material error as to  the  law
    or the facts.

18. The Judge found  that  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant  evidence
    highlighted by the respondent can be explained and  considered  on  the
    bases that he was a child when the events  occurred.  The  Judge  found
    that, in any event, the appellant had been  consistent  and  also  gave
    coherent and believable evidence. There is no  challenge  is  to  these
    findings of fact by the Judge.

19. The challenge is whether the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant cannot relocate to Kabul given his profile  as  a  son  of  a
    Taliban commander. The Judge relying  on  the  expert  report  and  the
    country guidance case of AS found that the  appellant  is  not  in  any
    danger from the Taliban in Kabul as he would be considered a  low-level
    target for them. This was a proper finding on the facts and  background
    evidence and it has not been challenged.

20. However, the Judge found that the appellant would be at risk  from  the
    Afghan authorities in Kabul as he was the son of  a  Taliban  commander
    and for that finding he relied on the expert  evidence.  He  said  that
    this point was not directly addressed in the recent country guidance of
    AS bat he considered the country guidance case of PM and others Kabul -
    (Hisbi-i- Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT  00089  which  noted  was
    promulgated over 10 years ago. The Judge relied on  the  report  of  Dr
    Guistozzi which stated at paragraph 11 that there is  evidence  of  the
    targeting of family members of members of the  Taliban  by  the  Afghan
    authorities, including the increase in the  rounding  up  of  suspected
    insurgents and the practice  of  arresting  relatives  to  force  other
    relatives to hand themselves in. The expert stated that  the  appellant
    would be targeted due to his  profile.  The  expert  was  also  of  the
    opinion that once the appellant settles down into Kabul,  his  presence
    and identity would become known this would put him at risk.  The  Judge
    was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  evidence  of  a  renowned  expert  of
    Afghanistan.

21. The Judge then referred to the country guidance case of PM which stated
    that a person returning from the United Kingdom after  a  long  absence
    from Afghanistan, who had  previously  been  with  the  Hezbi-i-Islami,
    would not be seen by the authorities  as  sufficiently  linked  to  the
    insurgency to be of interest to them in 2007. The judge noted  that  PM
    does not directly address the  situation  of  a  person  such  as  this
    appellant. The Judge relied on further and more recent evidence  by  Dr
    Gustozzi for his finding that there is a reasonable likelihood that the
    appellant would be at real risk if he  could  not  safely  re-establish
    himself in Kabul because of his family links to the Taliban as the  son
    of a  Taliban  commander.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  has
    discharged his burden of proof and had  demonstrated  a  real  lack  of
    safety in Kabul. There is no material error of law in this reasoning.

22. The respondent  makes  the  point  that  the  expert  stated  that  the
    appellant is very likely to be a person who could  effectively  benefit
    from the formal reconciliation process of the  Afghan  government.  The
    Judge however took into account the expert reports in which the opinion
    was expressed  that  the  numbers  of  those  detained  by  the  Afghan
    authorities on suspicion has significantly risen since the first report
    standing at around 27,500 people suggesting the situation is  worsening
    for those under such suspicion. The Judge relied on the  expert  report
    which stated that those detained by the authorities are at serious risk
    of mistreatment including beatings on the soles of their feet, legs and
    shoulders, suspension, electric shocks and sexual violence. The  expert
    opined that if  the  appellant  were  to  be  detained  by  the  Afghan
    authorities because of his family links with the Taliban, he  would  be
    at high risk of those forms of abuse  at  the  hands  of  the  security
    forces. Therefore, the Judge found that even if the appellant  was  not
    at risk from the Taliban in Kabul, he would be at risk from the  Afghan
    authorities and gave cogent and credible reasons for his conclusion.

23. I find that there is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal for it should be set aside. There  is  no  material
    error in the decision and I find that the grounds of appeal  reveal  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion  on  the  evidence
    before him. The First-tier Tribunal's decision stands.

    Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Dated this 22nd day of October 2018
Ms S Chana

