

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/13423/2018
                                                               PA/13425/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2019                    |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                                     EA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Semegia-Janneh, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellants.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised  the  appellants'  names  because  this  decision
         refers to their asylum claims.

      2. The appellants have appealed against a decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (FTT) sent on 15 January 2019 dismissing their appeals  on
         protection and human rights grounds.

      3. Mrs Pettersen conceded  that  the  appellants'  grounds  of  appeal
         contain errors of law such that the FTT decision must be set  aside
         and remade by another FTT other than FTT  Judge  AJ  Parker.   Both
         parties therefore consented to the appeal  being  allowed  and  the
         FTT's decision being set aside.  They also agreed that  the  appeal
         should be remitted to be remade by the FTT de novo.  I decided that
         it is appropriate to take this course pursuant to rule  39  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

      4. This is an appeal that turned on  the  credibility  of  the  second
         appellant's claim to be an atheist.  I agree with the parties  that
         the FTT's  findings  for  rejecting  that  claim  are  infected  by
         material errors of law, identified in the grounds  of  appeal,  and
         must be remade entirely.   The  FTT's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         second appellant's claim to be an atheist at [35] of  the  decision
         are inadequate and contain material errors of fact. In  particular,
         the FTT wrongly stated that the second appellant did not  claim  to
         be an atheist until her substantive interview when it is clear from
         4.1 of the screening interview that she feared everyone because she
         was "not a Muslim".  In addition, as acknowledged by Mrs  Pettersen
         the remaining  three  reasons  offered  at  [35]  are  unclear  and
         difficult to follow.

      5. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT to make  completely
         fresh findings of fact.

Decision

      6. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      7. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a judge other than Judge  AJ
         Parker) de novo.



Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
12 August 2019
