
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13601/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 June 2017                           |On 19 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     BVL
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Singer, Counsel instructed by Arona St James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 8 December 1995 who came
    to the UK as a student in September 2013 with a visa valid until
    January 2014. After his visa expired he remained in the UK without
    leave to remain.
 2. In May 2016 he was arrested as an overstayer. He then claimed asylum on
    the basis that he would be at risk on return to Vietnam of being taken
    hostage or otherwise harmed at the hands of both the authorities and
    non state actors because his parents owe a significant debt and have
    been threatened, with the threats extending to him.


 3. The respondent rejected the appellant's application. His account was
    not considered to be truthful.


 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge Callender Smith. In a decision promulgated on 16 January
    2017, the judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that he did not find
    the appellant credible. At paragraphs [30] - [32] the judge stated:


         30. Looked at with the most generous eye, in the round, I still
         cannot find [the appellant's] account in any way credible. It is
         very vague and unsupported by any kind of objective evidence.


         31.For all these reasons, his claims must be dismissed.


         32.He has not given a credible or substantial account and I do not
         believe that he is at any risk on return


 5. The appellant is now appealing, with permission, against the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.


 6. Three arguments are advanced in the Grounds of Appeal.


     a) Firstly, it is argued that the judge applied the wrong standard of
        proof as the judge referred to "substantial grounds" rather than
        "reasonable degree of likelihood".


     b) Secondly, it is submitted that the judge failed to give reasons for
        rejecting the claims made by the appellant.


     c) Thirdly, it is argued that the judge failed to adequately consider
        objective evidence relating to debt bondage in Vietnam which was
        pertinent to the plausibility of the appellant's account.

 7. Before me, Mr Singer advised that he would not be pursuing the standard
    of proof point as articulated in the grounds of appeal. However, he
    made an alternative argument.  At paragraphs [24] and [25] of the
    decision the judge stated:
         "24. He was asked the key question in cross examination and it was
         asked in an inquisitive rather an interrogative fashion: "is it
         correct that you chose not to claim asylum because you realise that
         your claim was not strong". The answer to that was a simple "yes".


         25. This is the problem with his asylum claim.

 8. Mr Singer argued that the reference to "strong" indicates that the
    judge placed too a high a standard of proof on the appellant.
 9. The focus of Mr Singer's submissions was the adequacy of reasoning in
    the decision. He maintained that the decision is lacking in reasoning
    and although the judge has correctly stated that Section 8 of the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 is only a
    factor taken into account it is in fact the main reason the judge gives
    for finding against the appellant.


10. Mr Singer also argued that although the judge stated at paragraph [17]
    that he had read the objective material, there is no consideration of
    it in the decision.


11. He also argued that the judge has in effect demanded corroboration,
    without explaining why this is a case where lack of corroboration is
    unacceptable. Mr Singer also argued that the judge failed to recognise
    that there was corroboration in the form of the objective evidence,
    which demonstrates that the appellant's account is consistent with what
    is known to occur in Vietnam.


12. Ms Pal argued that the findings were sufficient and that the judge had
    done "just enough". She observed that the judge had referred to the
    objective material and therefore was clearly aware of it. She argued
    that the judge was entitled to make findings on credibility.


Consideration

13. The approach to the standard of proof taken by the judge is set out at
    paragraph [26], where he states that "even to the lowest possible
    standard that is appropriate in asylum claims [the claim] is not
    credible" (emphasis added).  That is the correct standard, and reading
    the decision as a whole it is clear that the judge has not only
    correctly stated the standard of proof (at paragraph [26]), but also
    applied it, rather than a more stringent standard. When summarising his
    conclusions at paragraph [30] the judge stated that he did not accept
    the appellant's account when looking at it "with the most generous
    eye".


14. The judge did not, as suggested by Mr Singer, expect the appellant to
    show he had a "strong" case. The reference to the claim not being
    strong at paragraph [24] is a recounting of a question posed to the
    appellant in cross examination and the appellant's response to that
    question.


15. Having regard to how the judge has described his approach to the
    standard of proof in paragraphs [26] and [30], as well as the judge's
    overall approach, I am satisfied that the correct standard of proof has
    been applied.


16. I am also satisfied that the judge's reasoning is adequate. The judge
    did not find the appellant lacked credibility solely because of the
    delay in making the asylum application. Other reasons given by the
    judge were that:

     a)  the appellant's sister in Vietnam appeared to not be at risk;


     b) the appellant acknowledged his case was not strong; and
     c) there is a discrepancy between the appellant's claim that he did
        not apply for asylum until he was arrested because he was not aware
        until then that he could and his response to a question in oral
        evidence which indicated that the real reason he did not apply for
        asylum before he was arrested was that he believed he did not have
        a strong case.

17. The judge has given reasons to explain why he found the appellant to
    not be credible. These reasons, although brief, are sufficient - and
    sufficiently clear - to understand why the judge reached the decision
    he did. This is not a case where a judge has made a bare assertion that
    an appellant is not believed such as in MK (duty to give reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) and I am satisfied that the judge has
    reached a decision about the appellant's credibility - and therefore
    the merits of his asylum claim - that was open to him based on the
    evidence and which is adequately reasoned.


18. The third ground of appeal maintains that the judge failed to consider
    the objective material about debt bondage. Although the evidence was
    not discussed in detail, the judge made clear, at paragraph [17], that
    he had considered the evidence. And although not stated explicitly, it
    is apparent from the decision, when read as a whole, that the judge has
    reached the conclusion that the appellant is not credible even though
    it is objectively the case that debt bondage and corruption exists in
    Vietnam such that the appellant's account is not inherently
    implausible.  The fact that objective material shows that the
    appellant's account is plausible does not mean the judge was not
    entitled to reject the appellant's account for the reasons he gave, as
    summarised above at paragraph [16].


Decision


The appeal is dismissed. The judge has not made a material error of law and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 16 June 2017                  |

