

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13872/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 2 November 2018                            |On 16 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     KGH

                            (Anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard      (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the  tribunal")  which  it  sent  to  the
parties on 9 February 2017; whereupon it dismissed her  appeal  against  a
decision of the Secretary of State made on  16 December 2017  refusing  to
grant her international protection.

2.    The background  circumstances  are  relatively  straightforward.   The
claimant, who was born on 1 September 1989, says that she is a national of
Eritrea.  However, she claims that when she was aged only  four  years,  her
father was killed by the Eritrean authorities and that, when she  was  five,
her  mother  fled  to  Sudan  and  took  her  with  her.   Her  mother   has
subsequently passed away but the claimant remained  living  in  Sudan  until
2017 when she left that  country  and,  assisted  by  agents,  travelled  to
Italy,  then  France,  then  Belgium   until   arriving   in   the   UK   on
10 August 2017.  It was contended, on her behalf, that if she were  to  be
returned to Eritrea she would be persecuted for evading military service  or
would be forced to carry out military service in  circumstances  where  such
would amount to persecution, serious harm or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment.

3.    The central issue for  the  tribunal,  on  appeal,  was  that  of  the
claimant's nationality.  As to that, the claimant said that she  spoke  only
a little Tigrinya (a language one  would  expect  an  Eritrean  national  to
speak) because she had left Eritrea as a child and because her  mother,  who
used to speak Tigrinya to her, had passed  away  when  she  was  only  seven
years old.  She said that she  speaks  Amharic  and  Arabic  (languages  one
would not necessarily expect an Eritrean national to speak) because  of  the
time she had spent in Sudan where such was spoken.  She said that she  could
remember little of Eritrea because she had left that country as a child.

4.    Both the claimant and the Secretary of State were  represented  before
the tribunal.  It is  clear,  from  the  tribunal's  handwritten  record  of
proceedings, that the claimant gave oral evidence and, after examination  in
chief, was cross-examined.  The tribunal concluded  that  the  claimant  was
not Eritrean and, indeed, although it was not required to do so in order  to
dispose of the appeal, went on the conclude  that  she  is  Ethiopian.   The
salient part of the tribunal's findings are as follows:

      "     25.  I am not satisfied that the appellant is  Eritrean  as  she
      claims.  She knows a  little  bit  about  Eritrea,  but  that  is  not
      information which she gleaned from her late mother as a child.  It  is
      information which she has admitted that she obtained from her Eritrean
      friends  a  long  time  after  her  mother's  death.   She  claims  to
      understand Tigrinya but not to speak it very well because,  after  her
      mother's death, she was surrounded by Amharic and Arabic speakers  and
      not Tigrinya speakers because, although she had Eritrean friends, they
      too had been in Sudan a long time and did  not  speak  Tigrinya.   The
      letter from Mr Goitom  makes  no  mention  of  how  it  is  that  she
      communicates  with  members  of  the  Eritrean  Community  Group   and
      therefore I cannot be satisfied that she has any knowledge of Tigrinya
      at all, even though she says that she did interact with  Eritreans  in
      Sudan.

            26.  The burden of proof is upon the appellant and there  is  no
      evidence of her Eritrean nationality other than  her  claim.   In  her
      recent statement she states that the knowledge of Eritrea referred  to
      in paragraph 49 of the refusal letter is her own knowledge but in the
      interview at questions 39 and 52 she said that the knowledge she had
      displayed in questions 38-53, was obtained from her Eritrean friends.
      But she could not answer questions about Asmara, (paragraph 39 refusal
      letter) where she claims to have been born and raised  until  she  was
      five years old.  In her recent statement at paragraph 6, she says that
      she could not answer those questions because she was  only  five  when
      she left and how can she be expected to remember all that information.
       She could not answer those questions because she  was  not  born  and
      raised there and her friends  could  not  give  her  that  information
      either.

            27   I have taken account of the fact that the appellant  claims
      to have been five years old when she arrived in Sudan with her mother,
      but her inability to converse in Tigrinya even though it was the  only
      language used by her mother until she was seven  years  old  and  even
      though she claims to have associated with other Eritrean  refugees  in
      Sudan, causes me to doubt her claim.  Merely reiterating that  she  is
      Eritrean is not enough to make her Eritrean.  The appellant  needs  to
      produce more evidence to substantiate her claim and she has not.  I am
      satisfied that she is not from Eritrea and is, in fact, Ethiopian."

5.    So, the tribunal was concluding  that  the  claimant  was  seeking  to
mislead, for immigration purposes, in  claiming  to  be  Eritrean.   It  was
concluding, of course, that she is not  Eritrean.   That  was  a  conclusion
which it seems to me the tribunal was entitled to reach (that is to  say  it
was a conclusion open to it on  the  material  in  front  of  it)  but  that
conclusion had to be adequately (though no more) explained  as  a  component
of the tribunal's overall duty to give adequate reasons for its decision.

6.    The tribunal was concerned about the claimant not being able to  speak
much or any Tigrinya.  It was right to focus  upon  that  as  a  potentially
significant consideration since most Eritreans do speak that language.   But
the claimant had given an explanation as to why she did not  do  so  or,  at
least, did not do so to any significant extent.  The  explanation  was  that
she had not spoken the  language  since  she  was  seven  years  old.   That
explanation was not so unpersuasive that it did not  need  addressing.   But
although it is clear from the above reasoning  that  the  tribunal  did  not
believe the claimant about her nationality, it did not say what it  made  of
that explanation.  In my judgment it had to do  that  before  deciding  that
her inability to speak Tigrinya, or to speak it no more than a very  limited
extent, was a point which  could  properly  be  taken  against  her  in  the
context of the nationality issue.

7.    The claimant was not able to answer questions about Asmara,  which  is
the part of Eritrea she claims to have been born and  raised  in  until  her
departure from that country.  It appears, in looking at paragraph 26 of the
written reasons, that the tribunal  probably  took  an  adverse  credibility
point against  her  in  consequence  of  that  inability.   But  again,  the
claimant had provided an explanation  as  to  why  she  would  not  remember
anything about Asmara (her departure at a young age) and  it  is  not  clear
what the tribunal made of that explanation.  Once again,  in  my  judgement,
it was necessary for the tribunal to address that explanation and to form  a
view about it prior to taking a point against her because  of  it.   It  did
not do that.

8.    The claimant, as noted, gave oral evidence to the tribunal.  Her  oral
evidence, and what the tribunal made of it, was potentially  significant  in
this case.  But the tribunal did not explain  what  it  made  of  that  oral
evidence at all.  So, a reader of the written reasons is left uninformed  as
to, for example, whether it was consistent with  written  material,  whether
it was internally consistent or  whether  it  was  otherwise  persuasive  or
unpersuasive.   Given  the  absence  of  wholly  determinative   documentary
evidence it seems to me that the tribunal was required to form a view as  to
the oral evidence as part of its reasoning process.  It did not do that.

9.    In the  circumstances,  whilst  the  written  reasons  is  a  thorough
document with respect to the arguments put to it by the  representatives,  I
have concluded that it is unsafe with  respect  to  its  assessment  of  the
claimant's veracity and, hence, the question  of  her  nationality.  Legally
inadequate reasons have been  given  for  the  tribunal's  decision  not  to
accept the claimant's contentions regarding her  nationality.   Accordingly,
the decision has to be set aside.

10.   My having set aside the decision  I  have  decided  to  remit  to  the
tribunal for a complete rehearing.  That was  the  course  of  action  urged
upon me by each representative once I had confirmed that I  did  propose  to
set aside the decision.  I am not minded to preserve any of  the  tribunal's
findings so remittal to the tribunal, where matters can effectively  restart
and be looked at afresh, does seem to be  the  most  appropriate  course  of
action.

11.    Finally,  the  claimant  was  previously  granted  anonymity  by  the
tribunal.  Nothing was said about anonymity before me but I have decided  to
maintain the status quo.  Accordingly, the claimant continues  to  have  the
benefit of a grant of anonymity.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
a complete rehearing before a differently constituted tribunal.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted anonymity to the claimant. I  continue  that
grant under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Unless and until a Court or Tribunal  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the claimant and to the Secretary of State. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee has been paid and since no fee is payable, there can be no  fee
award.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


