
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13830/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th December 2017                    |On 14th December 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brooks, instructed by J M Wilson solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. [SA] was granted permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  E.E.M.Smith  who  had  dismissed  her  appeal   on
         protection and human rights  grounds.  Permission  was  sought  and
         granted on the grounds that it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal
         judge had erred in law in her conclusions that  it  was  reasonable
         and proportionate for the appellant's youngest child to  leave  the
         UK with her and the other three children.


      2. The respondent in her Rule 24 response asserted that the First-tier
         Tribunal decision was not vitiated by error of law: the  judge  had
         considered the child, found that the best interests  of  the  child
         were to remain with her mother and  that  it  was  reasonable,  the
         judge having directed himself to s117B(6) for the  child  to  leave
         the UK and thus there was of error of law.


      3. Permission to appeal the protection claim (asylum  or  humanitarian
         protection)  was  not  sought  by  the  appellant  and  Mr  Brookes
         confirmed the challenge was restricted to human rights/Article 8 as
         pleaded.


      4. Mr Bates relied upon the Rule 24 response and did not seek to  make
         any further submissions.


      5. The youngest child is  a  British  Citizen.  The  judge  failed  to
         consider the child's citizenship, the respondent's  policy  on  the
         removal of British Citizen children from the UK and SF [2017]  UKUT
         00120 (IAC). The failure to consider the citizenship of  the  child
         is a material error of law that impacts upon the findings  made  in
         relation to the mother and the other three children.  I  set  aside
         the decision to be remade.


      6. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First
         tier with directions or remake it for ourselves.  Further  evidence
         will  be  required  to  enable  findings  to  be  made.  In   these
         circumstances, I remit the appeal on Article 8/human rights grounds
         to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  remade.  The  protection  appeal
         decision stands.


      7. Given that the youngest child is a British Citizen  the  respondent
         will no doubt consider the decision prior to  the  hearing  of  the
         appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remit the  appeal  for  hearing  before  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge.

[pic]

Date 12th December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
