
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13677/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th June 2019                    |On 2nd July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   mr u a
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Buckingham Legal
Associates
     Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan whose appeal was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27th
    February 2019.  The judge concluded that the appellant was not gay  and
    that the  appeal  should  therefore  be  dismissed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and on human rights grounds.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said that the judge had not
    given proper consideration to the appellant's inability  to  give  oral
    evidence and had attached too much weight to alleged discrepancies with
    insufficient weight given to the medical evidence.  Reference  is  made
    to well-known case law.  The core issue before the judge was  that  the
    appellant was at risk in Pakistan due to his homosexuality.  While  the
    judge had commented on the lack  of  evidence  for  the  appellant  the
    skeleton  argument  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the  proposition  that
    supporting evidence was not a pre-requisite for a genuine  claim.   The
    appellant's cousin (who was regrettably unable  to  attend  the  appeal
    hearing) had provided a written statement to confirm he was aware  that
    the appellant was  gay.   The  judge  did  not  appear  to  reject  the
    appellant's cousin's account and failed to give adequate  reasoning  as
    to why in the round the evidence from the appellant's cousin and friend
    did not amount to evidence of the  appellant  being  openly  gay.   The
    judge had accepted  that  the  appellant's  extreme  anxiety  might  be
    further confirmation of the fact that he was  telling  the  truth,  but
    these very reasonable considerations  were  disregarded  by  the  judge
    because of the finding that there were inconsistencies in  his  account
    about when his family found out about his sexuality.  In respect of the
    delay of disclosing his sexuality the judge did  not  consider  whether
    the appellant's delay in disclosing that was  reasonable  and  did  not
    consider the  evidence  in  the  round.   The  judge  had  appeared  to
    misdirect herself in paragraph 55 when she said that the Rule 35 report
    was a general report and did not examine the scars in  detail  and  the
    physician compiling it was clear in stating that it was not  a  medico-
    legal report.  This was independent evidence that the appellant  was  a
    potential victim of torture.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially refused but granted by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain in a decision dated 21st May 2019.

 4. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. For the appellant Ms Harris submitted that the judge had considered the
    medical evidence in paragraphs 46 and 56 of the decision  and  had  not
    given that report sufficient weight.  This was an appellant who did not
    just suffer from anxiety but had post-traumatic stress  disorder.   The
    judge had attached too much importance to the  evidence  that  was  not
    available to the appellant and it was unfair  that  the  appellant  who
    could not give evidence should be criticised for not  bringing  forward
    further evidence. The judge had not considered that the  terms  of  the
    medical report might be an explanation for the  possible  discrepancies
    in the appellant's evidence.  The reasoning was  flawed  and  too  much
    attention was paid to the inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence.
    I was asked to set the decision aside and remit it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing where the cousin would be  available  to
    give oral evidence.

 6. For the respondent Mr Tufan said that it appeared the appellant  wanted
    a second bite at the cherry.  The judge could only make findings on the
    evidence that was available to her.  She had given  clear  reasons  why
    the appeal should be rejected.  There was a Section 8 issue in that  he
    only claimed asylum when his  removal  was  imminent.   The  judge  was
    entitled to rely on the discrepancies that were clearly pointed out  in
    the decision and there was no error in law.  She had  fully  considered
    the medical evidence and the decision should therefore stand.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. The judge gave a number of reasons why she was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant was a gay person.  In so doing the  judge  took  the  medical
    evidence into account.  In paragraph 46 she said the  psychiatrist  had
    concluded  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and depression and that he was not fit to give evidence.   The
    judge also noted that the psychiatrist had accepted his account without
    question and the report was based almost entirely on what the appellant
    had told her.  There was an element of speculation  in  the  report  in
    terms of what would happen to the appellant should he be returned.  The
    judge did not dispute the fact that the appellant was not fit  to  give
    evidence at the hearing saying in paragraph 47 that it was  unfortunate
    but she had to rely on the written evidence which was provided.

 9. In paragraph 48 of the decision the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    claimed he was attacked by four people and the brother of  the  man  he
    had a relationship with in Pakistan.  It was unclear what  his  parents
    found out about this.  In his interview he was  asked  at  question  62
    about when his parents found out that he  was  gay  and  he  responded,
    "when the attack happened".  He went on to say that that was 25th  July
    2010.  Later in the interview he says that they knew that he  had  been
    attacked but it was not until he came to the UK that they knew  why  he
    had been attacked.  At question 77 he says his  family  told  him  that
    they wanted nothing to do with him after he told them and they told him
    that he had brought shame on them.

10. In paragraph 49 the judge  found  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the
    appellant did not tell his father that he had been attacked because  he
    was gay.  The appellant also makes a point of saying that  people  were
    spreading rumours saying he had had sex with five  men  and  presumably
    there would be evidence in hospital that he had presented  with  wounds
    from a sexual assault.  Indeed, at question  83  of  the  interview  he
    stated he received threats  from  Pakistan  after  the  incident  "when
    people found out that I was gay ...".

11. The judge concluded that the appellant had been inconsistent about when
    his family found out about his sexuality, who knew about  it  and  when
    they found out.  In paragraph  50  the  judge  noted  his  account  had
    developed from one in which he was attacked and beaten by four  men  to
    one which he was raped by them.

12. In paragraph 51 the judge noted that the appellant was  examined  by  a
    doctor when he was  detained  and  the  findings  of  that  report  are
    contained in a Rule 35 report.  He was found to have a lot of scars and
    the account which he gave the doctor was that he had been approached by
    five people who were drunk, for sex and that  he  refused  and  he  was
    beaten thereafter.  The judge noted that the doctor was concerned  that
    the appellant may have been a victim of torture.  The appellant did not
    tell the doctor at that point that he was gay.  There was  a  statement
    which appears at page K3  of  the  respondent's  bundle  in  which  the
    appellant gives a similar account to the one he gave his doctor.

13. The judge went on to note that the appellant's account of what happened
    in Pakistan needed to be set out into the context of his life here.  He
    came here as a student.  He met a boyfriend when he was at college  and
    had a relationship.  He claimed that he had open relationships and  was
    therefore having relationships with  lots  of  men  but  there  was  no
    evidence of that.  He claimed he attended gay clubs but  there  was  no
    evidence of that either.  The only evidence that  the  appellant  could
    point to is from his friend Mr Akhtar who had provided a  statement  to
    the Home Office in support of his claim.  He is a British national  who
    says he knew the appellant was gay in 2010.  However, his oral evidence
    was vague and unhelpful.  All he could say was that  he  had  seen  the
    appellant share a room with a friend and he knew that he  had  a  white
    boyfriend for a few months.

14. The second witness was the appellant's Belgian national cousin who  was
    unable to come to the UK to give evidence but he provided a handwritten
    letter.

15. The judge said in paragraph 54 that apart from the  appellant's  cousin
    and his friend Mr Akhtar there was no evidence of the appellant being a
    gay person.  The judge was surprised that he did not ask for one of his
    acquaintances from the clubs he visits or one of the people that he had
    an "open" relationship with to support his claim.

16. Reviewing the evidence, the judge did not accept,  even  on  the  lower
    standard of proof, that there was  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant was gay.  He had been inconsistent about who  he  knew  about
    his sexuality, he had been inconsistent about  whether  he  was  beaten
    because he refused to have sex with  his  five  drunken  assailants  or
    whether he was raped by people  seeking  to  avenge  him  of  having  a
    relationship with the brother of the ringleader.  The judge was  unable
    to find that the scars on his body were as a result of him  being  gay.
    It was likely that he had been assaulted  but  she  could  not  make  a
    finding as to when that assault occurred.

17. In paragraph 56 the judge considered the medical report of Dr  Kashmiri
    in which he described a very  distressed  individual.   The  judge  was
    aware that often there would be no supporting evidence in  relation  to
    claims which are made by asylum seekers.  She also bore  in  mind  that
    some asylum seekers would not tell the true reason that they left their
    country. In paragraph 57  the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    account about what  his  family  found  out  about  his  sexuality  was
    inconsistent.  There was no evidence to support the fact  that  he  had
    relationships here and the only other witness  was  unable  to  provide
    persuasive evidence that the appellant was having  a  gay  relationship
    when living with him.  He had also  had  many  opportunities  to  claim
    asylum and the fact that he had not done so until he was  going  to  be
    removed was a significant factor that  went  against  him.   The  judge
    accepted that he was likely to have been the victim of an  assault  but
    she did not know the context of that attack.  The attack alone did  not
    confirm that the appellant was a gay person (paragraph 59).

18. In a case of this nature it is unfortunate if the appellant  is  unable
    to give oral evidence.  However, the judge did not  hold  that  against
    the appellant and she properly appreciated that she could only  proceed
    based on the evidence presented to her.  She clearly had regard to  all
    the evidence including the terms of the medical  report  the  terms  of
    which she rehearsed in paragraphs 46 and 56. The judge did  not  ignore
    or discount the medical evidence but the appeal turned on the  evidence
    presented to the judge that the appellant was homosexual.

19. What the judge correctly focused on was the quality and extent  of  the
    evidence placed before her that the appellant was a gay person and  she
    gave very clear reasons  for  concluding  that  the  evidence  was  not
    sufficient, even to the lower standard, to prove that the appellant was
    gay. Those reasons are sustainable and adequate.  It follows that there
    is no error of law in the judge's decision which must stand.

Notice of Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

21. I do not set aside the decision.  I shall continue the anonymity order.


Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date 28th   June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



