
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/13697/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 March 2018                            |On 25 April 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     I K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Anderson
                    Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by Judge Green, promulgated on
    12 October 2017.

 2. The grounds of appeal on which permission was granted are stated in the
    application dated 25 October 2017.  They are directed  firstly  against
    the judge's treatment of a medical report:

         [2] of the grounds -  error  in  giving  report  no  weight;  self-
         reporting by the  appellant  no  reason  for  doing  so;  extensive
         experience of the doctor in diagnosing PTSD;

         [3] - doctor not present  when  torture  allegedly  inflicted,  and
         reliant on appellant to tell the  truth,  no  reason  to  give  her
         conclusion no weight; logical conclusion would be to undermine  all
         medico-legal  reports;  doctor  considered  not  only   appellant's
         statements  but  interview  records,  physical  scarring,  her  own
         observations and experience;

         [4] - error in merely acknowledging the PTSD diagnosis, the  doctor
         being a retired GP and not a psychiatrist; reasoning and experience
         behind diagnosis set out; failure to  review  author's  credentials
         and to "provide weight";

         [5] - finding appellant unreliable and evasive, without considering
         mental health issues and diagnosis identified in the report.

 3. The grounds turn to:

         [6] - misleading analogy about use of false identity, so "incorrect
         weight applied".

 4. Mr Forrest sought to argue an additional ground:

         The judge  erred  in  law  in  his  conclusions  at  [17]  on  both
         sufficiency of protection and internal relocation because (i) no or
         inadequate  account  was  taken   of   the   appellant's   personal
         circumstances or the country circumstances and (ii)  the  authority
         relied upon, from 2002, takes no account of changing  circumstances
         in Pakistan since then.

 5. Mr Forrest realistically recognised that without the additional ground,
    the appeal was bound to fail on the findings at [17].

 6. Mr Diwyncz agreed to the further ground being argued.

 7. Mr Forrest submitted along the following lines.  The judge said at [15]
    (ix), line 6, that he gave the report little weight, but that was  only
    a polite way of saying in effect "no weight", as  stated  in  terms  at
    line 13.  He misunderstood the doctor's method of taking a history  and
    analysing its consistency with the  appellant's  claims.   He  did  not
    factor  the  PTSD  diagnosis  into  testing  the  reliability  of   the
    appellant's evidence.  He drew an elaborate analogy on the use of false
    identity which led to an  unjustified  finding  about  the  appellant's
    flight to safety in the UK.  It was human nature to flee to a place  of
    safety.  The sufficiency of protection and internal relocation findings
    were brief and inadequate.  They did not refer to the leading cases but
    made an odd reference to an outdated authority.   The  case  should  be
    remitted to the FtT.

 8. Mr Diwyncz submitted thus.  There was  some  apparent  tension  between
    saying that the medical report carried little weight or no weight,  but
    in effect the judge found that the report, giving it  face  value,  did
    not advance the appellant's case significantly.  The grounds  took  the
    report out of context and said it should have been given such weight as
    to carry the day, which did not show  any  legal  error  and  was  only
    disagreement.   There  was  nothing  wrong  with  the  overall  adverse
    credibility assessment.  The last two sentences of [17] said  all  that
    was needed about sufficiency of  protection  and  internal  relocation,
    which on their own were decisive issues.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The case can be resolved by taking a step back from the  rather  minute
    criticisms of the description in the decision of the medical report and
    putting  that  matter  in  context.   The  furthest  the  report  could
    realistically advance the case was by (a) consistency of scarring  with
    reported  ill-treatment  and  (b)  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD.   Both  were
    accepted.  The judge does  not  treat  the  author  of  the  report  as
    anything but an expert in her proper area.

11. The veracity of the appellant's account was for the judge,  taking  the
    report in the round along with other considerations.  The  judge  found
    for numerous  reasons  that  the  appellant  failed  to  establish  his
    contentions.  In most of those reasons no error of fact or of  law  has
    been or could be alleged.

12. The judge found at [15] that  the  appellant's  alleged  fear  did  not
    explain lying about his qualifications to gain entry to the  UK.   With
    or without comparison with a German Jew fleeing the Nazis, the point is
    reasonable.

13. This was, realistically, a weak and belated  claim  of  risk  from  the
    Taliban: see the summary of the refusal decision at [3] (i)  -  (xvii),
    and the judge's reasons in full at [15] (i) - (x).  His  conclusion  at
    the end of paragraph 15 not shown to have turned on the making  of  any
    error on a point of law.

14. The choice of an old case to cite at [17] is odd.  It is not a reported
    authority as country guidance or otherwise.  However, the  respondent's
    decision was clear and detailed on both sufficiency of  protection  and
    internal relocation.  It was the appellant's case to make in  the  FtT.
    He does not suggest that the passage quoted from the case is no  longer
    legally or factually accurate.  More pertinently, he does not say  that
    he  advanced  anything  on  sufficiency  of  protection  and   internal
    relocation which required any further analysis.

15. In short, the grounds and  submissions  have  made  the  most  of  such
    materials as are to hand, but they do not amount to more  than  further
    insistence on a case which was more or less hopeless all along.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  There is  no  apparent  need  for
    one, but as the matter was not addressed in the UT, anonymity has  been
    maintained.


            [pic]
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

            6 March 2018
