
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13526/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                           |On 22 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     I K
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Clarke  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal who although allowing the  appeal  of  the  appellant  on
    Article 3 grounds upheld the section 72 certificate which had been made
    by the respondent and the grounds of challenge  argue  that  the  judge
    erred in that respect in that there was a lack of reasoning.   On  this
    basis  permission  was  granted  by  Judge  Plimmer.   Even  where  the
    appellant and his representative as was admitted failed to engage  with
    the section 72 issue it  was  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to  provide
    adequate reasoning to support its conclusions on  the  certificate  and
    Judge Plimmer also pointed to the materiality of this in light  of  the
    finding of risk on return under Article 3.

2.   The Rule 24 response which is endorsed and  developed  by  Ms  Fijiwala
    today argues that there was no challenge to the Article 3 decision that
    went against the Secretary of State but only the  section  72  decision
    and it was clear that it was in issue but Article 3 only  was  pursued.
    I think this has been clarified rather by Ms Fijiwala on the basis that
    the judge was clearly aware of the existence of the certificate.  There
    are several references to it in  the  decision  and  the  letter  which
    addressed the certificate issued of 15 November 2016 did not raise  any
    rebuttal arguments in light of the reliance on Article 3 and  Mr  Sesay
    argues that this is essentially artificial and there was an independent
    duty on the judge to address the issue in dealing with the  section  72
    point and in that regard he relies on the decision in  Mugwagwa  [2011]
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

3.   I see the force of what Ms Fijiwala says but I think that  this  is  an
    issue which nevertheless needs to be addressed by  a  judge.   Although
    the focus of the hearing  clearly  was  on  Article  3  there  was  the
    certificate  and  the  judge  dealt  with  it  really  almost   as   an
    afterthought at the end without providing any  reasoning.   It  may  be
    that it would not be very difficult for a judge to reason without it we
    simply do not know because argument was not made  and  it  is  accepted
    that  was  an  oversight  by  the   appellant's   representatives   but
    nevertheless I think in the interests of justice it is necessary for me
    to find that there was an error of law in this case on the basis of the
    lack of reasoning in respect of the  section  72  certificate  and  the
    matter will be remitted  with  the  findings  of  the  judge  otherwise
    preserved to be dealt with by another judge at Taylor House.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 19 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

