
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13725/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 10th January 2019   On 7th February 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MRS I C C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Peer and Co
                    (Birmingham)
For the respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Malawi, born in January 1965. She came
       to the United Kingdom in April 2004 as a visitor. In October 2004 she
       sought leave to remain as a student which was granted, valid until 30
       November 2005. Thereafter she obtained a succession of further
       leaves, the last of which expired on 13 January 2014. All the further
       applications were made in time. After her last leave expired she
       overstayed.

    2. In August 2014 she made an application based upon article 8 rights
       which was refused with no right of appeal. She continued to remain.
       On the 17th November 2016 she made a similar application which also
       was refused on 11 May 2017.

    3. On 14 June 2017 she made a claim for protection. The basis of her
       claim was that she would be at risk of domestic violence from her
       former husband if returned to Malawi. She said the relationship began
       in 1987 and then they separated 10 years later. During that time she
       claimed he had been violent towards her. She said that in 2002 they
       were reconciled but the problems resurfaced. She claimed that in 2004
       he deliberately crashed their car, intending to injure her

    4. Her claim was dismissed on 8 December 2017. The respondent accepted
       that the claim potentially engaged the Refugee Convention. Based on
       country information, female victims of domestic violence in Malawi
       could be considered as forming a particular social group.  However,
       the appellant's account of suffering violence at the hands of her
       husband was not accepted. Her delay in claiming was raised as an
       indication of her lack of credibility.

    5. Even if the claim were true the respondent took the view that there
       was sufficiency of protection for her in her home country and, if
       necessary, she could relocate to avoid her former husband.

    6. The respondent had regard to her article 8 rights. She claimed to be
       married and in a relationship with a British citizen, Mr John R, from
       2012 to 2015. They were now estranged. The respondent did not accept
       the relationship as genuine and subsisting.

    7. The appellant's son Raymond from her marriage in Malawi was in the
       United Kingdom but he was over 18.

    8. In considering her article 8 rights under the immigration rules the
       respondent took the view that the suitability requirements were not
       met. This was on the basis she had engaged in fraud in attempting to
       obtain British citizenship.

    9. The appellant had also claimed health issues, particularly in
       relation to her mental state. However, the respondent referred to the
       high threshold for such a claim to succeed and found this was not
       met.





The First tier Tribunal

   10. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas at
       Birmingham on 29 January 2018. It was dismissed in a decision
       promulgated on 7 March 2018.

   11. In relation to her claim for asylum the judge concluded that her
       credibility was damaged by her delay in claiming. The judge rejected
       her claim that she was unaware of the concept of asylum.

   12. The appellant and her son Raymond gave evidence about events in
       Malawi. The judge also had a letter from the appellant's brother in
       Malawi setting out his observations of mistreatment.

   13. The judge accepted that her husband did abuse her.

   14. The judge noted that she had returned to Malawi to her home village
       for several weeks in 2006 and 2011 when she experienced no problems.
       Her evidence was that her former husband had remarried and had
       children. The judge found no evidence to suggest he was in a position
       of power and influence throughout the country or that he had been to
       her home village or made any attempts to find her.

   15. The background information indicated that domestic violence was
       criminalised but was not enforced. This was because it was considered
       a family matter. However, the judge made the point that as the
       appellant was no longer married she could resort to State protection
       if there were any difficulties from her former spouse.

   16. The judge concluded there was no risk of persecution or serious harm
       to the appellant. There was no evidence that her former husband
       maintained an adverse interest in her and had the means to locate
       her. The judge found there was sufficiency of protection for her. If
       she did not wish to return to the same area where her former husband
       and his family lived she could return to her home village. There she
       would have the support of her father, 2 brothers and various
       relatives.

   17. The judge referred to the appellant's health, pointing out no medical
       evidence had been submitted in relation to diagnoses and prognosis.
       The evidence indicated there was a healthcare system in Malawi and
       there was no evidence the appellant would be unable to access this.
       Consequently, the judge found her medical conditions could not meet
       the threshold the occasion a real risk of breach of her article 3 or
       8 rights.

   18. The judge went on to consider her article 8 rights. At paragraph 25
       the judge accepted the appellant's evidence and that of her witness
       to the effect that she was innocent of any deception over her claim
       for British citizenship. Rather, the fault lay with dishonest agents
       engaged. Consequently, the respondent's refusal on the basis of
       suitability no longer applied.

   19. In terms of her family life, the judge at paragraph 32 pointed out
       that she is no longer in a relationship with the British national.
       Her son is now an adult and also a national of Malawi. Consequently,
       the relationship requirements for appendix FM were not met. The judge
       then turned to consider her private life. The Judge considered the
       requirements of paragraph 276 ADE, pointing out the appellant had not
       been here the necessary period. Furthermore the judge did not see any
       significant obstacles to her reintegration into Malawi; referring to
       her 2 holidays to her home village and her family members. The judge
       said was educated and has work skills and experience which would
       assist in seeking employment in her home country. Although she had
       claimed a back problem the judge was not satisfied this would prevent
       her from working as a chef as she had done here.

   20. At paragraph 34 the judge referred to the Razgar principles and the
       decision of Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 when considering
       article 8. The judge noted that she had been in the United Kingdom
       for 14 years and accepted that her son arrived with her and although
       he does not live with her they have a close relationship and she is
       financially dependent on him. The judge found the relationship was
       such that family life within the meaning of article 8 was engaged.
       The judge then proceeded to consider the proportionality of the
       decision and referred to the public interest factors set out in
       section 117 B of the 2002 Act. The judge recorded that she speaks
       English and has worked so was not a burden upon the taxpayer. Against
       this, her family and private life had developed by the immigration
       status was precarious. At paragraph 39 the judge did weigh in the
       balance the fact she was here lawfully as a student from October 2004
       until January 2014. Against that, she had been here without leave
       since.

The Upper Tribunal

   21. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
       herself. She wrote out 6 pages in which she sought to explain her
       situation. She sets out how her subsequent marriage did not prove
       happy and how her husband did not earn enough money to meet the
       financial requirements of appendix FM. She refers to the comfort she
       takes from her son and her church. She also sets out details of her
       health. She states whilst here she paid taxes and volunteered for
       charities.

   22. The First-tier Judge who granted permission to appeal acknowledged
       that the grounds were largely a restatement of the compassionate
       features about the appellant's circumstances. However, it was noted
       she had arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2004 and had leave
       until January 2014. She did not apply for further leave until August
       2014 saying her husband was on social security benefits and she had
       problems raising the application fee. Consequently, she appeared to
       have almost qualified under the 10 years lawful residence rule. It
       was also pointed out that she had been in the United Kingdom for over
       14 years. The grant of permission states that the judge made no
       specific reference to the lengthy period of lawful residence or her
       reasons for applying late and it was arguable and sufficient weight
       was accorded to this in the proportionality assessment.

   23. At hearing the appellant's representative provided me with a copy of
       the skeleton argument used in the First-tier Tribunal. In relation to
       article 8, it was pointed out that the appellant had lived in the
       United Kingdom for almost 14 years. Paragraph 26 of the skeleton
       argument points out that the appellant was close to completing 10
       years continuous lawful residence.

   24. At hearing, the appellant's representative acknowledges that First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Thomas does refer to her long lawful residence
       but does not specifically referred to it when carrying out the
       proportionality consideration. She submitted she was not suggesting a
       near miss argument but referred to the Supreme Court decision in MM
       Lebanon [2017] UKSC 10. This concerned the lawfulness of the
       financial requirements and also considered cases where the rules were
       not met.

   25. In response, the presenting officer said that the judge was fully
       aware that the appellant had been here lawfully for an extended
       period and her immigration history was set out at paragraph 4 of the
       decision. At paragraph 39 the judge commented that she was here
       lawfully as a student from October 2004 for until January 2014.The
       reference to October 2004 relates to when she was 1st granted leave
       as a student. On this basis she was actually 6 months short of the 10
       years continuous lawful residence. However, whether it was 3 months
       short if the visit visa was included or 6 months otherwise, she still
       was short. In response, the appellant's representative accepted that
       the judge had acknowledged the length of time she was here lawfully.

Conclusions.

   26. No challenge was made to the judge's conclusions in respect to the
       claim for protection. The decision is well reasoned and acknowledges
       that the appellant was the victim of domestic violence but concluded
       her husband no longer posed a threat. In any event there was
       sufficiency of protection and the option of relocation.

   27. In terms of article 8 the judge accurately sets out the appellant's
       immigration history. The judge initially considered whether she met
       the terms of the immigration rules in respect of article 8. The judge
       accepted that she was a victim of unscrupulous agents and was not
       involved in any fraud in seeking citizenship. Consequently,
       suitability was not an issue. In respect of family life she was
       estranged from her husband and no challenge was made to the judge's
       conclusion. Her son was living independently and was an adult so she
       could not benefit from the parent route. No challenge was made to
       these aspects.

   28. In terms of private life the appellant had not been here the
       necessary 20 years as required by paragraph 276 ADE and the judge
       gave the sustainable reasons why she could integrate back into her
       home country. It is also accepted that factually the appellant could
       not meet the 10 years lawful residence requirement.

   29. The judge then considered her article 8 rights outside the specifics
       of the rules. There was no evidence to support her claim in relation
       to healthcare. The judge did accept that the appellant had a
       relationship with her son which went beyond the normal emotional ties
       and that family life was engaged. Clearly therefore this was a
       balance decision with findings made in favour of the appellant on
       disputed areas.

   30. The challenge now made relates to how the judge dealt with the length
       of time the appellant had been here, a proportion of which was
       lawful. The judge appreciated these features and refers to them at
       paragraph 34. The judge set out the periods of leave at paragraph 4.
       The judge refers to her statement wherein she states that had she
       been advised to make a human rights application in 2014 she would
       have done so and would then have completed 10 years lawful residence.



   31. The judge has followed the Razgar sequential approach, progressing
       through to the final stage of proportionality. The judge clearly
       balanced the appellant's interests with the public interests and the
       statutory provisions in section 117B. At paragraph 39 the judge
       specifically refers to weighing in the balance the length of time the
       appellant had been here lawfully.

   32. Ultimately, it was a matter for the judge to weigh up the balancing
       of the public interest with the appellant circumstances. I can see no
       material error in how this was done. The judge has clearly set out
       the factors taken into account and these have included the length of
       time the appellant was here lawfully and the totality of her time
       here. Consequently, I do not find a material error of law
       established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established. Consequently, the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas dismissing the appeal shall stand. This
appeal is dismissed.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

