
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'SC'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr B Hawkins, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 5 December 2019.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 19 September  2019,
    by which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
    refusal on 9 November 2018 of his protection and human  rights  claims.
    That decision had in turn refused the appellant's application for leave
    to remain based on based on a claim to have been  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery, as a result his father incurring  debts  to  pay  for  medical
    treatment of a family member. He then claimed to have  been  trafficked
    to the UK via Belgium, where his traffickers had  forced  him  to  beg.
    The appellant, then a minor, feared harm or being re-trafficked, if  he
    were returned to his country of origin, Albania.

 3. The core points taken against the appellant by the  respondent  related
    to her concerns  about  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account,
    notwithstanding his age at the  time,  as  a  minor;  as  well  as  the
    plausibility of his  account  -  in  particular,  it  was  regarded  as
    implausible that the appellant would not have used the  opportunity  to
    escape whilst begging in Belgium; or  that  those  who  trafficked  him
    would exercise so little control over him in Belgium. Whilst he claimed
    that his passport had been kept by an agent, he produced  this  at  the
    respondent's asylum unit in November 2016. Given what she  regarded  as
    the inconsistencies and implausibilities in his account, the respondent
    did not give the appellant the statutory 'benefit  of  the  doubt'.  In
    addition, the appellant's family was relatively financially comfortable
    and he would be up to access state protection in Albania.

The FtT's decision

 4. The FtT did not regard the appellant credible.  The  FtT  regarded  the
    appellant as vague in relation to his assertion that his knowledge that
    his father had borrowed money was based on conversations  that  he  had
    overhead, rather than discussed directly.  The FtT also regarded as not
    plausible  that  the  appellant  had  never  attempted  to  escape  his
    traffickers in Belgium or that a stranger would be willing to help  him
    come to the UK without asking about his family.   While FtT noted  that
    the appellant was accepted as a vulnerable witness,  and  that  he  had
    been assessed as suffering from PTSD, his medical needs  did  not  meet
    the threshold under article 3 the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    ('ECHR') and there was no evidence that he would not be able to receive
    medical treatment in Albania.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are lengthy, but the  gist
    of which I summarise below. On a minor  issue,  the  FtT  had  referred
    incorrectly  to  the  appellant's  name  and  gender  in  the  original
    promulgated decision. More importantly, the FtT had failed to  consider
    that the appellant's parents might not have discussed the issue of  the
    loan with the appellant, as he was only 15 at the time and it  was  not
    an issue raised in cross-examination.

 6. The FtT had also erred in findings based on an incorrect record of  the
    appellant's evidence: while FtT had  recorded  that  the  appellant  as
    making little attempt to contact his parents, his direct oral  evidence
    was  the  contrary;  the  FtT  recorded  an  inconsistency   with   the
    appellant's witness statement referring to him not remembering  whether
    loan sharks came to the family home, when the witness statement did not
    include such a passage; whilst the FtT  had  referred  the  appellant's
    claim of a 'stranger' helping him, this had not  been  the  appellant's
    evidence.

 7. The FtT had  failed  to  consider  properly  the  expert  report  of  a
    psychiatrist, when assessing the appellant's  credibility,  noting  the
    appellant's severe depression and PTSD was  attributed  to  being  held
    captive by traffickers.

 8. The  FtT  had  also  failed  to  assess  the  evidence  from  the  same
    psychiatrist about risk of suicide, including the submissions  made  in
    relation to the well-known authority of Y & Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362.

 9. Finally, the FtT failed to give  proper  consideration  to  a  separate
    country report of Dr Antonio Young, who had provided an opinion  as  to
    why the appellant's account was  plausible  and  consistent  background
    evidence.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to  appeal
    to this Tribunal on 29 October 2019.  She regarded it as arguable  that
    the FtT had failed to take into account the appellant's  age,  (15)  at
    the time when his father borrowed money; failed  to  properly  consider
    the appellant's personal evidence; and failed to consider the objective
    expert evidence. The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

11. Mr Walker conceded,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  that  the  FtT's
    decision did contain a number of material errors of  law  both  in  its
    recording of the appellant's evidence (for example in relation  to  the
    visits by loan sharks and people said to be 'strangers')  and  also  in
    other areas, including  a  failure  to  consider  the  medical  report,
    objective country evidence and the risks as  a  consequence  of  mental
    health.  All were accepted to be material and  as  a  consequence  both
    representatives agreed that the FtT decision needed to be set aside  in
    its entirety, without any preservation of finding.

Decision

12. As a consequence of the respondent's concession, I find that the  FtT's
    decision did contain material error of law and I set it  aside  in  its
    entirety, without any preservation of finding of fact.

13. Both representatives agreed that it was appropriate, in  the  light  of
    the need for detailed evidence and consideration of  credibility,  that
    the matter needed to be remitted back for remaking  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to a judge other than Judge Abebrese.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal:

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted  appeal  shall  not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Abebrese.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  16 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


