








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13906/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 14th June 2019                     |On 9th July 2019                |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     MFC

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by First Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Davies promulgated on the 2nd April 2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claims.

 2. The appellant has claimed that he is gay and as a gay man he  would  be
    at risk of persecution in Pakistan.  For the  purpose  of  the  present
    case it appears to be accepted  that  gay  men  would  be  at  risk  of
    mistreatment constituting persecution in Pakistan,  alternatively  that
    those perceived as being gay maybe at risk. The central issue therefore
    before the judge was whether or not the appellant was  gay  or  was  or
    would be perceived to be gay.

 3. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. As the appellant's claim concerns a matter that  is  private
    to the appellant, namely  his  sexuality.  Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 4. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gumsley on the 30th April 2019. Thus the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

Grounds of appeal

 5. The central core of the appellant's case is that he is a gay man and as
    such he would be at risk on return to Pakistan. It is asserted that the
    judge has made unsafe credibility findings on  issues  central  to  the
    appellant's claim.

 6. As part of his account the appellant had  described  two  relationships
    that he had, one with a friend, [F], allegedly from 2014  to  2016  and
    another relationship with a man called [IB]. It  is  suggested  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the judge has failed to make  clear  whether  he
    accepts that the appellant had those  relationships.  It  is  contended
    that a relationship including sexual activities lasting nearly  some  3
    years, that is the relationship with [F], is  a  significant  indicator
    that the appellant is gay and in failing to make  findings  in  respect
    thereof the judge has failed to make clear on  significant  aspects  of
    the appellant's claim.

 7. It is suggested that thereafter the judge's findings that since  coming
    to the United Kingdom that the appellant appears not to  have  had  any
    form of relationship does not necessarily mean that  the  appellant  is
    not gay.

 8. It is asserted that it is significant that the appellant was approached
    with the prospect of marrying a Miss [M] but  he  turned  the  prospect
    down. If the intention of the appellant was to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom he had an opportunity of seeking to do so by marrying a British
    national and seeking to remain as a spouse. It is claimed that this  is
    a significant factor that the judge has failed properly to consider.

 9. As a final element to the  appeal  it  suggested  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is gay that the appellant appeared on a BBC news  item  which
    was  seeking  to  deal  with  therapies  supposedly  impacting  on  the
    sexuality of gay people. It is claimed that as a result of appearing on
    the programme people, including the appellant's family,  will  perceive
    him as gay and he would as a result be at risk.



Factual background

10. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.

11. The appellant claimed that he had realised he was gay when he was about
    14 years old. He and a friend called [F] had been studying together  at
    the friend's house. During a break from studying  appears  they  became
    intimate and had a sexual encounter. The judge was willing to give some
    credence to such sexual encounters not always being carefully  planned.
    [F] and the appellant continued  to  study  together  and  have  sexual
    relations until the appellant was aged 16. When the  appellant  was  16
    [F] found another partner.

12. Thereafter the appellant has referred to using a dating website  Tinder
    on his mobile phone to meet gay men in Pakistan. The appellant met [IB]
    on the website in 2013 and some 2 months after first  telephoning  [IB]
    met in person at [IB]'s house. The relationship continued to the end of
    2013. The appellant claims that neighbours on last of his  visits  held
    [IB] and  addressed  him  in  threatening  terms.  At  that  stage  the
    appellant was frightened and never returned.

13. The appellant confirmed that he was not a member of any gay  groups  or
    pressure groups in Pakistan. The appellant claimed that he was discreet
    about his sexuality in Pakistan because of his fear of how he would  be
    treated.

14. Despite the fact that the appellant  appears  to  continue  to  have  a
    Tinder account, there are no further relationships either  in  Pakistan
    or in the United Kingdom.

15. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 13 September  2017  on  the
    basis of a student visa, which was valid until 19 October 2020.

16. The appellant did not complete his studies in the  United  Kingdom.  He
    stopped studying in autumn 2017, that is within a few months of  entry.
    The appellant was allegedly studying at  a  college  in  Leicester.  In
    giving reasons for his ceasing to study  the  appellant  has  indicated
    that his father  stopped  funding  his  studies  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant appearing on a BBC news item. As pointed out in paragraph  24
    of the decision under appeal the news item had  not  been  aired  until
    June 2018. The appellant had admitted first attending a meeting of  any
    LGBT organisation in April 2018. The  appellant,  in  part  seeking  to
    explain why he had not joined or searched online for LGBT organisations
    earlier, claimed that it  was  because  he  was  concentrating  on  his
    studies.

17. It was also to  be  noted  that  the  appellant  had  admitted  to  not
    attending any meetings of any LGBT  organisation  until  after  he  had
    moved to Manchester, which was in the April 2018. Again that would have
    been several months after he had ceased studying.

18. When pressed with regard to why  he  had  not  completed  part  of  his
    studies or taken the examinations finally the appellant  merely  stated
    that he could not take the papers but  was  claiming  to  have  stopped
    studying in the May 2018.

19. The appellant's account with regard to why he ceased to study and  when
    he ceased to study was not consistent with the facts  as  presented  by
    the respondent.  The  judge  found  much  of  the  appellant's  account
    inconsistent and not credible as  to  the  circumstance  sin  which  he
    stopped studying.

20.  As indicated the appellant claims to have attended LGBT meetings after
    April 2018. It was noted that the appellant had attended a total  of  3
    meetings, one on 30 April 2018, one on 21 July 2018 and the  final  one
    on 24 September 2018. At an early stage of attending the  meetings  the
    appellant  had  requested  support  by  way  of  a  letter   from   the
    organisation but it had been indicated that no  such  letter  would  be
    written until an individual had attended a minimum of 6 meetings  on  a
    regular basis. After September 2018 the appellant ceased to  attend  at
    the LGBT organisation. The appellant has indicated that he did not have
    the money to attend the meetings.

21. The appellant had participated in a BBC news item/programme relating to
    LGBT issues. When asked how he was picked for the program the appellant
    indicated he got to know about it at the LGBT  meeting.  At  a  meeting
    people were selected to participate. The  appellant  said  that  people
    said " You are single, come with us". The item  had  been  photographed
    near the gay village. The program was talking about therapies  proposed
    impact on the sexuality of gay people and the way that brains operated.



22. The judge noted that the appellant appeared  to  have  a  very  limited
    grasp of the issues explored  in  the  programme.  He  claims  to  have
    identified his sexuality  on  the  program  and  given  his  name.  The
    programme had lasted for a few minutes.

23. I note in paragraph 48 that  the  appellant  had  been  writing  on  27
    October 2018 to LGBT group in Rochdale run by Mr Adrian Palmer referred
    to above seeking a letter of support but the  letter  in  response  had
    referred to the fact that they only gave such letters after individuals
    had been attending 6 meetings. However the appellant had stated in  his
    request:- I attended some of your meetings in  Rochdale,  my  interview
    come early in 31st of October could you please help  me  by  supporting
    letter I need a letter I am very thankful to you if you remember I  did
    BBC news interview as well with you and 2 of my friends thanks.

24. The appellant claims that that news item had been shown in Pakistan and
    that his father had seen it. On 6 June 2018 he claimed that  he  had  a
    final conversation with his father in which his father was  asking  him
    to return home. Elsewhere however the appellant has referred to a final
    conversation with his father as being in August 2018.

25. Thereafter the judge  refers  to  the  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    witness Mrs [M]. She had referred to seeing the programme. She knew the
    appellant through a friend. She had suggested and arrange marriage  for
    the appellant with a relative.

26. The appellant was served with forms asserting  that  he  had  illegally
    entered the country on the basis of verbal  deception,  principally  on
    the basis that having entered the United Kingdom he had ceased studying
    in a relatively short space of time and was  therefore  not  a  genuine
    student. The forms were served on the appellant on 21 May 2018. At that
    stage the appellant claimed asylum.

27. In considering the appellant's account the judge had  noted  that  only
    the inconsistencies but matters that were factually wrong. For  example
    the appellant had described his  account  of  his  involvement  on  the
    dating website Tinder. The judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  claims
    about the website were inconsistent with the evidence about the site.

28. The judge had noted other inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence.
    The appellant claims with regard  to  his  relationship  with  [F]  was
    similarly inconsistent with other information provided.

29. The date for and reasons for having ceased to study were not consistent
    with the information about when in fact he did ceased to study and when
    he moved from Leicester to Manchester.

30. The circumstances and dates for his having discussed the BBC news  item
    with his father was similarly inconsistent. Further he had  claimed  to
    have been living openly as a gay man in the United Kingdom but that was
    inconsistent with Mrs [M]'s evidence.

31. The judge has carefully  looked  at  all  the  evidence  including  the
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account. The  judge  has  considered
    the appellant's claims with regard to his relationships whilst  he  was
    in Pakistan. The judge noted that these had ceased  some  years  before
    the appellant sought to come to the United Kingdom. Since being in  the
    United Kingdom the appellant has not referred to any relationship.  The
    appellant's only involvement with any LGBT organisation was that  noted
    as the 3 attendances at meetings  in  Rochdale.  Whilst  the  appellant
    claimed that he could not  afford  to  travel  to  Rochdale  to  attend
    meetings the appellant otherwise has claim to have been  attending  the
    gay village in Manchester but gave no evidence of any relationship even
    a passing relationship  arising  out  of  his  attendance  at  the  gay
    village. The judge made the point that attending the gay village  would
    be more expensive than attending 3 meetings.

32. The judge having  considered  the  evidence  found  much  of  what  the
    appellant asserted to be self-serving. The  judge  had  claimed  to  be
    actively involved in the LGBT community in his  witness  statement  but
    other  than  attending  3  meetings  gave  no  real  substance  to  his
    activities. The judge was satisfied that the actions of  the  appellant
    were merely self serving.

33. The judge was willing to accept that the appellant took part in  a  BBC
    interview. The appellant must have volunteered for that after his  very
    first meeting with the LGBT organisation in Rochdale. That  is  clearly
    the case has his first attendance at the meeting was in  April  and  he
    was not involved in any other meetings until after the  airing  of  the
    broadcast. The news item was extremely brief. The judge satisfied  that
    if such a brief news item had been published in  Pakistan  confirmation
    of such would have been obtained from the BBC and none had. Whilst  the
    judge appreciated that there was no requirement for corroboration,  the
    fact that confirmation should be readily available  and  had  not  been
    obtained could be taken into account.

34. The judge found that there was no claim that the appellant would be  at
    risk from his own family. Further the judge found  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk otherwise from the general population in  Pakistan
    by reason of a foreign news item, even if she did not find  to  be  the
    case the news item was screened in Pakistan. Further even if  the  item
    had been aired in Pakistan there would be available to the appellant an
    option of internal relocation.

35. The primary findings by the judge was that the appellant's account  was
    inconsistent and contradictory in material respects.  Whilst  he  could
    give some credence to the fact that the appellant may when he was young
    have had sexual encounters with another  boy,  even  taking  that  into
    account the judge found that the appellant was not gay.  In  coming  to
    that conclusion the judge took account of the appellant's  claims  with
    regard to his relationship to [IB], but  the  appellant's  claims  with
    regard to Tinder and how the appellant used it were not consistent with
    the evidence about the site.

36. Otherwise it had to be noted that the appellant made  no  reference  to
    any further relationship whether  within  Pakistan  or  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

37. The appellant's account as to why he had given  up  studying  was  also
    contradictory and was not credible.

38. The judge looking at  the  evidence  overall  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had not proved that he was gay. The judge has given valid and
    sufficient reasons for reaching the conclusions that he has. The  judge
    having taken account of all the evidence  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions that he did on a careful analysis of the facts of the case.
    The judge has given valid reasons for  finding  that  elements  of  the
    appellant's account were self-serving or attempts by the  appellant  to
    create evidence to support his claim to asylum.

39. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to come to the  conclusions
    that he did and there is no material error of law in the decision.

Notice of Decision

40. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 1st July 2019





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed      Date 1st July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

