
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13413/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2018                     |On 8th March 2018             |
|                                          |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     Y D
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Friel, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal McManus dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of the Gambia.  She has a son and a
      daughter.  Her son is a British citizen and on the basis of this the
      appellant has discretionary leave to remain.  She claims a fear of
      persecution on the grounds that her daughter is at risk of incurring
      FGM in the Gambia.

   3. I had before me amended grounds of appeal submitted on the same day as
      the notice of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Although the grounds are
      detailed, in the course of the hearing the focus turned to ground 4,
      in particular.  This ground arose from the judge's finding as to the
      ethnic group to which the appellant would be regarded as belonging and
      the risk of FGM in this group.

   4. The appellant's mother is Mandinka.  This is an ethnic group with a
      high incidence of FGM, according to the country information.  The
      daughter's father was a Fula - an ethnic group in which, according to
      the judge's findings, the incidence of FGM is significantly lower than
      among the Mandinka.

   5. The judge based the finding as to the daughter's ethnicity on the
      headnote of the reported decision in K and others (FGM) Gambia CG
      [2013] UKUT 62.  The headnote states at paragraph 7:





           "Thus, it is possible to arrive at a conclusion that the risk
           faced by an individual is less than, or more than, the rate of
           incidence of FGM in the ethnic group of the individual's father
           (if unmarried) or her husband (if married)..."



   6. The judge noted that the appellant was not married to her daughter's
      father.  The judge found that as the daughter's father was Fula, the
      daughter would be regarded as Fula.


   7. Ms Friel argued that this was an error by the judge.  Paragraph 7 of
      the headnote was derived from paragraph 124 of the Tribunal's
      decision, which reads:


           "In assessing the risk facing an individual, the starting point
           is to consider the statistical information currently known about
           the prevalence of the practice within the ethnic group that is
           the relevant ethnic group in the individual's case, as follows:


           a. If the individual is unmarried and given that ethnicity is
              usually taken from the father in The Gambia, the relevant
              ethnic group is likely to be the ethnic group of the father.


           b. If the individual is married to a man that is different from
              her father's ethnic group, then the relevant ethnic group is
              the ethnic group of the husband..."


   8. Miss Friel's first point was that these dicta refer to the marital
      status of the individual who fears being forced to undergo FGM.  The
      judge erred by applying the dicta not to the daughter but to the
      daughter's mother.  The judge found that because the daughter's mother
      and father were not married the daughter would be treated as having
      her father's ethnicity, i.e. Fula.  The daughter, whom it is feared is
      in danger of FGM, is only three years of age.


   9. This point might not of itself be material.  It is not disputed that
      the daughter's father is of Fula ethnicity.  Reliance by the judge on
      paragraph 7 of the headnote, however, compounded the error.  While the
      headnote refers in more or less unqualified terms to the ethnicity of
      an unmarried woman following her father, the actual text of the
      Tribunal's decision, at paragraph 124, is more nuanced.  What is
      stated at paragraph 124 is that ethnicity is usually taken from the
      father and the relevant ethnic group is likely to be the ethnic group
      of the father (italics added).  This is not at all the same as the
      finding made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 24
      of the decision, where the judge stated: "According to K & Others at
      point 7 above, the relevant ethnic group where the parents are
      unmarried is the individual's father's (Fula)."

  10. Not only did the judge err by treating headnote 7 as referring to the
      marital status of the parents of the individual alleged to be at risk,
      rather than the individual herself, but the judge did not have proper
      regard to the qualified language of paragraph 124 of K and others
      indicating that it was no more than "likely" or "usual" for a girl's
      ethnicity prior to her marriage to follow that of her father.

  11. The judge referred, at paragraph 18, to a submission for the appellant
      that while the daughter's ethnic group was likely to be taken from the
      father this was not determinative.  It depended upon the particular
      facts and circumstances.  When, however, the judge came to consider
      this question further, at paragraphs 24 and 25 of the decision, the
      judge found a "...lack of background information to support the
      position that the child would be regarded as being from the
      Mandinka..."

  12. This finding really pinpoints the judge's error.  By misinterpreting
      the headnote at paragraph 7 the judge assumed that because the parents
      of the girl potentially to be subjected to FGM were not married to
      each other then the girls' ethnicity must be taken to be the same as
      her father's.  Having decided on this erroneous basis that the girl's
      ethnicity was that of her father, the judge proceeded on the basis
      that, as this was the approach laid down in a Country Guideline case,
      the judge could not reach any other conclusion unless there was
      "background information" to support it.  The evidence of the appellant
      herself was not sufficient.

  13. By reasoning this way the judge erred twice over.  Not only did the
      judge err by misreading the headnote but the judge further erred by
      assuming that the headnote laid down a finding which had to be
      followed in the absence of country information to the contrary.  In
      fact what paragraph 124 said, in the body of the Upper Tribunal's
      decision, was that it was likely a girl's ethnicity would follow her
      father.  Assessing the girl's ethnicity involved looking at all the
      relevant evidence.  There was no finding by the Upper Tribunal of how
      to ascertain ethnicity which could be dislodged only by country
      information.  Accordingly the judge erred by failing to have proper
      regard to the appellant's evidence, and to the submissions made on her
      behalf, as to why the appellant's daughter would be regarded as
      Mandinka and not Fula.

  14. There were a number of other matters that were referred to me.  One of
      these was that the judge did not properly interpret the statistical
      information as to the incidence of FGM among the Fula.  Not all of the
      sub-groups of the Fula had a comparatively low incidence of FGM.  In
      this context Mr Matthews submitted that it should be considered
      significant that the girl's father had not identified to which sub-
      group of the Fula he belonged.  Having heard submissions on these
      points I did not consider it necessary to reach a decision upon them.
      These were matters which may properly be addressed at a further
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

  15. I am satisfied for the reasons stated above that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal erred in law in making findings as to the
      ethnicity of the appellant's daughter.  These errors render the
      judge's conclusions unsound.  There are not sufficient reliable
      findings to allow me to re-make the decision.  The proper course is
      for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, with no
      findings preserved, for the appeal to be reheard before a different
      judge.


Conclusions

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.


  17. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is set aside.

  18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved for the decision to be re-made before a differently
      constituted Tribunal.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  Having
regard to the subject matter of this appeal being the protection of a
child, and bearing in mind the need to preserve the positions of the
parties pending a final decision in the appeal, I make a direction for
anonymity.  Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise, no
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the
appellant or any member of her family.  This direction applies to the
appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction may
lead to proceedings for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
       7th March 2018
