
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13373/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 17th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             ms Halyna Brykailo
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Karia instructed by Sterling Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine and she  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis of a fear of her ex-husband and  her  fear  of  being  called  to
    military service as a nurse within the armed forces in Ukraine.

 2. Her claim for international protection which included protection  under
    the  ECHR  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Metzer  and
    permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable the judge  had
    misdirected himself as to a fundamental part of the claim,  had  failed
    to engage with material that was before him and had arguably failed  to
    give adequate reasons for his findings.

Permission to Appeal

 3. It was first, in Ground 1, argued that the judge had, at paragraph  15,
    not applied the correct test from Sepet and Bulbul v the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ  681  and  Krotov  v  the
    Secretary of State [2004] EWCA Civ 69.  It was submitted that the  test
    was  not  whether  the  military  service   itself   would   contravene
    international standards but whether the appellant  may  be  'associated
    with' a military which  is  engaged  in  acts  which  contravene  those
    standards.

 4. It was submitted that although it was accepted in Sepet and Bulbul that
    there was no extant legal rule or  principle  derived  from  treaty  or
    customary international law which vouched  a right of  either  absolute
    or partial conscientious objection without more it had been conceded by
    the Secretary of State and emphasised by the court per Laws LJ at  402,
    paragraph 61 that

         "It is plain (indeed un-contentious) that there  are  circumstances
         in which a conscientious objector may rightly claim that punishment
         for draft evasion  would  amount  to  persecution:  where  military
         service to which he was called involves acts, with which he may  be
         associated, which are contrary to basic  rules  of  human  conduct:
         where the conditions of military service are themselves so harsh as
         to amount to persecution on the  facts;  where  the  punishment  in
         question is disproportionately harsh or severe".

    It was submitted that a nurse may well be associated  with  a  type  of
    military action described in ground 2 below and the fact  that  doctors
    or nurses did not fight did  not  excuse  their  participation  in  war
    crimes.

 5. In relation to ground 2 it was submitted that the judge had  failed  to
    engage with the evidence and given adequate reasons.  He had not  taken
    into account the  background  evidence  and  pleadings  which  referred
    particularly the findings in the New Zealand case of AC Ukraine  [2015]
    NZIPT 800749-52.  It was accepted that this  was  not  binding  on  the
    Tribunal  but  was  nevertheless  an  application  of  the  same  legal
    principles and the Tribunal was invited to place significant weight  on
    those findings, such that international organisations,  NGOs  including
    Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and the UN High Commission of
    Human  Rights  had  issued  periodic  reports  of  human  right  abuses
    committed in the Donbas region by separatist government forces.

 6. Although PS remained authoritative with  regard  prison  conditions  in
    Ukraine and that they contravened Article 3, it  predated  the  current
    conflict and the new  approach  to  conscription.   There  was  ongoing
    evidence that the Ukrainian forces were engaging in  acts  of  torture,
    disappearances, extrajudicial killing and abuse with apparent impunity.
     The judge had failed to reject this evidence and if he did so to  give
    reasons for rejecting it.  It was submitted that it was not adequate in
    those circumstances simply to rely upon PS which is now over  a  decade
    old.

 7. There was thus a  failure  to  give  reasons  and  the  thrust  to  the
    appellant's was that if conscripted she would be  associated  with  the
    military which was currently engaging in acts contrary to international
    standards and that conscription in the circumstances was persecutory.

The Hearing

 8. Mr Karia submitted a skeleton argument in which he  expanded  upon  the
    written grounds and  alluded  to  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal  country
    guidance  authorities  VB  and  Another  (draft  evaders   and   prison
    conditions) CG [2017] UKUT 79.  It was argued that Judge  Metzer  after
    noting that the appellant was a nurse  applied  an  erroneous  test  of
    "would be required to undergo ..." in relation to military service. The
    judge concluded that as she would  not  be  actually  involved  in  the
    conflict owing to being a nurse in the military, the service she  would
    be required to undergo would not be contrary  to  the  basic  rules  of
    human conduct and therefore she would  not  be  persecuted.   Mr  Karia
    submitted, however, treating war criminals  providing  medical  support
    for detained hostages were  military  acts  with  which  she  would  be
    associated. Further the judge should have considered  the  evidence  in
    AC.

 9. Mr Kotas relied on the recent case of VB.

Conclusions

10. Putting aside for one moment the debate as to  whether  PS,  should  no
    longer be followed in the light of AC  Ukraine  on  the  basis  of  the
    contravention of the basic rules of  human  conduct,  I  note  that  at
    paragraphs 32, 33 and 34 of Krotov v SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  69,   the
    grave breaches or inhuman conduct were set out as Article 3 to the four
    Geneva  Conventions  1949,  Article  147  of  Convention   (IV),   and,
    additionally Protocol II of the 1949 Geneva Convention relating to  the
    Protection of Victims of  Non-International  Armed  Conflicts  (adopted
    1977) under the heading "Humane treatment under Article IV (Fundamental
    Guarantees).

11. As stated at paragraphs 32 to 34 of Krotov

    32.    Common Article 3 to the four Geneva  Conventions  of  August  12
         1949 ,to which 191 States are party, provides:

             In  the  case  of  armed  conflict  not  of  an  international
             character  occurring  in  a  territory  of  one  of  the  High
             Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict shall be bound
             to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions:

             (1)  persons  taking  no  active  part  in  the   hostilities,
                  including members of armed forces who have laid down their
                  arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness,  wounds,
                  detention, or any other cause, should in all circumstances
                  be  treated  humanely,  without  any  adverse  distinction
                  founded on race, colour, religion or faith, sex, birth  or
                  wealth, or any similar criteria.

             To  this  end,  the  following  acts  are  and  shall   remain
             prohibited at any  time  and  in  any  place  whatsoever  with
             respect to the above-mentioned persons:

             (a) violence to life and person, in particular murder  of  all
                  kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;

             (b) taking of hostages;

             (c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular  humiliating
                  and degrading treatment;"

    33.    Article 147 of Convention (IV) proscribes as "grave breaches":

             Any of the following acts, if  committed  against  persons  or
             property protected by the present Convention: wilful  killing,
             torture   or   inhuman   treatment,    including    biological
             experiments,  wilfully  causing  great  suffering  or  serious
             injury to body or health, unlawful deportation or transfer  or
             unlawful  confinement  of  a  protected  person  x  taking  of
             hostages  and  extensive  destruction  and  appropriation   of
             property, not justified by military necessity and carried  out
             unlawfully and wantonly."

    34.    Additional Protocol II of the 1949 Geneva Convention relating to
         the Protection of  Victims  of  Non-International  Armed  Conflicts
         (Adopted 1977) , under the heading "Humane Treatment" under Article
         IV (Fundamental Guarantees) provides:

             1.  All persons who do not take a  direct  part  or  who  have
                  ceased to take part in hostilities, whether or  not  their
                  liberty has been restricted, are entitled to  respect  for
                  their  person,  honour  and  convictions   and   religious
                  practices.  They shall in  all  circumstances  be  treated
                  humanely,  without  any  adverse   distinction.    It   is
                  prohibited to order that there shall be no survivors.

             2.  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing,  the
                  following  acts  against  the  persons  referred   to   in
                  paragraph 1 are and shall remain prohibited  at  any  time
                  and in any place whatsoever:

                      (a)   violence to the life, health  and  physical  or
                           mental  well-being  of  persons,  in   particular
                           murder  as  well  as  cruel  treatments  such  as
                           torture,  mutilation  or  any  form  of  corporal
                           punishment;

                      (b)   Collective punishments;

                      (c)   Taking of hostages;

                      (d)   Acts of terrorism;

                      (e)   Outrages upon personal dignity,  in  particular
                           humiliating  and   degrading   treatment,   rape,
                           enforced prostitution and any  form  of  indecent
                           assaults x"

         156 States are parties to Additional Protocol II .

    In addition, as stated at paragraph 37 of  Krotov,  the  crimes  listed
    above if committed on a systematic basis or as  a  result  of  official
    indifference to the widespread actions  of  a  brutal  mitlitary  would
    qualify as acts contrary to the basic rules of human conduct in respect
    of which punishment for  a  refusal  to  participate  would  constitute
    persecution within the ambit of the 1951 Convention.

12. It is clear that the Conventions require the authorities to treat those
    who have 'laid down their arms and  those  placed  hors  de  combat  by
    sickness and wounds (inter  alia)  to  be  treated  humanely.   If  the
    authorities  in  Ukraine  did  not  having  nursing  facilities  it  is
    difficult to see how those governments could  comply  with  the  Geneva
    Convention. As such I  do  not  accept  that  the  'nursing'  would  be
    associated with war crimes.  In fact the lack of  such  facilities  may
    suggest the opposite.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  evidence  produced
    indicated that nurses in Ukraine had to engage in  any  services  other
    than humane nursing.

13. Further, it should be noted that the paragraph 40, Lord Justice  Potter
    observed that

         "In respect of the test propounded in B and the Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department is that I would substitute  the  words  'in
         which he may be required to  participate'  [my  emphasis]  for  the
         words 'with which he may be associated'  as  emphasising  that  the
         grounds should be limited to reasonable fear on  the  part  of  the
         objector that he will be  personally  involved  in  such  acts,  as
         opposed to a more generalised assertion of fear or opinion based on
         reported examples of individual excesses of the kind  which  almost
         inevitably occur in the course of armed conflict, but which are not
         such as to amount to  the  multiple  commission  of  inhumane  acts
         pursuant to or in furtherance of a state policy of authorisation or
         indifference."

14. I would therefore conclude  that  the  words  "with  which  he  may  be
    associated" has been qualified to the extent that the  appellant  would
    have been required to actively participate in the crimes as  identified
    above.  The Appellant expected to be recruited as she stated as a nurse
    and that was the grounds on which her papers (which  I  note  have  not
    been accepted as valid) were served for conscription.  As  a  nurse  on
    the evidence as provided it is difficult to see  how  activities  as  a
    nurse in Ukraine could be described as anything other than humane.

15. Even if that were not the case, I turn to the point in relation to  the
    case of AC Ukraine  v  the  Immigration  and  Protection  Tribunal  New
    Zealand.  PS, which held that there was no question of persons  in  the
    military being required to perform acts contrary to international  law.
    The case of AC referenced independent and international reports such as
    the Amnesty International Report at paragraph 77 and the UN  Office  of
    the High Commissioner for Human Rights Reports at paragraph 78.   Those
    in turn identified allegations of  violations  of  international  human
    rights law and international humanitarian  law  by  the  Ukrainian  law
    enforcement agencies in  the  security  operation  area  and  those  in
    military uniform (79).  Although Mr Kotas argued it was a  New  Zealand
    first instance case, I nonetheless find it was open  to  the  judge  to
    consider the case.  However, the judge did take into account of AC  but
    in the particular circumstances of this case found  the  appellant  was
    not at risk.   It was open to the judge to approach  and  consider  the
    appellant's appeal in the way that he did.  He noted that the appellant
    would return as a nurse,  even  assuming  she  would  be  eligible  for
    conscription, finding that her service would not  be  contrary  to  the
    basic rules of human conduct, a point which I have addressed above.

16. The judge's decision was not in conflict with  the  subsequent  country
    guidance promulgated in March 2017 which in effect is declaratory.   VB
    and Another (draft evaders and prison  conditions)  Ukraine  CG  [2017]
    UKUT 00079 albeit promulgated after  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision (19th January 2017) identified in the head note

         "1.      At the current time it is not  reasonably  likely  that  a
             draft evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in  Ukraine
             would face criminal or  administrative  proceedings  for  that
             act,  although  if  a  draft  evader  did   face   prosecution
             proceedings, the criminal code  of  Ukraine  does  provide  in
             Articles 335, 336 and 409 for a prison sentence  for  such  an
             offence.  It would be a matter for any Tribunal to consider in
             the  light  of  developing   evidence   whether   there   were
             aggravating matters which  might  lead  to  imposition  of  an
             immediate custodial sentence, rather than a suspended sentence
             or the matter proceeding as an administrative  offence  and  a
             fine being sought by a prosecutor."

17. Although there was no in depth assessment of whether there would  be  a
    detention on return in VB, the assessment of Judge Metzer at paragraphs
    11 to 13 reflected essentially the findings in VB , albeit  promulgated
    later, such that it is unlikely that in  the  majority  of  cases,  the
    consequences of a person's general unwillingness  to  serve  the  armed
    forces or objection to enter a combat zone  would  be  such  that  they
    could make a well-founded claim for protection although each case  must
    be determined on the individual facts.   Judge  Metzer  looked  at  the
    particular and individual facts relevant to the present case and indeed
    noted at [15] that he applied the Country Guidance.

18. It is abundantly  clear  from  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Ukraine on Military Service (November  2016)  that  there  is  specific
    provision  for  conscientious   objection   under   Ukraine   law   and
    specifically conscientious objection for recognised  religious  groups.
    That is the basis upon which, confirmed in the skeleton argument,  that
    the appellant objected to  participation  as  a  nurse.   The  specific
    provisions for conscientious objectors are identified at 6 of the  CIG,
    Country Information and Guidance Ukraine  Military  Service  which  was
    evidence before the parties.  As recorded  as  6.3.1,  for  example  in
    practice,  in  relation  to  a  Jehovah's  Witness  the  requests   for
    "alternative service are 'generally respected, and few  witnesses  have
    faced prosecution'".

19. Following VB it is not reasonably likely that the draft evader avoiding
    conscription or mobilisation in the  Ukraine  would  face  criminal  or
    administrative proceedings.  This adds weight to the decision of  Judge
    Metzer.  Although the findings of Judge Metzer  were  economical,  this
    does not necessarily indicate a  material   error  of  law  and  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) confirms


        Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of  the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

20. Close analysis reveals that there was no material error of law in Judge
    Metzer's decision and it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                              Date  Signed  15th   May
    2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

