
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/13137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On November 30, 2018                         |On December 7, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel, instructed by Turpin and Miller
For the Respondent:    Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Egypt who claimed to have arrived in the
    United Kingdom on February 10, 2016 and claimed asylum on April 20,
    2016. The respondent refused his application under paragraphs 336 and
    339M HC 395 on November 28, 2017.


 2. The appellant lodged an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 12, 2017 and his appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Farmer on September 6,
    2018. In a decision promulgated on September 12, 2018 the Judge
    dismissed the appellant's claims.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on September 25, 2018. Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien on
    October 5, 2018. In giving permission the Judge concluded it was
    arguable the Judge had erred by failing to take into account the
    appellant's activities as an atheist in the United Kingdom and such
    evidence was material to the assessment of whether the appellant would
    live discreetly as an atheist on return.

 4. In a letter dated November 19, 2018, the respondent accepted there had
    been an error in law and invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal
    by considering if the appellant's sur place activities were accepted
    whether they would place the appellant at risk, if he was returned to
    Egypt.

 5. Ms Kenny accepted there was an error in law and the issue was (a)
    whether the appellant would have been at risk on return to Egypt
    because he was now an atheist and (b) how he would have behaved on
    return applying the principles of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 and
    RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38.

 6. Ms Smith was content to conclude the remaking of the decision at this
    hearing.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 7. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Kenny submitted that whilst there  was  evidence  that  atheists  in
    Egypt were discriminated against, she submitted that it was not illegal
    to be an atheist and there was insufficient  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim that returning him would lead to him being persecuted
    or face serious harm. It was important to note that  whilst  the  Judge
    had erred in the First-tier Tribunal by failing to consider the risk as
    an  atheist  the  remainder  of  the  Judge's  decision  had  not  been
    challenged and those findings should stand. Whilst she  accepted  there
    was evidence that he was attending demonstrations and posting on social
    media she submitted there was no reason to believe he would live openly
    on his return and consequently there was no basis to allow his appeal.

 9. Ms Smith submitted that there was ample  evidence  in  the  appellant's
    bundle that people were being prosecuted under the blasphemy  law.  She
    referred to a number of articles in the appellant's bundle that  showed
    atheists  had  been  arrested,  prosecuted,  convicted  and  thereafter
    imprisoned under the blasphemy laws.  If  people  were  prosecuted  for
    their religious beliefs,  then  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution/serious harm on return. The appellant wished to live openly
    as an atheist and in doing so would be at risk of persecution.

    FINDINGS


10. When this  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Judge
    recorded that the respondent accepted that the appellant had  converted
    from Sunni Muslim to atheist. At paragraph 19 of the Judge's  decision,
    the Judge accepted the appellant's evidence that he was an atheist  but
    found the appellant, in all other respects, lacked credibility.


11. The issue that I have to consider is not about what happened  in  Egypt
    before the appellant came to the United Kingdom  in  2016  but  whether
    atheists, per se, face a risk of persecution in Egypt, or is it  simply
    certain atheists who face a risk, and if being an active atheist  would
    place the appellant at risk.

12. If, as Ms Smith argues, atheists are at risk generally  then  it  would
    matter little whether the appellant  intended  to  openly  live  as  an
    atheist or not. The principles set out in HJ (Iran) would apply and the
    appellant would succeed in his protection claim.

13. The decision letter dated November 28, 2017 did  not  properly  address
    this issue. Paragraph 37 of the decision letter referred to the Country
    Policy and Information Note, Egypt: Christians (July 2017)  but  merely
    stated that as he had failed to demonstrate he had been targeted by the
    authorities for being an ex-Muslim atheist or that he had been  accused
    or charged under any blasphemy law cast doubt on the credibility of his
    claim. It was never the appellant's claim that  he  had  been  an  open
    atheist in Egypt. The appellant had claimed that he had  been  harassed
    and threatened in Egypt  because  he  criticised  Islamic  history  and
    Islamic beliefs, but this aspect of the claim was rejected by the Judge
    and is not something that has been appealed by the appellant.

14. In his interview he stated that whilst he believed in atheism  when  he
    was in Egypt he ensured that he was  not  identified  as  an  ex-Muslim
    atheist in Egypt and it is only after he came  to  the  United  Kingdom
    that he was encouraged to be more open and to  reveal  his  atheism  to
    others.

15. His case is that he has increased his knowledge  and  understanding  of
    atheism and humanism by joining in attending many events  and  meetings
    with the  Council  of  Ex-Muslims  in  Britain,  the  National  Secular
    Society, Harrow Humanists and Humanists UK. He has also posted articles
    on Facebook, Twitter and published documents on Word Press. He provided
    letters of support confirming his involvement with the  various  groups
    and  at  the  First-tier   Tribunal   two   witnesses   from   humanist
    organisations attended and gave oral evidence on his behalf. Since  the
    last  hearing  the  appellant  has  adduced   further   documents   and
    photographs indicating that he has continued to write  blogs  and  post
    photographs on social media as well as attend further meetings.

16. Taking the evidence, including the evidence from the two witnesses  who
    also attended this hearing but were not required to  give  evidence  by
    this Tribunal, I am satisfied that the  appellant  is  an  enthusiastic
    supporter of atheism and has projected himself in a very public way and
    is likely to continue to do so in the future. I do not propose  to  set
    out each document which supports this  conclusion  as  they  are  self-
    evident in the appellant's bundle of documents.

17. The issue in my opinion is whether this appellant would now be at  risk
    of persecution because of his religious belief.

18. Paragraph 5.3.2 of  the  aforementioned  Country  Report  states,  "The
    Egyptian website Mada Masr referred to criticism of  Egypt's  blasphemy
    laws by Human Rights Watch, which noted that they  curtail  freedom  of
    expression, which is guaranteed by the Egyptian Constitution. Mada Masr
    stated that blasphemy laws are used against  everyone,  including  Shia
    Muslims, atheists, Copts, and in some cases, Sunni Muslims."

19. The United  State  Department  Country  Report  on  Human  Rights  2015
    reported that  local  and  international  rights  groups  had  reported
    increased  charges  under  the  blasphemy  law,   primarily   targeting
    Christians but also atheists.

20. The appellant's bundle contained a number of articles between pages  52
    and 173 that described religious crackdowns and prosecutions in Egypt.

21. A report in Egypt Today dated July 10, 2018 reported that Egypt had the
    highest number of atheists in the Middle East but this  only  stood  at
    866 out of a population of 87  million  citizens  although  the  report
    suggested that it was  hard  to  determine  the  actual  percentage  of
    atheists since many of them feared that if they declared  their  belief
    their life would be in danger. This figure is brought into question  by
    other documents that suggest atheists could form as much as 10  million
    of the population.

22. On January 4, 2018 the Parliament Committee  on  religion  produced  an
    explanatory note on the draft law to criminalise atheism in  Egypt.  Ms
    Smith accepted that no law had been brought into force but  she  argued
    it was indicative of how the authorities felt about atheism but I  note
    the US Commission on International Religious Freedom 2018 Report stated
    that this bill had failed. Atheism is therefore not a criminal offence.



23. The same report reported that between 2011 and 2013, 27 people had been
    convicted of declaring themselves as atheists and in November 2014 a 21-
    year-old student was sentenced to 3 years in prison for  announcing  on
    Facebook that he was an atheist. Recently, the Egyptian security forces
    arrested a  29-year-old  student  for  administering  a  Facebook  page
    promoting atheism (see below for further details).

24. The US Department of State  '2017  Report  on  International  Religious
    Freedom: Egypt' issued on May 29, 2018, placed the number  of  atheists
    in Egypt anywhere between 1 million and 10 million  people.  On  August
    21, National Security Service (NSS)  officials  arrested  two  atheists
    after their manager at La Poire, a pastry shop in New  Cairo,  notified
    authorities of a private  message  passed  between  the  two  that  was
    critical of religion. The officials beat the two  arrestees,  according
    to sources familiar with the case, and then told inmates to  beat  them
    further. On December 23, NSS officers arrested  a  29-year-old  man  on
    charges of denigration  of  religions  for  allegedly  administering  a
    Facebook page entitled "Al Mulhedeen" ("The Atheists") with  more  than
    34,000 followers, according to press reports. The page, which allegedly
    questioned some Quranic verses and promoted the "Big  Bang"  theory  of
    the origin of the universe, was no longer available after  the  arrest.
    North Giza Court subsequently ordered the  man  detained  for  15  days
    pending investigation.


25. An article dated May  4,  2018  from  the  International  Humanist  and
    Ethical Union described how the author of  a  YouTube  channel,  Sherif
    Gaber, had discussed numerous on his YouTube channel including atheism.
    On March 31, 2018 he had tweeted  that  a  new  case  had  been  raised
    against him  in  connection  with  his  ongoing  atheist  advocacy.  He
    described how the police detained him for a period of time although  he
    was subsequently released. In February 2015 he had  been  sentenced  to
    one year in  prison  with  hard  labour  for  "professed  atheism"  and
    insulting Islam as well as defending homosexuality.

26. Article 98(f) of  the  Egyptian  penal  code  prohibits  citizens  from
    "ridiculing or  insulting  heavenly  religions  or  inciting  sectarian
    strife." Authorities have used  this  law  to  detain,  prosecute,  and
    imprison members of  religious  groups  whose  practices  deviate  from
    mainstream  Islamic  beliefs  or  whose  activities  are   alleged   to
    jeopardize "communal  harmony"  or  insult  Judaism,  Christianity,  or
    Islam. It is this legislation that Ms  Smith  argues  would  place  the
    appellant at risk of prosecution.

27. The 2017/2018 Amnesty International  Report  dated  February  22,  2018
    referred to criminal charges being brought against people  who  defamed
    the Islamic religion but cited no  examples  of  any  prosecutions  for
    being an atheist.

28. The DFAT Country Information Report-Egypt May 2017-confirmed that there
    was no legal statute preventing atheism in Egypt although the State had
    previously opposed the practice of the  religion.  DFAT  assessed  that
    proclaimed atheists  faced  a  high  risk  of  official  discrimination
    because vilification by government officials leaves them vulnerable  to
    arrest (under Article 98) or public  vigilantism.  DFAT  assessed  that
    proclaimed atheists face a moderate level of  societal  discrimination,
    although  this  is   dependent   on   individual   and   socio-economic
    circumstances.

29. The Christian Solidarity Worldwide Freedom of Religion Report, February
    2017, reiterated that despite the standards set  out  in  international
    covenants regarding freedom of expression, those professing atheism  in
    Egypt are afforded little or no  legal  protection.  Instead  they  are
    actively targeted by the authorities and by society.

30. The Freedom of Thought Report 2015 reported that atheists were  one  of
    Egypt's least protected minorities and that there  was  a  campaign  to
    turn the youth  away  from  atheism  with  several  prominent  atheists
    arrested and convicted. Whilst Article 64 of  the  constitution  states
    that freedom of belief is absolute the report suggests that the freedom
    to practice that religion was limited.

31. Looking collectively at these articles the picture in Egypt is far from
    clear. Under Article 64 of the constitution there is freedom of  belief
    but  the  authorities  appear,  in  some  cases,  to  have   prosecuted
    individuals under the blasphemy laws.

32. The bundle of documents provided by the appellant was considerable, but
    they did not appear to highlight a policy  of  prosecution  simply  for
    being an atheist. There is evidence  of  discrimination  and  I  accept
    evidence of a few people being prosecuted for  what  they  have  either
    spoken or written.

33. Ms Smith argues that all atheists are at risk but that is not borne out
    by the articles that I have looked at in the appellant's bundle.  There
    have been some prosecutions and assuming the appellant  intends  to  be
    open about his religion in Egypt I have to  consider  whether  that  is
    reasonably likely to place him at risk of persecution or  serious  harm
    from the authorities. At the hearing he handed up recent blogs  he  had
    written but these blogs do not attack Islam as such.

34. Reports of prosecutions in the appellant's bundle are limited and those
    who have been prosecuted appear to have spoken out  against  Islam  and
    not simply spoken out in support of atheism.

35. I was provided with limited evidence of his Facebook and Twitter social
    media accounts and what  I  was  provided  with  did  not  specifically
    criticise Islam. A report from the Evening  Standard  complained  about
    "Islamophobic"  banners  at  London  Pride  in  July  2017  (which  the
    appellant can be seen attending) with concerns raised  that  protesters
    were inciting hatred against Muslims on absolutely groundless  reasons.
    Contained within the bundle was evidence from the Council of Ex-Muslims
    of Britain who supported the appellant's appeal and stated that he  had
    joined their events and protests.

36. Whilst some people have been prosecuted, I find  they  appear  to  have
    been prosecuted because of their  stance  over  Islam  and  not  simply
    because they were atheists.

37.  I  accept  it  is  reasonably   likely   that   atheists   do   suffer
    discrimination, but discrimination is not the same as persecution.

38. Dealing specifically with this appellant I am satisfied  that  although
    he is an active atheist and someone who would be a reasonably likely to
    continue to write blogs and use social media to support  atheism  there
    is insufficient evidence to support  Ms  Smith's  submission  that  the
    Egyptian authorities has a policy of persecution  against  atheists  or
    that he would be at  risk  of  persecution  because  of  his  religious
    beliefs.

Notice of Decision

39. There was an error in law and I set aside the protection decision.

40. I have remade that decision and I dismiss the protection claim.

41. In all other respects the First-tier Tribunal decision is upheld.


Signed                              Date     04/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal


Signed                              Date     04/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

