
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13955/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2019                  |On 13 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     IZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Fazli (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant, a citizen of the Afghanistan born in 2005,  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision  dated  30  November
    2018 to refuse a protection and human rights claim. The  FtT  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

 2. At the hearing before me on 11 December 2019 it was agreed between  the
    parties that the FtT erred in law  for  the  reasons  advanced  in  the
    grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal was granted,  and  in
    particular by:

    (i)  making a mistake as to fact in the assessment of  the  credibility
         of the appellant's claim in terms of the distance between Bati  Kot
         and Jalalabad airport; and

    (ii)     failing  to  consider  written  evidence  in  support  of  the
         appellant's claim said to be from the appellant's maternal uncle.

 3. It was also agreed between the parties that the errors of law are  such
    as to require the decision of the FtT to  be  set  aside  and  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision of the FtT for error  of
    law and remit the appeal to the FtT for  a  hearing  de  novo,  on  all
    grounds, before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K.L.
    James, with no findings of fact preserved.

 5. In remitting the appeal I have had  regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.

                                     DIRECTION

    In  preparation  for  the  forthcoming  hearing  before  the  FtT,  the
    appellant is to file with the FtT and serve,  a  complete  copy  of  an
    appellant's bundle as it appears that the bundle  that  was  previously
    before the FtT omitted pages 70-91.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because the appellant is a minor and because this  is  a  protection  claim,
unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            11/12/19


