
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13059/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                    F K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was born on  23  June  1999.
    He arrived in the UK clandestinely  as  an  unaccompanied  minor  on  8
    October 2015.  He claimed asylum the next day.  On  24  November  2017,
    the Secretary of State refused  his  claims  for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Clemes
    accepted that the appellant was giving a "mainly truthful" account (see
    [23]).  He accepted that the appellant  was  a  "true  OLF  supporter",
    namely of the Oromo Liberation Front in Ethiopia.  He accepted that the
    appellant  had  been  involved  with  the  OLF,  having  attended   one
    demonstration  and  having  distributed  leaflets  on   their   behalf.
    Following one occasion  in  2015,  when  he  was  returning  home  from
    distributing leaflets, he was arrested and detained at a police station
    for 25 days during which time he was interrogated  but  released  after
    his mother had paid a bribe.

 4.  Having  accepted  this  involvement  with  the  OLF,   Judge   Clemes,
    nevertheless, concluded that the appellant  had  not  established  that
    there was a real risk of serious harm or  persecution  on  return.   At
    para [25], Judge Clemes said this:

         "Whilst I do not doubt that he is a true OLF supporter,  he  is  in
         the very lowest echelons of its ranks, I am satisfied.  I find that
         people who took part in the protest but were not  arrested  and  do
         not have an outstanding warrant, or those  who  were  arrested  but
         then released are unlikely to be identified or sought  (this  would
         encompass the appellant, of course) and therefore unlikely to be at
         risk of persecution or serious harm on return."

 5. In support of that  conclusion,  Judge  Clemes  relied  upon  the  Home
    Office's Country Information and Guidance Note, "Ethiopia:  Oromos  and
    the 'Oromo Protest' (December 2016) to which he was referred.

 6. Consequently, the appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The
    appellant sought permission to appeal and on 21 May  2018,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 7 September 2018, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    opposing the appellant's appeal.

 8. At the hearing, we heard brief submissions from Mr Clark on  behalf  of
    the appellant and from Mr Howells, who represented the respondent.   Mr
    Howells conceded, having heard Mr Clark's submissions, that the judge's
    decision was legally flawed.  He accepted that the  judge  had  applied
    the wrong CPIN  relevant  to  the  appellant.   The  relevant  CPIN  is
    "Ethiopia: Opposition to the Government" (October 2017).   He  accepted
    that the judge had not  been  referred  to  this  (correct)  CPIN.   Mr
    Howells accepted that on  the  judge's  findings  in  para  25  of  the
    appellant's  involvement  with  the  OLF,  he  was  at  real  risk   of
    persecution or serious  ill-treatment  applying  the  relevant  country
    guidance decision of MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    0030.  Mr Howells acknowledged that the Home Office's position set  out
    in paras 2.3.14 and 2.3.15 of the relevant CPIN was  that  the  country
    situation in Ethiopia had "not significantly  changed"  since  MB.   Mr
    Howells conceded, therefore, that the judge had materially erred in law
    in dismissing the appeal and he accepted  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on asylum grounds.

 9. Paragraph 2.3.14 of the CPIN summarises the effect of MB as follows:

         "... OLF members and  sympathisers,  and  those  perceived  by  the
         authorities to be such members or sympathisers, will in general  be
         at real risk of persecution if they have been  previously  arrested
         or detained on suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too will those who
         have a significant  history,  known  to  the  authorities,  of  OLF
         membership or sympathy (para 66)."

10. We accept that the appellant falls within that rubric.  He is a genuine
    OLF supporter and sympathiser and  has  previously  been  arrested  and
    detained on suspicion of his OLF involvement.

11. Paragraph 2.3.15 goes on to state that the country  situation  has  not
    "significantly changed" since MB.

12. In the light of this, we accept that Judge Clemes materially  erred  in
    law by failing to consider the relevant country guidance decision in MB
    and, albeit through no fault of his own, by  failing  to  consider  the
    CPIN relevant to the appellant's circumstances.

13. On the basis of the judge's findings and the  application  of  MB,  the
    appellant has established a real risk of persecution for  a  Convention
    reason on return to Ethiopia.

Decision

14. The decision of the FtT to dismiss the appeal involved the making of an
    error of law.  We set aside the FtT's decision to dismiss the appeal.

15. For the reasons we have given above and as  Mr  Howells  conceded,  the
    appellant has established a real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Ethiopia because of his political opinion due to his  involvement  with
    the OLF.

16. Consequently, we remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             19 October 2018
