
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/13078/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th April 2018                        | On 11th May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     t d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett instructed by Wick & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of  Vietnam  whose  date  of  birth  is  24th
    October 1999, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of
    the Home Office dated 9th November 2016 to refuse his  application  for
    asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision dated 29th October 2017.  The Appellant  now  appeals  to
    this Tribunal with permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
    on 21st February 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claims  that  his
    father accumulated a number of debts in  relation  to  his  involvement
    with gambling.  His parents were threatened and their  home  ransacked.
    He claims that his parents  disappeared  and  the  Appellant  was  left
    homeless, that he lived on the streets and worked for  street  vendors.
    He claimed that he  was  trafficked  to  the  UK  and  placed  with  an
    employer.  He claims that he was about  to  be  passed  on  to  another
    employer when he was able to escape and claimed asylum in April 2016.

 3. There was a referral to the competent authority  through  the  National
    Referral Mechanism to consider whether the Appellant had been a  victim
    of human trafficking.  On 11th April 2017 the competent authority  made
    a decision that there were  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  the
    Appellant was a victim of human trafficking.  The  competent  authority
    subsequently made a conclusive decision that the Appellant had been the
    subject of human trafficking (although the letter is undated, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision notes that the decision was made on 17th
    October 2017). In that decision it appears to have been  accepted  that
    the Appellant's date of birth is 24th October  1999  and  that  he  was
    subjected to forced labour in London.

 4. In considering the Appellant's claim for asylum the Secretary of  State
    accepted that the Appellant  comes  from  Vietnam.   His  age  was  not
    disputed.  The Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant  and  his
    parents were threatened and that their house was attacked  due  to  his
    parents owing  money  to  debt  collectors.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the Appellant has no family support in Vietnam  and  that
    he had demonstrated a genuine  subjective  fear  on  return  to  Hanoi.
    However, the Secretary of State considered that the Appellant's genuine
    subjective fear  is  not  objectively  well-founded  because  there  is
    sufficient protection provided by the authorities in Vietnam and  there
    is an area of Vietnam to which he could reasonably  relocate  where  he
    would not face a real risk of harm.

 5. In  considering  the  Appellant's  appeal  the  judge  found  that  the
    competent authority letter was issued on 17th October  2017.   However,
    the judge said, "based on the oral evidence I heard, I find the  reason
    (sic) he claims to have been trafficked are markedly different from the
    ones accepted by the Respondent" [11].  The judge went on  to  consider
    the circumstances of the Appellant's claim finding material changes  to
    the Appellant's evidence which went towards his credibility.  The judge
    made a number of adverse credibility findings at paragraphs  15  to  26
    before concluding at 26:-

         "However, the evidence upon  which  the  Appellant  claims  he  was
         trafficked is not made out, to the lower  standard.   He  may  have
         been sent to the UK by his parents to work or to study.   Whatever,
         the real reason the reason he gives for being in the UK is not  the
         truth.  I therefore, (sic) the Appellant  may  meet  the  technical
         definition of  being  'trafficked'  (the  Council  of  Europe  2005
         Convention).  However, I do not find he was recruited, transported,
         transferred, harboured or received person, within the terms of  the
         2005 Convention.  This is migration masquerading as  'trafficking'.
         I therefore find the Appellant  is  not  entitled  to  a  residence
         permit pursuant to article 14.".

    The judge went on at  paragraphs  27  to  31  to  consider  the  expert
    reports.  The judge concluded that the Appellant was  not  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection or  any  international  protection  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds of appeal and also went on  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. There are three grounds of appeal articulated in the renewed Grounds to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The first ground is in relation to the burden  and
    standard of proof and contends that the judge has not made any findings
    or given any reasons as to why the decision of the competent  authority
    has been disregarded.  The second ground contends that the judge  erred
    in his assessment of the medical evidence  and  the  expert  report  as
    these were considered after the judge had found that the  Appellant  is
    not credible.  The third  ground  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in
    assessing the evidence and credibility in that he rejected the  medical
    evidence and the expert report without considering the evidence as  the
    whole.

Error of Law

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy accepted that there were difficulties
    in relation to this decision.  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that,  although  it
    appears that the judge was led that way by the  Presenting  Officer  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, in circumstances where the Appellant had  been
    accepted as a victim of trafficking, it was  not  appropriate  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to go behind that finding. He  accepted  that
    this was particularly the case in light of the recent Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Secretary of State for the Home Department v MS  (Pakistan)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 594.  In these circumstances he accepted that there was
    a procedural error in the judge's decision and in  these  circumstances
    he submitted that it was appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.  Mr  Burrett  agreed  with  that
    analysis and approach.

 8. I firstly note that the judge did not appear to take into  account  the
    contents of the reasons for refusal letter and in particular  the  fact
    that the Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant and his parents
    were threatened that their house was attacked due to his parents  owing
    money to debt collectors and that he had no family support in  Vietnam.
    The judge also failed to take proper account of  the  decision  by  the
    competent  authority  that  the  Appellant  had  been  the  subject  of
    trafficking and forced labour in the UK.  This failure is  particularly
    relevant in light of the decision in MS (Pakistan).   At  paragraph  17
    Lord Justice Flaux said:-

         "Before considering the Decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  more
         detail, it is convenient to set out some of the legal framework. At
         the time that this appeal was lodged, section 82(1) of the 2002 Act
         set out that a person against whom an  'immigration  decision'  had
         been made could appeal to the Tribunal. Subsection (2) then set out
         the categories of immigration decision, which included, so  far  as
         presently relevant at (g) a  decision  that  a  person  was  to  be
         removed from the United  Kingdom.  The  categories  of  immigration
         decision did not include a trafficking decision."

 9. Flaux LJ said at paragraph 69:-

         "In my judgment, it is absolutely clear that the Court of Appeal in
         AS (Afghanistan) was limiting the  circumstances  in  which,  on  a
         statutory appeal against a removal decision, an Appellant can mount
         an indirect challenge to a negative  trafficking  decision  by  the
         authority  (in  the  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  has  not
         challenged it by way of judicial review), to where the  trafficking
         decision can be demonstrated to be perverse or  irrational  or  one
         which was not  open  to  the  authority,  those  expressions  being
         effectively synonymous for present purposes.".

    He said that there is a two-stage approach:-

         "First,  a  determination  whether  the  trafficking  decision   is
         perverse or irrational or one which was not open to  the  authority
         and second, only if it is, can the Appellant invite the Tribunal to
         re-determine the relevant facts  and  take  account  of  subsequent
         evidence since the decision of the authority was made."

    He went on to say at paragraph 70:-

         "Of course, a trafficking decision, whether positive  or  negative,
         may well be relevant to the issue before the  Tribunal  as  to  the
         lawfulness of the removal decision. However, an Appellant can  only
         invite the tribunal to go behind the trafficking decision  and  re-
         determine the factual issues as to whether trafficking has in  fact
         occurred if the decision of the authority is shown to  be  perverse
         or irrational or one which was not open to it ...".

10. Although in MS the Court of Appeal was considering a challenge  by  the
    Appellant to a negative trafficking decision, the guidance  is  equally
    applicable to a positive trafficking decision.  It is  clear  that  the
    remedy in relation to challenging a trafficking decision is by judicial
    review and that on statutory appeal the only ground open is  whether  a
    trafficking decision was perverse or irrational and  not  open  to  the
    authority.  No such  allegation  was  made  in  this  case.   In  these
    circumstances it was not open to the  judge,  in  an  analysis  of  the
    decision, to reach  a  conclusion  contrary  to  that  reached  by  the
    competent authority. The First-tier Tribunal judge clearly attempted to
    do so, for example at  paragraph  26  and  at  paragraph  27  where  he
    concluded that the Appellant was not trafficked within the terms of the
    Convention.

11. A further issue arises in relation to the way the judge considered  the
    expert and psychiatric evidence.  I find that, particularly in relation
    to the psychiatric evidence, in which the  doctor  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from PTSD, the  judge  should  have  considered
    this document as part of the evidence in the round rather than reaching
    a conclusion as to credibility before looking at  the  medical  report.
    Further, as raised by Mr Burrett at the hearing, I accept that there is
    no indication that the judge  considered  the  Practice  Directions  in
    relation to child vulnerability and sensitive witnesses in light of the
    diagnosis of PTSD and the fact that the Appellant was a minor  when  he
    came to the UK and when he was interviewed.

12. As set out above, it is clear that the judge did not take  the  reasons
    for  refusal  letter  and  decision  by  the  competent  authority  and
    concessions made in both as a starting point in assessing the  risk  to
    the  Appellant  upon  return  to  Vietnam.   Accordingly,   the   judge
    erroneously went behind the decision of  the  competent  authority  and
    failed to engage properly with the issue before him, that is  the  risk
    to the Appellant on return to Vietnam on the basis of  the  concessions
    already made.

13. As the judge failed to consider to engage with the issues  in  dispute,
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law on a procedural matter.  I set that decision aside.

15. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  considered
    afresh.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                                 Date:
10th May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




