
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/13425/2018 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 July 2021                    |On 11 August 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     EAJ

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Ms G Patel, Eric Smith Law Ltd.

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan with date of birth given  as
   16.12.99, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 12.11.210  (Judge  Alis),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 20.11.18, to refuse her claim for international
   protection made on 19.4.18, on the basis of being at risk  on  return  as
   having abandoned Islam to become an atheist, and  fear  of  her  maternal
   uncle who had sexually abused her as a child.

2. The appeal was first heard and dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Parker in the decision promulgated 15.1.19. However,  that  decision  was
   found to be in error of law and  set  aside  in  its  entirety  by  Upper
   Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  in  the  decision  promulgated  16.8.19,  which
   remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  de  novo,
   stating "this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal
   to make completely fresh findings of fact."

3. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Zucker on 15.12.20, considering it arguable that Judge  Alis  "materially
   erred in law in (i) failing to consider the report of Dr Latif  dated  24
   February 2020; (ii) applying country guidance relating to people born  as
   Christians rather than considering the risk to  a  person  who  renounces
   Islam in favour of atheism; (iii) confused the reports of Dr Ahmed and Ms
   Hodgson; (iv) gave limited weight to the social worker's report  arguably
   because of not having seen medical recorder which arguably had been seen;
   (v) misapplied the principles in  Devaseelan;  and  (vi)  made  a  flawed
   article 8 assessment."

4. The matter was first listed before the Upper Tribunal on 20.4.21 but  was
   adjourned on the failure of any  attendance  at  the  remote  hearing  on
   behalf of the appellant. It transpired that the email notification of the
   date of hearing went into the solicitors' junk  email  box  and  was  not
   seen.

5. The Upper Tribunal has received  very  late,  only  the  day  before  the
   hearing, a bundle of lengthy documents, forwarded in four separate emails
   on 14.7.21, and forwarded to me on 15.7.21. However, these appear  to  be
   the appellant's bundle and supplementary bundle put before the First-tier
   Tribunal appeal hearing in October 2020.

6. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

7. The appellant's primary claim, first raised in the  screening  interview,
   is that she would be at risk  on  return  to  Pakistan  because  she  has
   abandoned Islam and has been an atheist since 2014. She also  feared  her
   maternal uncle, claiming that he sexually abused  her  in  Pakistan,  and
   that she  would  be  forced  into  an  arranged  marriage,  as  had  been
   attempted. The appellant's mother had her asylum appeal hearing in  2012,
   alleging risk on return from her former  husband  in  Pakistan,  who  had
   threatened her on her proposed marriage to a husband in the UK.

8. As part  of  the  decision,  the  judge  considered  that  there  was  an
   inconsistency between the appellant's claim at the appeal hearing to have
   only told her mother about the sexual abuse by her uncle in  2018,  after
   her asylum interview, and what she said in that asylum interview. Despite
   Ms Patel's arguments to the contrary, I am satisfied that the  judge  was
   reasonably entitled to conclude from the  appellant's  replies  at  Q100,
   read in context, that the appellant there stated that she told her mother
   about the abuse at or about the time of the abuse and whilst she  was  in
   Pakistan, but that her mother had told her  she  could  not  do  anything
   about it. At the appeal hearing before Judge Alis, the  mother  supported
   the appellant's account that she was only told  about  the  sexual  abuse
   after the appellant's asylum interview.

9. At several points, the judge was satisfied  that  if  the  appellant  had
   been threatened with forced marriage and in  consequence  estranged  from
   her family, or been sexually abused, her would have mentioned this in her
   own appeal in 2012.

10. The first ground is the  complaint  that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
   overlooked the report of Dr Latif. The judge refers in general  terms  to
   the appellant's bundles at [20] to [22]  of  the  decision  and  at  [56]
   stated that all the evidence had  been  considered  before  reaching  any
   findings. However, I note that in referring to reports at [21], the judge
   mentioned only two, when there were three. In  relation  to  one  of  the
   reports, at [68] the judge refers to Dr Ahmed's report when in  fact  the
   report in question was by Jenny Hodgson, a CBT counsellor.  Nevertheless,
   the judge does address the contents of that report and the report of  the
   independent social worker. The misnaming of the author of the counselling
   report, complained of in ground 2, is not  material  and  the  judge  was
   entitled to observe at [69] that the report  simply  sets  out  what  the
   author was told by the appellant. However, consideration of the  contents
   of Dr Latif's report is entirely omitted from in the decision,  which  is
   the substance of ground 1. Mr Tan accepted that there  is  no  direct  or
   indirect reference to this report in the decision but submitted that  the
   medical condition was taken at its highest for the purpose of considering
   return to Pakistan. However, that overlooks the  purpose  for  which  the
   appellant relied on this report.  Ms  Patel  drew  my  attention  to  the
   significance of the judge's omission in that between  8.4  and  8.11  the
   author  of  the  report  specifically   addresses   in   the   issue   of
   inconsistency, which is explained in terms of the  appellant's  PTSD  and
   depression and  in  the  author's  own  observation  of  the  appellant's
   apparent inability to recall dates and some factual information. At  8.11
   Dr Latif states that the appellant, "struggles with her  memory  and  her
   ability  to  encode,  manipulate,  retain   and   retrieve   information,
   particularly in relation  to  dates  and  events,  as  a  result  of  her
   depressive disorder, this will place her in a compromising  situation  if
   weight is heavily placed upon her ability to  recall  specific  dates  in
   oral evidence." The significance is that whilst the judge was willing  at
   [74] to treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness,  the  evidence
   described above does not appear  to  have  been  taken  into  account  in
   assessing  what  to  make  of  the  apparent  inconsistency  between  the
   appellant's interview account that she told her mother  in  Pakistan,  at
   the time of the abuse, and the later  claim  to  not  have  informed  her
   mother until after the interview. At the end of  [74],  the  judge  found
   that "the conflicting evidence as to when  this  disclosure  (the  sexual
   abuse by her uncle) was made to her mother  is  not  explained  by  these
   reports."  Without  being  able  to  be  satisfied   that   the   judge's
   consideration  of  "these  reports"  included  that  of  Dr  Latif,  that
   conclusion is undermined and unsustainable.

11. Contrary to the argument in ground 2, I am not satisfied that there  was
   any failure by the judge to properly address the risk  on  return  as  an
   atheist or that there was any error on the part of the judge by referring
   to the principles in the country guidance of AK and SK (Christians: risk)
   [2014] UKUT 569 (IAC), where there is no  country  guidance  on  atheists
   returning to Pakistan. The judge adequately dealt with the issue,  giving
   cogent reasons for findings made.

12. I also find no  error  of  law  in  the  limited  weight  given  to  the
   independent social worker report between [70] and [71] of  the  decision,
   the subject matter of ground 4, for the reasons set out at  [71],  namely
   that it was not clear what papers the author  of  the  report  had  seen,
   making only an oblique reference to "medical  reports"  at  [33]  of  the
   report.

13. In relation to ground 5 and the Devaseelan point, it is argued  that  it
   was procedurally unfair for the judge to use against the  appellant  what
   her mother did or did not say in her own asylum appeal in 2012.

14. I have carefully considered the submissions and  looked  very  carefully
   at the impugned decision as a whole. For the reasons set out herein, I am
   satisfied that effectively, in relation to the issues  of  sexual  abuse,
   attempts  at  forced  marriage,  and  estrangement  from  her  father  in
   Pakistan, the judge erred in  relying  on  findings  made  in  an  appeal
   hearing in which this appellant was not a party  as  undermining  of  the
   credibility of her present claim.

15. Whilst the judge recognised that the  appellant  cannot  be  blamed  for
   what her mother did or did not say at her previous appeal, at [75] he was
   satisfied that had she told her mother in Pakistan about the  abuse  this
   was something that her mother would have  mentioned  at  her  own  appeal
   hearing in 2012. Judge Alis found "the failure by her mother  to  mention
   the abuse significant." Similarly, in  relation  to  attempts  at  forced
   marriage, at [80] the judge stated that the forced marriage attempts were
   not mentioned by the appellant's mother in her appeal in 2012. The  judge
   then stated, "whilst the appellant cannot be blamed for what  her  mother
   did or did not say at her previous appeal, I  find  the  failure  by  her
   mother to mention the forced marriage attempts significant."

16.  At  [81]  the  judge  spelt  out  that  adverse  findings  against  the
   appellant's mother do not mean this appellant is not truthfully recalling
   what she says happened but suggested that in assessing what is  said,  he
   had to have regard to all the evidence and as the mother gave evidence at
   the appellant's appeal hearing, he  was  entitled  to  consider  how  the
   Tribunal  previously  assessed  the  mother's  credibility  in  assessing
   whether the appellant's own claim is credible. "The previous judge  found
   the appellant's mother was not a witness of truth and found that she  was
   evasive. This means the mother's evidence,  where  applicable,  does  not
   provide support for the appellant's claim."

17. Once again, at [82] the judge stated that had  there  been  attempts  to
   force the appellant to marry prior to  her  coming  to  the  UK,  he  was
   "satisfied  that  the  appellant's  mother  would  have  mentioned   this
   earlier."

18. At [84] to [85] Judge Alis set out the findings  made  in  the  mother's
   appeal and, pointing out that they  were  never  appealed,  purported  to
   apply the Devaseelan principle applies to them.

19. The judge was certainly entitled to make  credibility  findings  against
   the appellant's  mother,  a  witness  in  the  appellant's  appeal,  and,
   therefore, to conclude that the appellant could derive no support for her
   account from her mother's evidence. The judge was also entitled  to  find
   an inconsistency in the appellant's case, between the interview  and  her
   later evidence in the appeal, as to  when  the  sexual  abuse  was  first
   disclosed to her mother.

20. However, the judge  was  not  entitled  to  use  against  the  appellant
   findings made in a previous appeal in which she was not a party. This the
   judge appears to have done at [86] where, in respect of  the  appellant's
   claim not to have spoken to her father since coming to the UK, he  stated
   "that evidence must be considered against the findings  of  the  previous
   judge." He cannot have been referring to the decision of Judge Parker, as
   that decision was set aside in its entirety for the findings to  be  made
   de novo.

21. The Devaseelan principle does not apply to this case in respect of  this
   appellant. The mother's appeal was decided as long ago as March 2012 and,
   as is clear from the above, the factual basis of this appellant's  appeal
   is very different to the issues raised by this  appellant,  although  the
   mother was claiming that she could not return because of hostility by her
   former spouse. This is not a second appeal  by  this  appellant  and  the
   findings  of  fact  in  her  mother's  appeal  cannot  be  relied  on  in
   determining  this  appellant's  credibility.  In  any  event,  given  the
   different bases of the appeals, I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  was
   entitled on the evidence to conclude that had the appellant disclosed the
   sexual abuse to her mother in Pakistan that her mother would  necessarily
   have mentioned this at her own appeal. Similarly, I am not satisfied that
   the judge was entitled to conclude that had there been attempts to  force
   the appellant into marriage this would also have been mentioned by mother
   in 2012.

22. I have carefully considered the way in  which  the  judge  set  out  the
   decision, in  which  he  purported  to  distinguish  between  credibility
   findings in relation  to  the  mother  from  those  in  relation  to  the
   appellant. However, in relation the allegation of sexual  abuse,  I  note
   that whilst rejecting the credibility  of  the  appellant's  mother,  the
   judge does not make a finding either that  the  appellant  did  tell  her
   mother in Pakistan, or that she didn't tell her mother in Pakistan,  only
   that the sexual abuse did not happen. Furthermore, as  Ms  Patel  pointed
   out in submissions,  the  appellant  was  never  challenged  in  her  own
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal about her interview account as to
   when she told her mother. For that reason, it was procedurally unfair for
   the  judge  to  reply  on  this  point  in  assessing   the   appellant's
   credibility. More significantly, if one excludes  reliance  on  what  was
   said or not said by the appellant's mother at her  previous  appeal,  the
   finding appears to be inadequately reasoned;  the  only  possible  reason
   that I can identify is reliance on  the  apparent  inconsistency  between
   what was said in the  asylum  interview  as  to  telling  her  mother  in
   Pakistan and the appellant's claim to have only told her mother after the
   interview. However, whilst  that  is  relied  on,  it  appears  from  the
   decision that despite purporting not to blame the appellant for what  her
   mother said or did not say, the judge did  in  fact  conflate  issues  in
   relation to  the  mother's  credibility  with  that  of  the  appellant's
   credibility. This is demonstrated when considering [84] to  [86]  of  the
   decision. There was no adequate  reasoning  provided  for  rejecting  the
   appellant's claim to be estranged from her father's side  of  the  family
   whether because she was in danger of being forced into marriage,  or  any
   other reason. The judge appeared to rely for this conclusion entirely  on
   the findings in the mother's appeal, set out in detail at [84], with  the
   judge concluding at [85] that as they  were  not  challenged,  they  must
   stand on Devaseelan principles. That finding was made in error of law  by
   an improper application of Devaseelan.

23. Mr Tan submitted that even if the above concerns amounted to  errors  of
   law, they were not material, as the judge also rejected  the  appellant's
   claim to being at risk on return as an atheist. He  also  submitted  that
   the findings at [86] that she was not estranged from her  father  or  his
   side of the family and would not be returning as a single woman  at  risk
   were  not  challenged.  However,  in  making  this  submission,  Mr   Tan
   overlooked the fact that findings in relation to the  appellant's  family
   are indeed challenged at [17] of the  grounds.  As  stated  above,  I  am
   satisfied that the judge was not entitled to rely on  those  findings  in
   rejecting this appellant's claim in relation to the alleged  estrangement
   from family, only in relation  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
   mother and the extent of support she could  provide  to  the  appellant's
   case. As the judge repeatedly stated, the appellant is not to  blame  for
   what was said or not said by her  mother  in  her  previous  appeal.  The
   findings of the previous Tribunal in relation to the family circumstances
   were neither binding on the First-tier Tribunal in 2020, nor the  correct
   starting point for assessment of this appellant's claim. Furthermore,  it
   is impossible to untangle the findings as to risk on return as an atheist
   from the apparent errors in relation to family support and the allegation
   of sexual abuse, as they are based on interlinked  credibility  findings.
   In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the errors identified above are
   material to the outcome of the appeal.

24. In relation to ground 6, I am not satisfied that there was any error  of
   law in relation to the article 8 ECHR assessment; the ground is  no  more
   than a disagreement with the assessment and an  attempt  to  reargue  the
   matter.

25. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
   require it to be set aside to be remade.

26. Given the extent of evidence required, the  appropriate  course,  as  Ms
   Patel submitted, is to remit this to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade
   with no findings preserved, in accordance  with  the  Senior  President's
   Practice Direction, as the findings will  need  to  be  remade  following
   further evidence.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be  remade  de
      novo with no finding preserved.

      The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal at Manchester.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 July 2021






Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 July 2021












