
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13172/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2018                        |On 17 January 2018            |
|                                         |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               SHAHJAHAN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr V Ogunbusola, instructed by M-R solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Conrath promulgated on  16  May  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 26 March 1975 and is a national of  Bangladesh.
The appellant says that he left Bangladesh on 29 April 2004  and  travel  to
India where he remained until July 2004. From there he went to  Italy  where
he stayed for a further six months, before travelling to France in  February
2005. The appellant claims that he arrived in the UK in November  2005.  The
appellant did not make an application for leave to remain until  3  November
2009. That application was refused. On 8 October 2010  the  appellant  asked
for reconsideration of the decision, saying that because of his  affiliation
with the Bangladesh National party he had a fear of return to Bangladesh.

4. It was not until 15 July 2015  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant
saying that an application for international  protection  must  be  made  in
person in Croydon. The appellant chose not to make the protection claim  and
on 26 November 2015  the  respondent  adhered  to  the  decision  of  the  3
November 2009.

5. On 24 May 2016 the appellant made  a  protection  claim.  The  respondent
refused that claim on 21 November 2016.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Conrath ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  23  October  2017  Upper
Tribunal Judge Reeds gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The Judge made a number of adverse credibility findings  concerning
      the appellant's claim including the length  of  delay  in  seeking  to
      claim asylum  on  the  factual  basis  now  claimed.  However,  it  is
      arguable, as the grounds assert, that the Judge did  not  give  proper
      consideration to the arrest warrant provided. The Judge did not assess
      its reliability in accordance with the decision of Tanveer Ahmed.  The
      document was dated February 2016 which is arguably nine months  before
      his interview in November 2016 and thus was arguably  consistent  with
      his account of when he had received the news of it.


      2. It is also arguable that the alternative findings at paragraphs  51
      and 52 are inconsistent with the background material in the  objective
      information  paragraph  1.3.11  (country  information   and   guidance
      Bangladesh: opposition to the government contained in the  appellant's
      bundle).


      The Hearing

7. For the appellant, Mr Ogunbusola moved the grounds of appeal. He took  me
to [50] & [51] of the decision and told me that, there, the Judge failed  to
consider a document which  the  appellant  says  is  a  warrant  for  arrest
properly. He told me that the Judge had taken a dismissive approach to  that
document and decided that the document was not genuine, and that if  it  was
genuine it was of little value because the Judge viewed it  as  evidence  of
"trumped up charges". He told me that, in effect, the Judge  took  the  view
that the document was a forgery, and reversed the burden of proof.

(b) Mr Ogunbusola told me that the Judge's findings at [50] and [51] of  the
decision are not properly  reasoned,  and  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
appreciate the high probative value of the document  produced.  He  told  me
that the Judge's findings are irrational and relied on Ireland AO v  Refugee
Appeals Tribunal 27 February 2017. He told me that  no  reasoning  has  been
provided to suggest that the document is not  apparently  reliable,  and  so
the Judge's conclusions are irrational.

(c) Mr Ogunbusola referred me to background materials and told me  that  the
Judge applied to  high  a  standard  of  proof.  He  reminded  me  that  the
appellant had to establish to a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  he
faces of risk on  return  to  Bangladesh.  He  told  me  that  the  evidence
indicated  that  the  appellant  established  the  facts  claimed   to   the
applicable standard of proof. He urged me to allow the appeal  and  set  the
decision aside.

8. Mr Walker for the respondent told me that the decision does  not  contain
errors, material or otherwise. He told me that the Judge has made  a  number
of adverse credibility  findings  and  that  at  [50]  and  [51]  the  Judge
correctly dealt with the document which is said to be an arrest warrant.  He
told me that the Judge gave clear and sustainable  reasons  for  placing  no
weight on that document.  He  told  me  that  consideration  of  the  arrest
warrant formed only one small part of the  overall  credibility  assessment,
and that the Judge made clear findings against the appellant which  are  not
the subject of challenge. He urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  allow  the
decision to stand.

Analysis

9.  Between [2] and [8] of the decision the Judge sets  out  the  background
to this appeal. Between [9] and [15] of the decision  the  Judge  summarises
the appellant's case.  Between  [16]  and  [21]  the  Judge  summarises  the
respondent's position. At [22] and [23] the Judge summarises  the  notice  &
grounds of appeal. Between [28] and [32] the Judge sets out  the  applicable
law.

10. The Judge's findings in relation to  the  appellant's  protection  claim
are set out between [33] and [53] of the decision. The focus in this  appeal
is solely on [50] and [51] of the decision.

11. Between [33] and [35] the Judge records that the appellant accepts  that
he has not suffered any form of serious harm in the past. At [36] the  Judge
says that he has considered the  documentary  and  oral  evidence  in  their
entirety. The Judge also sets out the correct standard of proof.

12. Between [37] and [43] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  conduct
damages his overall credibility. Between [44] and [49]  the  Judge  makes  a
series of detailed adverse credibility findings. The Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is not a credible witness. The  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant
overstates his involvement with BNP. The Judge finds that  he  cannot  place
reliance on documentary evidence produced by the appellant. Having made  all
of those findings, none of which favour the appellant, the Judge  turns  his
attention to the document bearing to be an arrest warrant at [50] and [51].

13. In Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) 2002  UKIAT  00439  the  Tribunal  said  "The
decision maker should consider whether a document is one on  which  reliance
should properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in the round".

14. Judges should determine how much weight is to be given to each piece  of
evidence in the appeal in the normal way.  It  is  then  for  the  Judge  to
assess each piece of evidence together - or what is commonly referred to  as
"in the round" - in order to arrive at an overall  conclusion.   A  document
is no different to any other piece of evidence in this respect.   The  Judge
must decide whether it is a weighty piece of evidence;  whether  the  weight
that can be attributed to the document is limited;  or whether indeed it  is
a document which merits no weight at all.

15. The approach to documentation in Tanveer Ahmed  was  reaffirmed  in  the
starred  decision  of  BD  (Croatia)  (2004)  Starred  UKIAT  00032,   which
confirmed that it would be an error of law  not  to  follow  the  Tribunal's
decision in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.  The  Tribunal  said  that
Tanveer Ahmed "needs to be considered in all those very many  cases,  indeed
the very considerable majority, where the issue is not whether the  document
in question is forged or authentic but whether it is reliable or not.   This
distinction is vital.  Documents produced may be on the  right  paper,  even
with the right stamps or signature, but may be  unreliable  because  of  the
way in which they are procured."

16. At [50] and [51] the Judge considers the reliability  of  the  document,
not the authenticity of the document. A fair reading of the  decision  as  a
whole indicates that the Judge considers all of the evidence in the  around.
The Judge does  not  dismiss  the  documentary  evidence  because  of  other
adverse credibility findings. Instead the Judge takes an  holistic  view  of
the evidence. His consideration of the arrest warrant is  not  determinative
of the appeal; it is part of the overall consideration of  every  aspect  of
the appellant's case. The Judge does not make  a  finding  that  the  arrest
warrant is a forgery.  His  finding  is  that  the  document  merits  little
evidential weight.

17. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or another  is  for  the  fact
finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise  to  an
error of law".

18. At [51] the Judge considers the arrest warrant as  a  genuine  document,
and deals with its evidential value. The conclusions that the Judge  reaches
are well within the range of reasonable conclusions available to the  Judge.
The Judge's  findings  are  not  irrational.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's
factual  conclusions,  his  appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law.  Rationality  is  a  very  high  threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not
irrational just because some alternative explanation has  been  rejected  or
can be said to be possible.

19. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that  "Where
a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence,  a  reviewing  body
should be very slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked  some  factor,
simply  because  the  factor  is  not  explicitly   referred   to   in   the
determination concerned". McCombe LJ  in  VW(Sri  Lanka)  C5/2012/3037  said
"Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when  a
First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment  explaining  why  he  has
reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously  areas
of evidence that have been less fully dealt with than  others  and  then  to
use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is  legally  flawed
because it did not  deal  with  a  particular  matter  more  fully.   In  my
judgment, with respect, that is no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  a  proper
challenge to a judge's finding of fact"

20.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

21. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

22. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 16 May 2017 stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date  12 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

