

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/13194/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|by Skype for Business                |                                     |
|On 7 October 2020                    |On 13 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     N B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Cox, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Debra  H  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 17 June 2019.

 2. This determination is to be read along with the decision  of  UT  Judge
    Owens, promulgated on 6 July 2020, setting aside the decision of  Judge
    Clapham for material error on a point of law.

 3. The case came before me for review on 7 October 2020.  I conducted  the
    hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended  remotely.   No
    members of the public attended, either  in  person  or  remotely.   The
    technology  functioned  without  difficulty,  enabling   an   effective
    hearing.

 4. The case requires entirely fresh hearing.  The  appellant  proposes  to
    adopt her previous statements, to provide a further updating statement,
    and to tender herself for cross-examination.  That is likely  to  be  a
    quite  substantial  exercise.   It  needs  to  take  place  through  an
    interpreter.  Parties agree that it  is  preferable  that  should  take
    happen at a face to face hearing, not a remote hearing, if possible.

 5. At present, in Scotland, no face to face hearings are being held in the
    UT, but are taking place in the FtT.

 6. Mr Whitwell mentioned that further  country  guidance  on  Ethiopia  is
    likely to emerge, but that may be at a quite distant date.  Parties did
    not consider that new guidance might relate to any  matter  crucial  to
    this case, such as might justify any delay.

 7. In all the circumstances, parties agreed that the  resolution  of  this
    case by the UT should be as follows.

 8. The decision of the FtT has been set aside, and stands only as a record
    of what was said at the hearing, with no findings preserved.

 9. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Clapham.

10. An anonymity direction remains in place at this stage.


      [pic]

      7 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.


