
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13790/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2019                        |On 21 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     JU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. N. Quadi, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen, promulgated on 26  February  2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "It is arguable that the Judge  erred  in  rejecting  the  expert's
         report on the grounds that she "had mission in  dealing  with  this
         issue" and the failure to provide her CV.  As  the  grounds  state,
         the expert complied with paragraph 10.9 of the Practice  Directions
         of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber and the Judge gave no reasons
         for concluding that the expert had a  mission.   Whilst  the  other
         grounds are less arguable I do not refuse permission.  In light  of
         the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Safi and  Others  (permission
         to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC)."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.

 5. I heard brief submissions following which I stated that  I  found  that
    the decision involved the making of material errors of law.  I set  the
    decision aside and remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    de novo.

Error of Law

 6. The grant of appeal focused on ground 1, the treatment  of  the  expert
    report.  The Judge states at [40]:-

         "The expert has produced an authentication of  the  arrest  warrant
         finding it to have the  hallmarks  of  a  genuine  document.   This
         expression however is puzzling in  the  least.   The  expected  not
         address the same (sic).  The warrant contains the appellant's  name
         and photograph so why state that her identity was unknown in  doubt
         is unfathomable (sic).  I note that the expert has not provided her
         CV.  His (sic)  previous  summary  of  her  academic  expertise  in
         Rwandan social political matters (sic).  I find her own mission  in
         dealing with this issue calls into question the weight that can  be
         attached to this report.  In the  light  of  this  report  and  the
         failure of the expert to provide  her  CV,  I  attach  very  little
         weight to this report."


 7. Mr. Tarlow accepted that he "had difficulties" with this paragraph.   I
    find that the Judge has given no  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    expert had "mission".  It is difficult to know what he  means  by  "her
    own mission in dealing with this issue"  as  there  is  no  explanation
    given.  Ground 5 sets out the many and various spelling and grammatical
    errors in the decision.  The paragraph  set  out  above  contains  such
    errors, which makes the Judge's findings regarding  the  expert  report
    yet more unclear.  I find that the Judge has failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for giving little weight to the expert  report.   I  find  that
    this is a material error of law.

 8. While I do not need to proceed to consider the other  grounds,  I  find
    that grounds 3 and 4 are also made out.  At ground 3  it  is  submitted
    that the Judge has mistakenly stated that the evidence provided by  the
    Respondent  referred  to  at  [40]  and  [41]  was  contained  in   the
    Appellant's bundle.  At [26] the Judge states:

         "It was put to the appellant that in the photographs  she  produced
         of her husband in uniform that the badge was on the right,  whereas
         in the objective evidence and photographs produced  in  the  appeal
         bundle the badge was shown on the left."


 9. This is to misunderstand the evidence.  Photographs showing  the  badge
    on the left were provided by the Respondent on the day of the  hearing.
    They were not in the Appellant's bundle.  There is no reference to  the
    submissions made regarding the unreliability of the  evidence  provided
    by the Respondent.  Further, it is not clear whether this evidence  has
    led the Judge to conclude that the Appellant's husband was not  in  the
    police as there is no clear  finding  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    husband was in the police or not.  I find that this failure to  make  a
    finding on a core issue is a material error of law.

10. In relation to ground 4, the Judge has not considered  the  Appellant's
    explanation for her delay in claiming asylum ([44] and [47]).   I  find
    that he has failed to take into account relevant evidence.  His finding
    that the Appellant's credibility is damaged by behaviour falling  under
    section 8 has not taken into account her  explanation  for  the  delay.
    Given that this goes to her credibility, I find that this is a  further
    material error of law.

11. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
     I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary  to  enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,  given  that   the
    credibility findings cannot stand, and having regard to the  overriding
    objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

12. I thanked Mr. Tarlow for the approach taken to this appeal.



Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

15. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Cohen.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 17 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
