
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13080/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 January 2019                      |On 05 February 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    AB 1
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot of Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                             Anonymity Direction
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is a Palestinian born in 1990  from  the
    Burj el-Shemali refugee camp in Lebanon, identified by  the  Respondent
    as a stateless person.  On 28 March 2017 he arrived by air.  On 12 June
    2017 he claimed humanitarian protection because he  feared  persecution
    on return by Hezbollah for refusing to fight for them in Syria.

The SSHD's decision

 2. On 5 December 2017, the Appellant (the SSHD)  refused  the  Applicant's
    application for international surrogate protection.  The Respondent did
    not accept the Appellant's claim to  have  undergone  two  sessions  of
    military training Hezbollah and considered the Applicant would  not  be
    at risk on return to Lebanon.  The Applicant's claim that  his  removal
    would breach the  State's  obligations  to  respect  his  private  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention was rejected  on  the
    basis that he had been in the United Kingdom for only some  six  months
    and there were no exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Applicant appealed and by a decision promulgated on 29 August  2018
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Davey  having  regard  to  background
    evidence and the expert country report  from  Ms  S  Laizer  found  the
    Applicant's account was consistent and credible.  He allowed the appeal
    on asylum grounds.

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis the Judge had  failed
    to identify any cogent background evidence, despite an  expert  report,
    to support a conclusion the Applicant on return would be at risk  as  a
    perceived deserter from Hezbollah.  The Applicant  had  made  clear  to
    Hezbollah that he had no intention of joining.  The Judge had  recorded
    but made no finding on  the  witness  statement  from  the  Applicant's
    brother.

 5. On 19 September 2018 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  refused
    the SSHD permission to appeal.  She found the grounds  amounted  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge who had made findings about the
    Applicant's brother.  The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal
    and on 3 December 2018 Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  granted
    permission stating only that "I believe that the grounds arguable".

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

Submissions for the SSHD

 6. At the start Mr Whitwell confirmed the SSHD did not intend  to  proceed
    with the grounds identified at paragraphs 4 and 5 of the application to
    the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal.  These  grounds  were
    that the Judge had arguably erred because the Applicant's own  evidence
    was that he had made clear to Hezbollah he had no intention of  joining
    them and that the Judge had noted but made no finding on  the  evidence
    of the other witness.  It was appropriate  to  withdraw  these  grounds
    since they did not take account of what the  Applicant  had  stated  at
    paragraphs 7ff of his witness statement and  the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 7 of his decision.

 7. Mr Whitwell handed up extracts from the documents mentioned in  two  of
    the footnotes referred to in paragraphs (iii)-(v)  on  page  12  of  Ms
    Laizer's report.

 8. He accepted that the SSHD's reasons letter did not broadly address  the
    issue of risk on return and the SSHD had been represented by externally
    instructed Counsel at the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  who  had
    not taken or pursued this  issue  at  the  hearing.   Nevertheless,  in
    protection claims, risk on return was always  a  relevant  factor.   He
    submitted that it would be in the interests of Hezbollah  to  publicise
    what happened to  deserters  since  it  would  discourage  people  from
    deserting.

 9. He referred to paragraph  9  of  the  Judge's  decision.   He  had  not
    explained what grounds he had for the conclusions he reached about  the
    treatment of deserters by Hezbollah.  Ms Laizer's report did not detail
    the treatment of deserters: it  dealt  with  Hezbollah's  treatment  of
    Iraqi citizens as illustrated by the extract from the sources cited  by
    Ms Laizer in her footnotes, mentioned above at paragraph 7.

10. These matters disclosed errors of law and the decision  should  be  set
    aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

11.  Ms Foot referred to paragraph 3 of the Procedure Rule 24  response  for
    the  Applicant.   The  SSHD's  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Judge and disclosed no  arguable  error  of  law.
    The SSHD sought to quibble with the evidence which had not been put  or
    argued before the Judge.

12.  It was accepted that there had been no formal concession  that  if  the
    Applicant were found credible then he  would  be  at  risk  on  return.
    Nevertheless, the SSHD had argued the case  before  the  Judge  on  the
    issue of the limited risk identified at paragraph  34  of  the  Reasons
    Letter.

13.  The basis for the SSHD's appeal is a challenge to the reasons given  by
    the Judge which  had  a  high  threshold  to  cross.   Referred  me  to
    paragraphs 22-25 of the decision in VV (grounds  of  appeal)  Lithuania
    [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC), especially paragraph 24, namely: -

         "... Even if the matter relates to a substantial issue or principal
         controversial issue, it is  essential  for  an  appellant  to  show
         either that the judge has simply failed to resolve that dispute, in
         other words there is a gap in  the  reasoning  on  that  point,  or
         alternatively, that even though the issue has been dealt with,  the
         reasoning is so unclear that the Tribunal is satisfied that it  may
         well conceal a public law ground  of  challenge  ...  such  adverse
         inferences will not readily be drawn."


     She submitted that the risk to  the  Applicant  on  return  was  not  a
    substantial principal controversial issue and so there was a lower duty
    on the Judge to consider it as described in paragraph 23 of VV.

14.  The evidential context of the  appeal  is  that  Hezbollah  takes  very
    seriously its role in the civil war in Syria.  The expert report of  Ms
    Laizer at  page  12  noted  that  deserters  were  beaten  and  it  was
    sufficient for the Judge to rely on this.  The items referred to in the
    footnotes describing Hezbollah's treatment of Iraqi civilians showed of
    what abuses they were capable.  The Judge was entitled to rely on  what
    the expert report stated at the foot of page 11  and  on  pages  12-13.
    There was sufficient contextual evidence to support the Judge's finding
    the Applicant would likely be at risk on return.

Error of Law Consideration

15.  At the end of the hearing I stated that I found there was no  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for reasons which  would
    follow in this written decision and which I now give.

16.  The Judge accepted the expert report of  Ms  Laizer.   Paragraph  6  at
    pages 10-12 of the report explains why  the  Appellant  on  return  was
    likely to be seen as a security risk and possibly even as  a  suspected
    spy or supporter of an opposition party and  so  be  at  risk.   It  is
    important to keep in mind that the Applicant  had  voluntarily  "joined
    up" to receive military training, in his mind, to prepare him to  fight
    the Israelis which the Judge had  addressed  at  paragraph  11  of  his
    decision.  While it might have been  helpful  for  the  Judge  to  have
    referred to specific paragraphs in Ms Laizer's report,  it  is  evident
    from his decision that he had given it careful  consideration  and  his
    conclusions reflect this.

17.   The  thrust  of  the  reasons  letter  is  entirely  focused  on   the
    Applicant's claim to have undergone military  training  with  Hezbollah
    and to have refused their order that he fight in Syria.  Paragraphs 33-
    36 of the reasons letter are clear on this.  There  was  no  suggestion
    that the SSHD had sought to amend the reasons  letter  at  the  hearing
    before the Judge to widen the basis for the SSHD's decision.  The  SSHD
    had made clear that the refusal of the Applicant's claim for subsidiary
    protection was narrowly based and there was no obligation on  Applicant
    to answer any other case or on the Judge to  consider  it  on  a  wider
    basis.

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any  material
    error of law and the SSHD's appeal against it is dismissed.

Anonymity

19.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  an  anonymity  direction
    although it gives no reason why it is proportionate  to  the  need  for
    transparency in the Tribunal's administration of justice.   This  is  a
    subsidiary protection appeal and on that basis and because  the  matter
    was not addressed hearing before me I propose to continue the anonymity
    direction.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

    The effect is that SSHD's  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  Applicant's
    appeal is successful.

    Anonymity direction continued.




Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  22.  i.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



