
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/13586/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 28th November 2018                |On 30th November 2018                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell (Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq and sought asylum on  the  basis  of
    the claimed risk in his home area and his inability to relocate to  the
    IKR or within Iraq itself. The application was refused, the Appellant's
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke at  Nottingham  on
    the 27th of July 2018 and  dismissed  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision promulgated on the 17th of August 2018.

 2. The reasons for the decision are set out in paragraphs 13 to 31 of  the
    decision. The Appellant had relied on an expert report from Ms  Leitzer
    to which the Judge attached no great  weight  on  the  basis  that  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT212 (IAC) had  been
    reported after the report and had not been considered by  the  report's
    writer.  The  Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have   been
    threatened by ISIS or that he would be at risk on  return.  There  were
    inconsistencies that the Judge referred to in paragraphs 15 to 18.

 3. The ground argue that the  Appellant's  case  is  that  he  is  from  a
    contested area and that aspect of the case and the effect it would have
    on the Appellant's ability to obtain documentation and to relocate  had
    not been considered by the Judge. It is also argued that the Judge  was
    wrong to place little weight on the expert's report,  the  contents  of
    the report dealt with relevant issues  and  had  referred  to  AAH  and
    accordingly the principal reason for not relying  on  the  report  were
    erroneous.

 4. The grounds were expanded on by Mr Ell in oral  submissions  and  these
    are set out in the Record of Proceedings.  Mr  Tan  accepted  that  the
    decision did not address contentious issues sufficiently  and  accepted
    that the appeal would have to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing.

 5. I agree with the grounds and with Mr Tan's concession.  Whilst  brevity
    is a virtue the reasons given do have address the relevant  issues  and
    be sufficient. In the decision the Judge wrongly rejected the  expert's
    report and did not consider the nature of the Appellant's home area and
    the consequences for his return and ability to obtain documentation  if
    he needed it.

 6. Since then there has  been  a  new  CPIN  on  Iraq  which  updates  the
    background information on which  decisions  are  to  be  made.  In  the
    circumstances the appropriate course of action is to set  the  decision
    of Judge Clarke  aside  with  no  findings  preserved.  The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all  issues,  not
    before Judge Clarke.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  on  all
matters, not to be heard by Judge S C Clarke

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  make  no
direction.



Fee Award

In setting the decision aside and remitting it to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
fees remain an issue to be decided dependent on the outcome of the  remitted
hearing.

Signed:[pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                                   Dated: 28th November 2018






                          (c) Crown copyright 2018
