




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13439/2018

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                             |                                   |
|On 1st April 2019                  |On 11 April 2019                   |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between
                             Mr Abbas Ahmad Reda
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh of Counsel, instructed by ACN
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Abbas Ahmad Reda date of birth 2 February  1984,  has
    dual nationality of Venezuelan and Lebanon. The appellant was  born  in
    Lebanon but acquired Venezuelan citizenship in 2005.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 3.  This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Davis promulgated on the 23rd January 2019 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection  claim  and  his  claim
    otherwise based upon based on Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Loke on 27 February 2019. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

    Factual background

 5.   The  appellant  was  born  in  Beirut  and  therefore  has   Lebanese
    nationality. The appellant claims that he had problems in  Lebanon  and
    therefore left Lebanon in or about 2005. The appellant claims  that  he
    left Lebanon in 2005 because Hezbollah, who were in  control  of  major
    parts of south Lebanon, were accusing him of being a collaborator  with
    the Israelis.

 6. It is to be noted that the appellant has stated that he  went  back  to
    Lebanon in 2010, 2012 and 2015. He had no problems when he went back to
    Lebanon in 2010 and 2012.   In  2015  he  claims  that  his  house  was
    occupied by Hezbollah. However it appears that the appellant managed to
    live in Lebanon for a period of  approximately  2  months  without  any
    serious problems.  Given  the  background  information  in  respect  of
    Lebanon and the treatment of suspected Israeli collaborators, the  fact
    that the  appellant  managed  to  live  there  without  problem  was  a
    significant factor.

 7. The appellant claims that he was told  to  leave  Lebanon  and  not  to
    return. However he had claimed that when he originally left Lebanon his
    name was listed by the Lebanese government as a person that was wanted.
    The lists of wanted persons were put up at ports and airports.  Despite
    being wanted by the Lebanese authorities and by Hezbollah the appellant
    managed to leave Lebanon without any problems on 4 occasions,  that  is
    the original occasion when he left and the 3 subsequent occasions.

 8. In 2005 the  appellant  went  to  Venezuela  and  whilst  living  there
    acquired Venezuelan citizenship. The appellant's brother was living  in
    Venezuela.  Both the appellant and his brother appear then to have  run
    shops in differing areas of Venezuela.

 9. The appellant claims that his problems in Venezuela began and he  began
    to be targeted in Venezuela when he had  sacked  an  assistant  at  his
    shop. The shop assistant had been stealing from  the  shop.  After  the
    assistant was sacked the  Appellant  claims  that  the  lady's  brother
    confronted him. Thereafter he has claimed that the  shop  was  attacked
    and he was robbed.

10. The judge noted that the appellant's account was  not  consistent.  The
    appellant had made reference to having his own shop  but  also  to  his
    brother having a shop, in which the appellant worked. His  brother  had
    told the appellant that a gang, ostensibly criminals, were looking  for
    the appellant. The appellant was threatened at the brother's shop or at
    his own shop that he would be killed or his son would be kidnapped. The
    appellant has alleged that there was a robbery at a shop  and  he  then
    went  to  live  with  his  brother  or  alternatively  or  additionally
    depending on the version of events that were there was  a  burglary  at
    the brother's shop. The burglary may have been whilst the appellant was
    in Venezuela or whilst he was in the United  Kingdom.  The  appellant's
    account as noted by the judge  was  inconsistent  with  regard  to  the
    details. Despite the burglary being at the brother's shop the appellant
    claimed that he was the target.

11. The appellant had also claimed that the brother of the  shop  assistant
    was working in the government in Venezuela but when  asked  to  provide
    details could not give the name of the man. Whilst he claimed that  the
    man worked in the intelligence service he gave no evidential  substance
    to that claim. He also said that the man worked in the police  was  not
    of a high rank but subsequently said he was of an officer's rank.

12. Whatever the substance of the appellant's case the appellant  had  left
    Venezuela and come to  the  United  Kingdom  ostensibly  to  visit  his
    sister. The appellant had been granted  a  visa  on  23  October  2015.
    However he had remained in Venezuela for 4  months  after  getting  the
    visa.

13.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 February  2016.  The
    appellant only claimed asylum on 21 July 2016. In part  the  suggestion
    by the appellant being that the robbery had occurred whilst he was here
    in the UK and it was only post being  informed  that  the  robbery  had
    taken place that he claimed asylum.

14. On 14 November 2018 the respondent refused the appellant's  claim.  The
    appellant appealed against the decision. The  case  was  listed  to  be
    heard on 3 January 2019.

15. After the refusal the appellant consulted Compass Law. He was given  an
    appointment on 30 November 2018. The judge  notes  at  that  stage  the
    appellant was being told that the solicitors were unlikely to represent
    him.  He  had  a  further  appointment  on  10  December  when  Compass
    Solicitors informed him that they would not be able to represent him.

16. On 28 December 2018 the appellants spoke  to  his  present  solicitors,
    ACN. In evidence before the judge the appellant had stated, when asked,
    that he had not done anything after the 30th  November  or  after  10th
    December until 28 December when he approached the new solicitors.

17. ACN made an application for an adjournment but that was refused. It was
    being claimed that the solicitors did not have  all  the  documentation
    and only had part of the Home Office bundle.

18. On 3 January 2019 the case appeared before Judge  Davis.  Mr  Singh  on
    behalf of the appellant renewed his application for an adjournment  but
    Judge Davis having examined the circumstances refused that  application
    and went on to determine the appeal.

    Grounds for challenging the decision

19.  In essence the basis for the challenge to the present decision is that
    the judge should have granted a short adjournment to the  appellant  to
    enable his new solicitors to put the case properly in order.

20. It is asserted in the grounds of appeal:-

      a) The solicitors had only received instructions on the 28th  December
         and did not have a complete Home Office bundle. There was reference
         to a list of documents,  which  had  been  submitted  to  the  Home
         Office, and the solicitors did not have those documents.

      b) The solicitors were unaware of  all  the  issues  relating  to  and
         facing  the  appellant  including  not  being  in  receipt  of  the
         substantive legal interview.

21. The grant suggests that the judge has failed to consider the  issue  of
    fairness and whether the appellant would be deprived of a fair hearing.



    The Procedure Rules & Case law

22. The appellant seeks  to  rely  upon  the  provisions  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014, specifically rule 2 , which provides: -

         Overriding objective and parties' obligation to cooperate with  the
         Tribunal

             2   (1)   The overriding objective of these rules is to enable
                  the Tribunal to deal with cases justly and fairly

             (2) Dealing with the case fairly and justly includes

                  a)   dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate
                  to the importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
                  issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of  the
                  parties and of the Tribunal ceremony:

                  b)     avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                  flexibility in the proceeding;

                  c)   ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
                  able to participate fully in the proceeding;

                  d)    using  any  special  expertise   of   the   Tribunal
                  effectively; and

                  e)   avoiding delay, so far as compatible with the  proper
                  consideration of the issues

             (3) The Tribunal must seek to give effect  to  the  overriding
             objective when it

               a) exercises any power under these rules; or

               b) interprets any rule or practice direction.

             (4) Parties must-

               a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and

               b) cooperate with the Tribunal generally.

23.  In relying upon the overriding objective's the appellant's  case  that
    the refusal of the adjournment does not comply with the rule.  Reliance
    is placed upon the case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418, the  headnote  of
    which provides:-

         "If the tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting a material  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct S; and acting irrationally. In practice, in most cases  the
         question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of
         his right to a  fair  hearing.  Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is
         challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to  recognise  that
         the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether  the  FtT  acted
         reasonably. Rather, the test to be applied is that of fairness; was
         any deprivation of the affected parties right to  a  fair  hearing?
         See SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

24. It is clear  from  the  case  cited  that  the  issue  is  not  one  of
    irrationality but of fairness.

    Consideration

25. The appellant had been told as of the 10th December at the latest  that
    Compass Law could not represent him. The  appellant  had  done  nothing
    until the 28th December to try and find new legal representatives.  The
    appellant knew that his case was listed and was to proceed on  the  3rd
    January 2019.

26. The appellant cannot just stand by and instruct solicitors at the  last
    minute and expect that the case will be adjourned. Whilst I  appreciate
    that some solicitors may be closed for  the  Xmas  holiday,  I  do  not
    accept that all  representatives  would  close  two  weeks  before  the
    holiday. The appellant had done nothing until the last possible minute.



27. There was nothing to  stop  the  appellant  requesting  his  file  from
    Compass Law and taking the file and finding new representatives.  Judge
    Davis considered that the appellant had had ample time to put his  case
    in order.

28. The judge was satisfied that the appellant had  had  adequate  time  to
    prepare his case and to instruct another firm.

29.  During  the  course  of  the  hearing  before  me   the   respondent's
    representative   made   the   point   that   whilst   the   appellant's
    representative made submissions on the basis that an adjournment should
    have been granted but had not identified how the failure to  grant  the
    adjournment  had  unfairly  affected  the  appellant.  There   was   no
    identification of any adverse consequence or prejudice to the appellant
    by the refusal of the adjournment.

30. Whilst it has been suggested that the representatives did not have  the
    full bundle, had  the  appellant  acted  expeditiously  he  could  have
    obtained a copy of his bundle from the Home Office and given it to  his
    new representatives, alternatively he could have obtained a copy of his
    file  from  his  previous  representatives  and   given   it   to   new
    representatives in ample time to prepare for the hearing.  It  was  the
    failure of the appellant to act with due expedition which  resulted  in
    his new representatives not having a bundle.

31. In making submissions it was suggested  that  the  appellant  was  only
    asking for a short adjournment of 5 days. Had the appellant acted  with
    due expedition when he was first told Compass Law could not act for him
    there would have been ample time for the  representatives  to  instruct
    new representatives and prepare the file.

32. Accordingly it was the failure on the part of the appellant to act with
    due expedition in failing to ensure that he had  his  papers  that  has
    resulted in his solicitors not having all the documents at the time  of
    the hearing.

33. It was not being suggested that the appellant required  any  expert  or
    other background evidence or that there  were  other  documents  to  be
    obtained from abroad. The issue in the case related to the evidence  of
    the appellant and the credibility of the account  being  given  by  the
    appellant.

34. The judge has carefully looked at the appellant's  account  and  raised
    valid issues about the appellant's account. It is  not  suggested  that
    the inconsistencies and contradictions identified by the judge were not
    justified.

35. In the circumstances the appellant had had sufficient time  to  prepare
    his case and it was the failure of the appellant to  act  expeditiously
    that resulted in his case being in  the  state  that  it  was.  In  the
    circumstances the judge in satisfying himself that  the  appellant  had
    had sufficient time to prepare his case was considering whether it  was
    fair to proceed with the hearing. As no prejudice has  been  identified
    to the appellant's case, the judge was clearly mindful  of  whether  it
    was fair to proceed. The judge was entitled  in  the  circumstances  to
    conclude that the case should proceed.

36. In the circumstances there is no material error of law in the decision.



    Notice of Decision

37. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 10th April 2019

