
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13359/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 June 2017                        |On 06 July 2017                |


                                  Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 TANU SHARMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Khan of Prestige Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 6 May 1986 and is a national of India.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 16 January 2017 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  25
   November 2016 to refuse the Appellants application for protection status.


The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") refused an adjournment  request  made  by  the
   Appellants legal representative and  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
   Respondent's decision.
6.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  there  was  procedural
   unfairness in the Judge's decision to refuse and adjournment request.
7.  On 10 April 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

8. At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) Mr Khan had represented the Appellant at  the  hearing
   before the First- tier Tribunal and had produced  the  'Red  Book'  which
   disclosed that the Appellant was suffering problems  with  her  pregnancy
   and had done so for some time. The date of birth for the baby was  within
   2 weeks of the date of hearing, 23 January 2017.

   (b) When asked by me for the Red Book so I could confirm the  information
   that he was providing he stated that he was unable to produce it  as  the
   NHS retained this document.

   (c) When asked by me why there had been no application for an adjournment
   prior to the date of hearing he was unable to give an explanation.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) The situation faced by the Judge had to be considered in  the  context
      of there having been no attendance at the CMR by either the  Appellant
      or her Representative and that no adjournment request having been made
      prior to the hearing date.

   c) In normal circumstances given the  date  of  birth  of  the  child  an
      application for an adjournment may have been anticipated but none  was
      made.
Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. Rule 4(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
   and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 gives the power to adjourn or  postpone  a
   hearing.  This power must be exercised in accordance with the  overriding
   objective which is found in Rule 2  of  dealing  with  cases  fairly  and
   justly and having regard to any other relevant  considerations.  Rule  28
   gives the power to proceed with a hearing in the  Appellants  absence  if
   they have been notified of the hearing and it  is  in  the  interests  of
   justice to do so.


12. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment;  fairness)
   [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  although  based  on  the  2005  Procedure  Rules
   provides clear guidance and emphasizes the  importance  of  the  test  of
   fairness and the question of whether a party will be deprived of  a  fair
   hearing if an adjournment is refused.


13. Each application to adjourn  must  be  considered  on  its  own  merits,
   examining all the factors brought  to  the  Tribunal's  attention.   When
   reaching a decision on such an application, the Tribunal  may  also  have
   regard to information already held and its  own  special  expertise  (see
   rule 2(2)(d)).


14. Factors weighing in favour of adjourning  an  appeal,  even  at  a  late
   stage in proceedings, include.


   (a) Sudden illness or other compelling reason preventing  a  party  or  a
   witness attending a hearing.  Normally such a reason should be  supported
   by medical or other relevant evidence, unless there has been insufficient
   time to obtain such evidence.  However, where there is no likelihood that
   the party will be able to attend a hearing within a reasonable period,  a
   hearing may proceed in absence where the tribunal considers that this  is
   in the interests of justice in terms of rule 28.


   (b) Late changes to the grounds of appeal  or  the  reasons  for  refusal
   which change the nature of the case.  The terms of rules 19(7),  23(2)(b)
   and 24(2) should be taken into account, as appropriate, when  considering
   changes to the grounds or reasons.


   (c) Where further time is needed because of a delay in obtaining evidence
   which is outside the  party's  control,  for  example,  where  an  expert
   witness fails to provide a report within the period expected.


15. The following factors, where relevant, may weigh  against  the  granting
   of an adjournment.


   (a) The application to adjourn is not made at the earliest opportunity.


   (b) The application is speculative, such as, for example, a  request  for
   time for lodging further evidence where there is no reasonable  basis  to
   presume  that  such  evidence  exists  or  could  be  produced  within  a
   reasonable period.


   (c) The application  does  not  show  that  anything  material  would  be
   achieved by the delay, for example, where an appellant wants more time to
   instruct a legal representative but there is no evidence  that  funds  or
   legal aid is available.


   (d) The application does not  explain  how  the  reason  for  seeking  an
   adjournment is material to the case, for example, where there is a desire
   to seek further evidence but this evidence does not appear to be material
   to the issues to be decided.


   (e) The application seeks more time to prepare the appeal  when  adequate
   time has already been given.  In such  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  may
   take into consideration a failure to comply with directions.  However,  a
   failure to comply with directions will not be  sufficient  of  itself  to
   refuse an adjournment.


16. It  is  a  trite  observation  therefore  that  there  is  no  automatic
   entitlement to an  adjournment  or  that  proceeding  in  the  Appellants
   absence deprives them of a fair  hearing  and  any  such  application  or
   argument must be supported by evidence in accordance  with  the  Practice
   Direction and the guidance of caselaw.

17. In this case the Appellant was pregnant which  is  a  condition  not  an
   illness and as such she was not automatically entitled to an  adjournment
   unless there was clear  evidence  before  the  Judge  to  show  that  her
   pregnancy had caused her problems that made her unfit to attend court  on
   the date of hearing and that proceeding in her absence would not be  fair
   and just.

18. The Judges record of the application made appears at  paragraph  20  and
   the basis of the application was that the Appellant was pregnant and  due
   to give birth in a few weeks.  The  ROP  notes  'Having  difficulty  with
   pregnancy -letters produced'. The Judge therefore records that  he  asked
   Mr Khan if he had:

    'any evidence to indicate why the Appellant had not attended the hearing
   today. He produced letters and forms to indicate  she  was  pregnant  but
   nothing more. No evidence  was  produced  to  me  to  indicate  that  the
   Appellant was unfit to attend the hearing  due  to  her  pregnancy.'  (my
   bold)

19. Mr Khan argued before me that the  pregnancy  had  caused  her  problems
   from her mid trimester and the Judges note appears to confirm that  there
   was reference to 'problems'.  However this argument makes clear that this
   was not a case of a 'sudden' illness and therefore the fact that  he  was
   unable to explain why no application had been  made  for  an  adjournment
   prior to the date of hearing supported by medical evidence was  a  factor
   of some weight.

20. Mr Khan also argued before me that he had produced the  Appellants  'Red
   Book' to the Judge and that this showed there had been problems with  the
   pregnancy. The Red Book, or Personal Child Health Record, is a document I
   am very familiar with. When asked by me therefore why the  Appellant  was
   unable to produce this document before me, given that it is the  personal
   health record of the child retained by  the  parent,  Mr  Khan  suggested
   rather surprisingly that it had been retained by the NHS but  could  give
   no explanation why that was the case with this Appellant and why  he  had
   not obtained copies of what he claimed was contained within that book  to
   support his application. There is moreover no record in the decision that
   the Red Book was produced simply that the  documents  produced  confirmed
   she was pregnant.

21. The Judge  did  take  into  account  when  considering  the  application
   (paragraph 19) that although legally represented at the time of  the  CMR
   neither the Appellant nor her legal representative had attended  at  that
   hearing or indicated that there would be any issues that would affect the
   full hearing date that had been fixed and notified of as long  ago  as  6
   December 2016. He would also have been entitled to take into account that
   her legal representatives had also been sent Directions  on  23  December
   2016 requiring them to serve their bundle 5 days before the hearing  date
   and had not done so.

22. Before him therefore the Judge appeared to have had very clear  evidence
   of a late claim for asylum followed by a wholesale failure to engage with
   the proceedings by the Appellant and her legal  representatives  at  each
   stage of the process: this is a choice that is open to them.

23. The Judge went on to consider against this background in the absence  of
   any evidence that the Appellant was unfit to attend the  hearing  whether
   the case could be justly disposed of and concluded that it could. He  had
   the Respondents bundle which contained the Appellants interviews with the
   Respondent  together  with  her  witness  statement  and  documents   and
   photographs in support of her application and the refusal  letter.  I  am
   satisfied on the basis of the evidence and history of the case before him
   there was no basis on which he could have concluded  that  proceeding  in
   her absence deprived her of a fair hearing and he  applied  the  dominant
   test as he was required to do of the case being dealt with justly.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date
5.7.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
