
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/13738/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    M H B
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed by R. Spio and
Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald  on  27
          August 2019 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
          Young, promulgated on 19 July 2019 following a hearing  at  Hatton
          Cross on 4 June 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born  24  October  1988.  He
          entered the UK as a student  in  December  2009  and  subsequently
          obtained further grants of leave until under Tier 4 and, according
          to the respondent, under Tier 2 until 15 April 2017, although  the
          appellant maintains he was a Tier 2 dependant  from  11  May  2016
          until 13 April 2017 (witness statement p.4, SB). Plainly he cannot
          have been a dependant if in 2015 his wife was seeking to remain on
          the basis of her relationship to him.  This  detail  is,  however,
          immaterial to the issues.


       3. The appellant made visits to Pakistan in August 2011,  June  2012,
          February 2016 and June 2016. A year after his last  entry,  on  21
          June 2017, he claimed asylum on the basis that his family had been
          involved in a land dispute and that  when  he  had  last  been  in
          Pakistan, he had been attacked. He claimed that in early June 2017
          he had become aware that a warrant for his arrest had been  issued
          against him because it was believed that he had been  involved  in
          an incident in 2013 when a security guard had  been  killed.  What
          had previously happened was that  his  paternal  cousin,  KM,  had
          killed three family members in 2011 over a  property  dispute  and
          then fled to the UK as he was a British national or a UK resident.
          In 2013 the appellant's brother,  FAB,  had  killed  one  of  KM's
          security guards, allegedly in self-defence.


       4. The appellant also maintained that he was  married  under  Islamic
          law to KK/ZB, an Indian national, and  that  he  had  taken  their
          daughter (born August 2014) to Pakistan and left  her  there  with
          his mother. He had returned with her in June 2016 to arrange entry
          clearance for her return as she was here without leave but had  to
          leave her there when he fled following the attack. Thereafter, his
          sponsor's licence was revoked and so he could no longer  work  and
          his daughter could not seek entry clearance to  join  him.  It  is
          unclear  whether  an  application  had  been  made  prior  to  his
          departure.


       5. The appellant's wife entered the UK in October 2010 as  a  student
          and subsequently obtained discretionary leave  until  13  November
          2014 in order to give birth to her daughter (now in Pakistan). Her
          subsequent application on  12  November  2014  for  leave  as  her
          husband's dependant was refused and her article 8 appeal was heard
          at Hatton  Cross  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell  on  14
          September 2015 and dismissed on  29  September  2015.  I  have  no
          evidence  of  whether  she  acquired  any  status  thereafter  but
          certainly she had  none  at  the  time  of  the  decision  in  the
          appellant's  case  when  she  was  also  refused  leave   as   the
          applicant's dependant. At her hearing, the appellant's wife stated
          that her intention was to return to India with her  daughter.  She
          also maintained, however, that she could not return there with her
          husband as she had converted to Islam.  It  was  argued  that  the
          child was stateless and was  unable  to  obtain  nationality  from
          either India or Pakistan. Plainly that was incorrect as the  child
          obtained a Pakistani passport shortly afterwards.


       6. The appellant's  claim  was  refused  on  14  December  2017.  The
          respondent did not accept that the claim of a family land  dispute
          engaged the Refugee Convention. She also found inconsistencies  in
          the claim. She considered that  the  appellant  had  not  been  in
          Pakistan in  2013  and  so  it  was  unlikely  that  he  would  be
          considered to have been involved in the incident. The delay in the
          making of  the  claim,  some  12  months  after  his  return  from
          Pakistan, allegedly when he had been in fear  for  his  life,  was
          also taken into account.


       7. The appeal was initially heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson
          at Hatton Cross on 29 January 2018. It was dismissed on 2 February
          2018. However due to the lack of clarity in the determination  (it
          appears as though voice recognition  software  was  used  with  no
          subsequent proof reading), the decision was set  aside  by  Deputy
          Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 2 August 2018. It then came before
          First-tier Tribunal Judge Young at Hatton Cross on 4 June 2019 and
          was dismissed on 19 July 2019.


       8. The judge rejected the claim of a  real  risk  of  persecution  on
          account of the  property  dispute  and  the  alleged  accompanying
          events. The claim is convoluted and contains numerous difficulties
          but as no  direct  challenge  has  been  made  to  any  particular
          findings on the asylum/humanitarian protection claim, there is  no
          need to set the details out in any detail at this  stage.  Suffice
          to say that the claim was rejected, and that  the  judge  did  not
          accept that the appellant had  experienced  any  problems  on  his
          return visits in 2016. Indeed, the judge found that  the  family's
          property dispute had been  exaggerated  and  the  account  of  the
          attack had been added to boost it so that the appellant could find
          a way to remain in the UK after his discovery  in  2017  that  his
          employer's sponsor licence was under investigation and was revoked
          on 10 May 2017. The judge found that tied in  perfectly  with  the
          timing of the asylum claim.


       9. It was argued at the hearing, and appears to have been raised  for
          the first time before Judge Chapman, that there would be  problems
          for the appellant's wife if she accompanied him to Pakistan as she
          was a Sikh and an Indian national. This was further pursued as  an
          argument before Judge Young and an expert report  was  adduced  to
          support the contention that the  wife  would  not  be  welcome  in
          Pakistan.


      10. The judge rejected this claim, finding that the wife had converted
          to Islam and changed her name and that the Islamic marriage  would
          be accepted in Pakistan where their daughter now lived. The  judge
          also found that the evidence did not establish that  there  was  a
          real risk that the wife's mental health  (after  losing  a  second
          child shortly after its birth in May 2018)  would  deteriorate  if
          she was removed to such an extent as to engage article 3 or 8.  He
          accepted that the appellant would not be able to relocate to India
          but found that family life could continue  in  Pakistan.  He  also
          took account of the fact that both the appellant and his wife  had
          come to the UK for studies and had no expectation of being able to
          reside here. He found that there  would  be  no  very  significant
          obstacles to integration. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed on
          all grounds.
          The Hearing


      11.  Mr  Malik  relied  on  his  grounds  which  he  expanded  in  his
          submissions at the hearing on 3 October 2019.


      12. The following arguments were made. First, it was argued  that  the
          judge's approach as to whether the appellant's wife could relocate
          to Pakistan was legally flawed and inconsistent with CS and Others
          (Proof of Foreign Law) India [2017] UKUT 199  (IAC).  That  was  a
          case which concerned an Indian male, a Pakistani  wife  and  three
          children.  Mr  Malik  referred  me  to   paragraph   22   of   the
          determination and argued that in the present case the judge should
          have found  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  adduce
          documentary evidence of Pakistan's immigration laws meant that  as
          in CS, the cornerstone of her case  had  collapsed  and  crumbled.
          Mr Malik maintained that the burden was on the respondent to prove
          that relocation to Pakistan was a viable option.  He  also  argued
          that there was a  conflict  in  the  evidence  as  to  the  wife's
          conversion and this was not resolved by the judge.


      13. Mr Malik's second ground was that the judge had applied the  wrong
          test in considering the claim  based  on  the  appellant's  wife's
          suicide risk. It was argued that in seeking  clear  evidence  that
          suicide would be the  result  of  removal,  the  judge  failed  to
          consider whether there would be a real possibility of suicide. The
          judge is criticised for failing to refer  to  and  follow  binding
          authorities such as J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y and Z [2009]  EWCA
          Civ  362.  He  is  also  criticised  for  the  reference  to   the
          availability of medical treatment in India (at 146).


      14. The third ground was that the judge had applied the wrong standard
          of proof and failed to ask the right question when considering the
          protection claim. Mr Malik relied on ME (Sri  Lanka)  [2018]  EWCA
          Civ 1486 and argued that in accordance with paragraph 18  of  that
          judgment, it was unsatisfactory for the  fact  finder  to  express
          findings of fact in the negative. He argued that Judge  Young  had
          consistently approached his assessment  in  a  binary  manner  and
          expressed himself in the negative. Mr  Malik  submitted  that  the
          decision should be  set  aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal for a fresh decision.


      15. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response. He
          submitted that it was not a misdirection in law for the  judge  to
          have expressed himself as he did.  If  that  was  indeed  a  valid
          argument, it would have been the first and not the last ground put
          forward and there would be a raft of applications being  made  all
          relying on that point.  On the issue  of  the  appellant's  wife's
          conversion, although it was now said that she had duped the  imam,
          there was a conversion certificate and  they  had  a  daughter  in
          Pakistan with whom they would be reunited. With reference  to  the
          case of CS, Mr Melvin argued  that  the  reason  that  appeal  was
          allowed was because the  family  would  have  been  fragmented  by
          removal to two different countries. Here, it was for the appellant
          to show that his wife could not return with him as a  spouse.  The
          expert report was unhelpful as it was prepared on the  basis  that
          the wife was Sikh whereas the evidence was that she had  converted
          and had married the appellant in an Islamic marriage. There was no
          obligation in those circumstances for the Secretary  of  State  to
          prove that Pakistan would accept the appellant's wife.


      16. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had  adequately  addressed  the
          issue of suicide risk. There  was  no  evidence  of  any  previous
          attempts at suicide. There was a child in Pakistan. The  newspaper
          reports referred to  all  dealt  with  Pakistan  and  this  was  a
          typographical error. There had been no actual challenge to any  of
          the findings on  the  asylum  claim.  The  judge's  findings  were
          adequate.


      17. In response,  Mr  Malik  maintained  that  although  there  was  a
          certificate of conversion, there was also the appellant's evidence
          that that had  been  done  for  convenience.  The  judge  had  not
          resolved the issue of faith. There was also  the  problem  of  the
          wife's nationality and there was no evidence on the  domestic  law
          of Pakistan. Mr Malik repeated his argument that it  was  for  the
          Secretary of State to show  relocation  to  a  particular  country
          would be possible and proportionate.


      18. Mr Malik submitted that Mr Melvin had no basis on which  to  argue
          that the reference to India was a typographical error and  he  had
          not taken the Tribunal to the newspaper articles he  referred  to.
          The medical claim had been dismissed using  the  wrong  test.  The
          first child was living apart from the mother in Pakistan  and  the
          second child had died in her arms, so it was not  surprising  that
          she was suicidal. Even if the third ground was not  considered  to
          be meritorious, there was  enough  in  the  first  and  second  to
          warrant the setting aside of the decision and a  remittal  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing and decision.


      19. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      20. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  made,  I
          find that the contended errors of law have not been  made  out.  I
          take each complaint in turn.


      21. On the issue of the appellant's wife removal to Pakistan,  I  find
          that CS is not on point and cannot be used as  authority  for  the
          proposition that the burden is on the respondent to show  that  KK
          would be admitted to Pakistan. The facts of CS were  fundamentally
          different to those in the present case as  was  the  issue  to  be
          decided. In that case the respondent proposed removing the  Indian
          father/husband  to  India  with  one  child  and   the   Pakistani
          mother/wife to Pakistan  with  the  remaining  two  children.  The
          respondent was of the view that family  reunification  could  take
          place post removal in  India.  It  was  on  that  basis  that  the
          Tribunal held that the burden lay with the Secretary of State.  In
          the present case there is no plan to fragment the  family.  It  is
          proposed to remove both the appellant and his  dependent  wife  to
          Pakistan. Plainly if her admittance proves to be a  problem,  then
          the respondent  will  have  to  reassess  the  situation  but  the
          practicality of removal is not a matter for the Tribunal  at  this
          stage.


      22. Nor is it arguable that the cornerstone of the  respondent's  case
          "crumbles and collapses". The cornerstone of the respondent's case
          in CS was the proposal that post removal reunification in  another
          country would be  possible.  It  was  in  that  context  that  the
          Tribunal held that the respondent was required to show  that  such
          reunification would be viable. The appeal was allowed  because  on
          the available evidence the Tribunal found that such a prospect was
          "highly uncertain". It is also of note that in CS there  had  been
          no conversion of faith by either spouse.


      23. That brings me to the complaint made by Mr Malik about the judge's
          failure  to  resolve  the   contradictory   evidence   about   the
          appellant's wife's conversion and change of name. It  is  not  for
          the judge to resolve this inconsistency but for the  appellant  to
          do so. The judge had  a  certificate  of  conversion.  He  had  an
          Islamic marriage certificate. He had the  wife's  interview  notes
          where she gave her faith as  'Muslim'  and  stated  that  she  had
          changed her name to ZB.  That  name  also  appears  on  the  birth
          certificates of the children born  to  the  couple.  Further,  the
          wife's evidence in her appeal was that she could not return to her
          own family as she had converted to Islam. It is  now  argued  that
          the appellant had given evidence that in fact the  conversion  and
          change of name was just for convenience. The  appellant's  witness
          statement (SB C: paragraph  82)  confirms  this  and  I  was  also
          pointed to his similar oral evidence (at 72 of the determination).
          It is hardly surprising in the face of all this evidence that  the
          judge found that "the faith of Mrs Kaur changes depending  on  the
          advantage that is sought to be made" (at 152). It  certainly  does
          appear that the appellant and his wife  are  cynically  exploiting
          their position depending on the case  they  wish  to  put.  Having
          admitted to lying about the conversion, there is no reason why the
          judge should believe the change in story that the  conversion  was
          in fact a sham. Indeed, if it was, it is difficult  to  understand
          why KK would have  told  her  family  that  she  had  changed  her
          religion and have exposed herself to their wrath.   It  also  goes
          against the entire thrust of her appeal before Judge Kimnell  when
          she maintained that she could not go to India as she had converted
          to Islam.


      24. The judge  also  had  expert  evidence  and  documents  about  the
          position of a foreign wife in Pakistan. He was entitled to observe
          that the report was based on the premise that the wife remained  a
          Sikh and that it was not, therefore, helpful.  The  evidence  from
          Pakistan's Directorate General of Immigration sets out a procedure
          by which  "foreign  ladies  married  to  Pakistan  nationals"  can
          acquire citizenship. The evidence from the Indian advocate (Bundle
          B) was that  Pakistan  and  India  had  signed  a  bilateral  visa
          agreement in 2012 and that the  spouse  of  a  Pakistani  national
          would be entitled to a long-term visa. There is also reference  in
          the Government of India Ministry of Home Affairs  documents  about
          the category of Indian women  returning  to  India  from  Pakistan
          after widowhood or divorce which further suggests that  there  are
          Indian women in Pakistan.  No  attempts  have  been  made  by  the
          appellant and his wife to approach the  Pakistani  authorities  in
          this country to make the necessary enquiries. I  note  that  after
          arguing that their daughter would be stateless because  she  could
          not be registered as a Pakistani national, found to be an  example
          of "manipulating the evidence" by Judge Kimnell (at  paragraph  26
          of the KK determination), the child was able to obtain a  passport
          shortly thereafter and travel to Pakistan on it.


      25. Also of relevance is the fact that  at  no  point  in  his  asylum
          application did the appellant make any claim that his  wife  would
          face any difficulties in Pakistan or that there would be any issue
          as to her  admission.  Similarly,  she  herself  as  part  of  her
          application did not maintain that she would be at risk in any  way
          in  Pakistan  other  than  because  of  the  appellant's  property
          dispute, a claim that was rejected.


      26. The next ground put forward by Mr Malik was that  the  wrong  test
          had been applied when the appellant's  wife's  suicide  claim  had
          been considered.  It is argued that the  judge  should  have  been
          looking for whether there was a real risk of suicide if removal to
          Pakistan was to take place and not clear evidence of same,  as  he
          stated at paragraph 145. The judge was plainly clumsy  in  how  he
          expressed himself but looking at  the  assessment  of  the  wife's
          mental health as a whole, I cannot find that that 'error', if poor
          phraseology can be described as such, warrants a setting aside  of
          his decision.


      27. The basis for the appellant's wife's  depression  is  plainly  the
          death of her second child shortly after birth in May 2018 in  what
          I  accept  are  heart  rending  and   tragic   circumstances   and
          exacerbated by the separation from her daughter (who has  been  in
          Pakistan since June 2016). The  appellant  confirms  this  in  his
          witness statements  and  notes  that  the  separation  from  their
          daughter after the death of their  baby  has  made  the  situation
          worse with his wife crying for her absent child. The  report  from
          Dr Kashmiri also confirms that low mood was triggered by the  loss
          of the new born child following  complications  in  pregnancy  and
          difficulties in being away from her daughter (at  2.41,  2.44  and
          2.6).    The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  is  that  the
          depression, anxiety and low  mood  are  linked  to  family  losses
          rather than leaving the UK or to a  fear  of  going  to  Pakistan.
          Indeed, the medical report deals with a  return  to  India  rather
          than to Pakistan (at 5.19 and  5.42).  Astonishingly,  the  doctor
          does not even touch upon how KK's condition would be affected were
          she to be reunited with her daughter in Pakistan. That seems to me
          to be a serious flaw in the report.


      28. The judge was criticised for not dealing with whether there  would
          be a real risk of suicide were removal to take  place  however  in
          the absence of any professional view about how mood could in  fact
          change for the better were there to be a reunion with the child in
          Pakistan, it is difficult to see how the decision could have  been
          any different. The evidence before the judge did not  meet  the  J
          test, even if that test was  not  specifically  referred  to.  The
          judge did cite N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT 00053, N v UK, Paposhvili  v
          Belgium and KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354.  Any errors  in
          how he phrased the risk to be  considered  are  not  material  and
          could not have  led  to  a  different  outcome  on  the  available
          evidence.


      29.   Mr  Malik  also  made   strong   criticisms   of   the   judge's
          "indefensible" reference to newspaper articles on the availability
          of medical treatment and drugs in India (at 144 and  146).  It  is
          argued that the judge was wrong to have looked at this and that he
          should have been referring to  evidence  on  Pakistan.  Mr  Melvin
          suggested it was a typographical error. Neither  party  is  right.
          The judge was given numerous newspaper articles to consider. These
          are attached to the representations made on 4  June  2019  by  the
          appellant's previous representatives and, as the  judge  correctly
          observed, they all related to  medical  treatment  in  India.  The
          representations themselves also  contain  repeated  references  to
          these articles (for example at paragraph 5, 6, 7 and 8)  and  make
          the submission that KK would be unable to access  health  care  in
          India (at paragraphs 15-16). There was, therefore, no error at all
          made by the judge when  he  referred  to  India  in  the  impugned
          paragraphs of his determination. The articles formed part  of  the
          evidence before him and he was required to  consider  them.  There
          are also Pakistani newspapers articles  but  those  refer  to  the
          appellant's asylum claim and were  dealt  with  elsewhere  in  the
          determination.




      30. Mr Malik's final point related to the judge's application  of  the
          standard of proof with respect to the asylum claim.  It  is,  with
          respect, his weakest. Mr Malik relies on  ME  (Sri  Lanka)  [2018]
          EWCA Civ 1486 for the court's criticism at  paragraph  18  of  the
          negative findings made by the judge who had dismissed the  appeal.
          In my view this has been  taken  out  of  context.  The  criticism
          applied to the discrete issue of whether  that  appellant  was  at
          risk of not being believed by the authorities when  he  maintained
          he had no information to hand over (at paragraph 17). I do not see
          it as authority for the contention that fact  finders  should  not
          express findings of fact in the negative. Moreover, this criticism
          by the Court of Appeal was made after numerous  difficulties  with
          the determination were identified. Judges  are  required  to  make
          findings of fact on claims. Some will be positive,  some  will  be
          negative.  This does not mean that the wrong standard of proof has
          been applied. Judge Young properly directed himself at  paragraphs
          8-12 and there is nothing to suggest that he  did  not  apply  the
          lower standard.


      31.  For  all  these  reasons,  therefore,  despite  Mr  Malik's  able
          submissions  and  arguments,   I   conclude   that   the   judge's
          determination contains no  errors  of  law  and  the  decision  to
          dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.


          Decision


      32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.  The appeal  is
          dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
          grounds.


          Anonymity


      33. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 7 October 2019












