
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13804/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 August 2017                        |On 06 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                      Mrs Kanthi Nandani Samarawickrama
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in 1964.  On  8  November
    2016 the respondent made a decision  to  refuse  an  asylum  and  human
    rights claim.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge V Fox ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 12  January
    2017.  The FtJ dismissed the appeal on all grounds, both  in  terms  of
    the asserted claimed fear of return to Sri Lanka,  and  also  on  human
    rights grounds on the basis of her mental health.

 3. Summarising the FtJ's detailed decision  provides  the  background  and
    context for my assessment of her appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The appellant's claim as summarised by the FtJ is to  the  effect  that
    she left Sri Lanka to avoid an abusive  ex-husband  who  has  influence
    with politicians and the police there.

 5. As regards her immigration history, the FtJ referred to  the  appellant
    as having applied for entry clearance and coming to the UK as a Tier  4
    Student in September 2009.  She applied for further leave to remain  on
    successive occasions, with leave being granted until  June  2015.   Her
    leave was however, curtailed on three occasions during that period  and
    her leave as a student expired on 28 July 2014.

 6. She applied for a residence card as an extended family  member  on  two
    occasions, both applications having  been  refused.   The  most  recent
    application was refused on 11 February 2016.

 7. She was encountered by immigration authorities on  17  April  2016  and
    notified of her status as an overstayer.  She then made an  appointment
    to claim asylum on 22 April 2016.  The  appellant's  (current)  partner
    applied for entry clearance as her dependant on 3 February 2010 and  he
    remains her dependant in terms of his immigration status.

 8. The appellant has a child whose father is her ex-husband.   That  child
    is currently studying in the UK.

 9. In relation to the hearing before the FtJ, the appellant's partner  had
    written to the Tribunal on 6 January 2017 asking for an adjournment  on
    the basis that the appellant was overwhelmed  by  the  asylum  process.
    The application  was  refused,  pre-hearing.   The  appellant  in  fact
    attended the hearing but the FtJ noted that she was distressed from the
    outset of the proceedings.   He  said  that  despite  reassurances  she
    initially refused  to  communicate  with  the  interpreter  before  she
    finally agreed to participate in the proceedings.

10. She had said that she did not understand the respondent's decision  and
    her son had assisted her in drafting the grounds of appeal, as she  has
    issues with her memory.

11. The FtJ records that he explained to  her  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent for refusing her claim and she was asked whether she  wished
    to  rely  upon  further  documents.   Her  partner  provided  documents
    relating to an incident on 15 December 2016  when  the  appellant  went
    missing.

12. The FtJ further recorded that during oral evidence the appellant became
    hysterical as she volunteered evidence of her ex-husband's appetite for
    sexual voyeurism and his requirement that the appellant  should  engage
    in sexual activities with anonymous males.  The FtJ  explained  to  her
    that no-one had asked her to provide those details and if she wished to
    volunteer that evidence she should do so in a calm manner.

13. During her oral evidence the appellant had also said that her  son  had
    witnessed her ex-husband's recent abuses via telephone.   Although  her
    son had driven the appellant and her partner to the hearing centre that
    morning, it seems that the appellant said that it  was  not  considered
    necessary for the son to attend as a witness.  Later however, it  seems
    that the appellant changed her mind about her son giving  evidence  and
    the FtJ allowed the appellant's partner to telephone her son so that he
    could attend the hearing.  Apparently,  her  son  did  not  answer  the
    phone.

14. The FtJ set out the appellant's and her partner's evidence  in  detail.
    He also summarised the respondent's submissions and what the  appellant
    said in reply.

15. The FtJ made detailed findings of fact, starting at [67].  He concluded
    that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof  to  the
    lower standard.  He found that she was not a witness of truth.  In  the
    very next paragraph he said that he had considered the medical evidence
    in accordance with JL (medical reports-credibility) China  [2013]  UKUT
    00145.  He noted that the appellant and her partner claimed  to  suffer
    with historic psychological and physical "issues" but stated  that  the
    appellant alone had sought medical intervention during the  process  of
    the asylum claim, despite having been in the UK since 2010.   It  seems
    that the FtJ was commenting on the fact  that  the  appellant  had  not
    sought medical help earlier.

16. At [69] he said that the medical  report  in  the  respondent's  bundle
    makes no meaningful reference to self-harm or suicidal  ideation.   The
    discharge  notification  dated  22  December  2016  referred  only   to
    immigration issues as the cause of the appellant's anxiety.   There  is
    no reference in that document to historic trauma.  The FtJ stated  that
    the medical evidence did not provide any meaningful investigation  into
    the appellant's psychological state, for the purpose of her claim,  and
    relied upon the appellant's account of her  circumstances  "which  does
    not stand up to scrutiny for the reasons stated below".

17. The FtJ then gave a number of reasons for doubting  the  appellant  and
    her partner's credibility.  Before doing so he stated that the Tribunal
    remained the finder of fact and the medical  evidence  was  of  limited
    probative value when the evidence was considered in the round.

18. He concluded that the appellant was vague and evasive in oral evidence.
     He said that he had attempted to assist her in examination-in-chief to
    set out her claim.  However, she deviated from her evidence immediately
    when she stated that her ex-partner had confiscated her home.  When the
    interview record at question 96 was brought to her attention,  he  said
    that she amended her evidence to state that another property  had  been
    confiscated.  The FtJ said that had her ex-husband  really  confiscated
    her home it is reasonable to conclude that she would recall  the  event
    with some degree of accuracy.  He dismissed the possibility  that  this
    was simply a mild variation in her account, stating that  the  evidence
    related directly to the preservation of the appellant's  home,  and  it
    was reasonable to expect the appellant to maintain general  consistency
    in that respect.

19. In expressing those views, it  seems  that  the  FtJ  in  referring  to
    question 96 of the interview took the view that the appellant had said,
    or at least implied, that she remained in her home after the divorce.

20. He went on to state  that  the  appellant  was  vague  and  evasive  in
    relation to the alleged attacks upon her partner.   The  appellant  was
    unaware of when the attacks occurred, when she was  informed  of  them,
    and the nature of any injuries sustained.   Her  partner  however,  had
    said that  he  was  assaulted  on  one  occasion  only,  following  his
    abduction on the way home from work.  His evidence was that he did  not
    tell the appellant about the incident until they were in the UK as  the
    appellant's ex-husband had told him not to tell her.

21. The FtJ said  that  there  was  the  obvious  discrepancy  between  the
    appellant and her partner regarding the number of assaults suffered  by
    the partner.  Furthermore, he said that the  appellant  was  unable  or
    unwilling to provide evidence of abduction, blindfolding  and  beating.
    He made the observation that it  was  a  common  feature  of  dishonest
    witnesses to claim memory problems as the  cause  of  their  unreliable
    evidence, but he said that in the  absence  of  medical  evidence  that
    explanation was unconvincing.

22. He went on to  state  at  [77]  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant's partner would acquiesce  in  her  ex-husband's  demands  to
    maintain the secrecy  of  the  assault,  yet  that  her  partner  would
    simultaneously approach two separate police stations in an unsuccessful
    attempt to register a complaint.  He also said that it was not credible
    that the appellant's partner would be able to conceal the injuries from
    the appellant,  especially  when  one  considered  the  claim  that  he
    continues to suffer from the effects of the alleged assault.   He  also
    found that it would be reasonable to expect such long-lasting  injuries
    to give rise to some medical evidence, from  medical  practitioners  in
    the UK at least.  The absence of  such  evidence  which  was  available
    "with relative ease" did not assist the appellant in her appeal.

23. The FtJ  then  repeated  that  the  appellant  was  vague  and  evasive
    throughout her evidence, but that he had highlighted the more  apparent
    examples although "the record" shows  the  appellant's  propensity  for
    evasive and embellished claims.

24. Notwithstanding that the appellant's son  was  said  to  have  received
    death threats from her ex-husband, he remarked that it was nevertheless
    not deemed appropriate by the appellant to ask her son  to  attend  the
    appeal hearing, notwithstanding his presence at the hearing centre.  He
    also found it unusual that  the  appellant's  partner  should  fail  to
    mention the threats against her son.  He repeated  his  view  that  the
    number of discrepancies and inconsistencies in the evidence damaged the
    appellant and her partner's credibility, along with  the  core  of  the
    claim.

25. At [82] - [83] the FtJ referred to the appellant's  and  her  partner's
    evidence about whether they had ever cohabited.  Their evidence in this
    respect  was,  he  concluded,  inconsistent.   He   found   that   that
    inconsistency damaged their credibility and caused  him  to  doubt  the
    motivation for their marriage in the period immediately prior to  their
    entry clearance applications.  However, the FtJ appears to  have  taken
    the view that that was not a central issue in  the  appeal,  he  having
    stated that he would continue to focus upon their issues in the appeal.

26. He concluded that it was not credible that the  appellant's  ex-husband
    would wage a longstanding vendetta against the appellant  yet  fail  to
    exert his  alleged  influence  in  any  meaningful  way,  allowing  the
    appellant to maintain a home in close  proximity  to  his  family,  and
    failing to exert any influence to disrupt  the  appellant's  employment
    activities.  Nor was it credible that he  would  fail  to  contest  the
    divorce petition in 2002, and by default accept the allegation that  he
    had abandoned her.  On the other hand, the appellant's claim  was  that
    her ex-husband was an alcohol abuser  who  forced  the  appellant  into
    prostitution.

27. This led the FtJ to conclude that the appellant was  prepared  to  make
    any allegation, however sensational, to bolster her claim.

28.  He  found  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  her  partner  had   any
    "independent proof" of her ex-husband's apparent influence, despite the
    appellant's partner's assertion that he is aware  of  the  ex-husband's
    social status via news media.

29. In relation to the absence of the appellant's son  as  a  witness,  and
    whether the appellant had been disadvantaged  by  that  fact,  the  FtJ
    concluded that there were  numerous  reasons  as  to  why  neither  the
    appellant nor her partner were credible witnesses.  He  found  that  it
    was open to the appellant to ask her son to give evidence when he drove
    her to the hearing centre.  However, the evidence demonstrated that the
    appellant merely sought every opportunity to  embellish  her  evidence.
    He said that he was able to make a finding  of  fact  on  the  existing
    evidence "with confidence" that there was no merit in  the  appellant's
    allegations.

30. He referred to the timing of the  appellant's  claim  as  damaging  her
    credibility further.  He noted that  she  had  made  two  unmeritorious
    applications pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006, and that her leave to remain as a  student  had  been
    curtailed on three occasions.  It was reasonable to conclude therefore,
    that the appellant had extensive experience of  making  representations
    to the respondent.  However, she only claimed asylum after she received
    formal documentation to  confirm  her  status  as  an  overstayer.   He
    described her claim as opportunistic, with  the  exclusive  purpose  of
    frustrating her departure from the UK.

31. He went on to dismiss the appeal with reference to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  He referred to the appellant's temporary status in  the  UK  and
    said that she had made a false claim for asylum and  that  her  partner
    had colluded with her in that.  He noted that the appellant's  son  was
    24 years of age, and that his status in the UK was unclear.  If he  was
    a dependant in immigration terms, he could be expected to leave the  UK
    with her.  Furthermore, there was no reliable evidence of  family  life
    beyond normal emotional ties between adult relatives.

32. So far as the medical evidence is concerned with reference  to  Article
    8, he concluded that there was no reliable evidence to demonstrate that
    the appellant could not obtain adequate medical services in Sri  Lanka.
    In any event, the alleged nexus between her medical needs and the  core
    of her claim was not made out.

33. Finally, in the alternative, he went on to state that any  interference
    with  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  was  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued, and the appellant was a "resilient migrant" who
    had engaged in abusive conduct to prolong her presence in the UK.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

34. There are two sets of grounds from the appellant, the second  following
    from the initial refusal of permission to appeal.  Both sets of grounds
    are brief.  In the first, the appellant  stated  that  because  of  her
    mental health she was unable to express her side of the story perfectly
    at the hearing before the FtJ.  She  also  stated  that  she  needed  a
    chance to provide specialist medical reports for her next hearing.   It
    is asserted that some answers included in the FtJ's  findings  are  not
    exactly what had been said (by her and her partner) and that there were
    a "lot of confusions" in his decision.

35. In the second set of grounds it is stated that the appellant  would  be
    receiving a new medical report in relation to her mental  and  physical
    health.  It is then stated that she had requested an adjournment before
    the hearing "because of my situation" but the FtJ did  not  accept  it.
    At the time of the hearing before the FtJ she was  not  100%  recovered
    from her "mental condition" and  her  conditions  had  not  fully  been
    understood by her GP.

36. In submissions, Mr Duffy said that although permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, on the basis that it was
    arguable that the FtJ failed to have adequate  regard  to  the  medical
    evidence before him, it was not clear exactly what was before the  FtJ.
    Furthermore, it was not simply an issue of the  appellant's  health  in
    terms of the assessment of her credibility  but  also  the  significant
    inconsistencies, as well as her  immigration  history.   She  had  made
    unmeritorious applications in terms of the  EEA  Regulations,  and  her
    student leave had been curtailed three times.   She  had  only  claimed
    asylum after being notified  that  she  was  an  overstayer.   All  the
    findings were open to the FtJ and the weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    evidence was a matter for him.

37. In relation to any adjournment application, if the application had  not
    been renewed before the FtJ it could not have been an error of law  for
    him not to have adjourned the hearing.




    Conclusions

38. The appellant did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  me  and  was  not
    represented.  At a hearing on 26 June 2017 before Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Frances, the appellant did  not  attend  either.   Judge  Frances  gave
    directions, which were sent out in writing, that the appellant  was  to
    serve a medical report in relation to her fitness to  attend  the  next
    hearing.  She also stated in those directions that it  was  not  to  be
    assumed that the appeal would be adjourned if  the  appellant  did  not
    attend on the next occasion. An earlier hearing before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen on 10 May 2017 was also adjourned on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was unwell.

39. In relation to the hearing before me, no medical evidence was  provided
    indicating that the appellant  was  unfit  to  attend.   There  was  no
    application for an adjournment in advance of the  hearing,  or  on  the
    day.  No messages were received by the Tribunal to  indicate  that  the
    appellant was unable to attend.  In those circumstances, I decided that
    it was appropriate to proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the  appellant's
    absence, having regard to Rules 2 and  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The appellant was notified of  the  date,
    time and place of the hearing and had not applied for an adjournment or
    offered any explanation for her  non-attendance.   No  information  had
    been provided by the appellant's partner either.

40. The appellant's  grounds  are  not  entirely  clear,  although  I  have
    interpreted them as best I can.  Insofar as the appellant  claims  that
    she sought an adjournment, which the  FtJ  wrongly  refused,  there  is
    nothing to indicate that the appellant made any application to the  FtJ
    for an adjournment, either expressly  or  by  implication.   The  FtJ's
    manuscript record of proceedings does not indicate such an  application
    either.  Furthermore, it was not as if the appellant was alone  at  the
    hearing.  She had her partner with her.  There is nothing  to  indicate
    that he made mention of the appeal not being ready to proceed from  the
    appellant's perspective.

41. It is true that there was an application for an  adjournment  prior  to
    the hearing, dealt with on the papers by  a  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   That  application  was  refused.   It  was  not
    encumbent on the FtJ to revisit that decision of his own motion, and he
    was not asked to do so.  The fact that there was an application for  an
    adjournment prior to the hearing indicates that  the  appellant  and/or
    her partner were aware that an appeal can be  adjourned.   Furthermore,
    it is apparent from the FtJ's decision that both the appellant  and  he
    took an active part in the proceedings.

42. As regards the contention that the  FtJ's  decision  does  not  reflect
    exactly what was said at the hearing and that seemingly his  assessment
    was confused, it was open to the appellant or her partner to explain in
    the grounds the basis upon which that assertion is made.  Not  only  is
    there no specific detail given in relation to that allegation, there is
    not even any  indication  of  the  areas  of  the  appellant's  or  her
    partner's evidence which are said to have been affected  in  this  way.
    This, it  seems  to  me,  is  merely  a  general  assertion  expressing
    disagreement with the FtJ's decision in an attempt to undermine it, but
    without any basis for doing so.

43. In terms of the suggestion  that  the  appellant  has  further  medical
    evidence to provide, the FtJ's decision cannot be said to be  erroneous
    in law in relation to material that was not put before him.

44. As to the contention that because of her mental state she was unable to
    "express my side of the story perfectly" again the appellant  does  not
    explain what aspects of her evidence were affected by her mental state.
     The FtJ referred to the appellant being vague and evasive and, on  the
    basis of his summary of the evidence and detailed conclusions,  he  was
    entitled to come to that view.  It  is  not  apparent  from  the  FtJ's
    decision that the appellant's vagueness and evasiveness was the  result
    of any mental health condition.   It  is  however  apparent,  that  the
    appellant's partner's evidence suffered from the same  defects.   Their
    evidence  was  inconsistent  in   various   respects   and   inherently
    implausible, according to the FtJ.  Furthermore, it is perfectly  clear
    from the FtJ's decision that he was aware of the medical evidence  that
    had been provided.  It is also evident that he was at pains  to  ensure
    that the appellant was properly able to participate in the proceedings,
    he having taken care to explain the proceedings to  her.   Furthermore,
    there is no information provided in support of  the  grounds  from  the
    appellant's partner in terms of her inability to express herself.

45. It is  apparent  that  the  appellant's  claim  is  not  based  on  any
    Convention reason.  Accordingly, the  FtJ  was  bound  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

46. His decision is detailed and properly reasoned.  Although at times  the
    FtJ expressed himself in emphatic terms in relation  to  the  appellant
    and her partner's credibility, that in no way undermines his findings.

47. In addition, as submitted on behalf of the respondent  before  me,  the
    timing and circumstances of the appellant's claim and  her  immigration
    history are matters that the FtJ was entitled to take into  account  in
    assessing the credibility of the claim.

48. Likewise, even if everything the appellant said about her  ex-husband's
    behaviour towards her is true, there was simply no evidence before  the
    FtJ to indicate that the appellant's ex-husband has  any  influence  at
    all in Sri Lanka, a matter relevant to the  issues  of  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation.

49. I cannot see, either in terms of the grounds of appeal, or  considering
    any Robinson obvious potential errors of law, that there is  any  basis
    from which to conclude that the FtJ erred in law  in  his  conclusions.
    Accordingly, his decision to dismiss the appeal is to stand.

    Decision

50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            Date 5/10/17

