
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13768/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR SUBHY RASHID FAIQE
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abdullah      (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    On 12 December 2017 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  grant  the
claimant,  with  his  wife  and  two  infant  children  as  his  dependents,
international protection. In a decision sent to the parties  on  9  February
2018 the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal)  dismissed  his  appeal.  In  a
decision sent to the parties on 13 December 2018 I set aside the  tribunal's
decision (whilst preserving certain of its findings as set  out  below)  and
directed that the decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal after  a  further
hearing. That hearing took place on15 February 2019 and what  follows  below
is my explanation as to how I have made the decision and why I have done  so
in the terms that I have.

2.    I have not directed anonymity in this case.   No  such  direction  was
made by the tribunal and none was sought on behalf of the  claimant  by  his
representative before me. In any event, it is not apparent that  this  is  a
case where anonymity would be appropriate.

3.    By way of brief background, the  claimant  is  an  Iraqi  national  of
Kurdish ethnicity and he was  born  on  1 July 1968.   He  is  married  to
Parween Ali Muhamad, herself a Kurdish citizen of Iraq, who  was  born  on
10 March 1970.  The couple have two minor  children.   Shorn  of  all  but
essential detail the  account  underpinning  the  claim  for  asylum  is  as
follows: The claimant is from Kirkuk whereas his wife is from  Sulaymaniyah,
the latter city being located within the part of Iraq which is  governed  by
the Kurdish authorities.  I shall refer to that part of the country as  'the
IKR'.  The claimant says he experienced difficulties in  Kirkuk,  where  the
family resided, as a result of two men asking him to repair  a  truck  which
they had brought to a garage which he owned.  Whilst working  on  the  truck
he discovered some grenades  secreted  in  it  and  contacted  the  security
forces.  This led to his safety coming under threat from one  of  those  men
(the other was arrested) and from possible associates who may be  linked  to
the organisation sometimes called ISIS.  He and his  wife  decided  to  flee
Kirkuk.  Although they initially travelled to the IKR they  could  not  stay
there, it was said, because of a fear of the claimant's wife's  family.   As
to that, it was asserted that she had been disowned by  her  family  because
she had married the claimant against their wishes and this had  resulted  in
an ongoing family dispute of gravity.   There  had  been  consequent  danger
from her family to the extent that  she  had  felt  unsafe  even  in  Kirkuk
(which is outside the IKR) and would take precautions  so  as  not  to  draw
attention to herself.  So, it was said, there was no viable  possibility  of
the family relocating within the IKR.  It was also contended,  with  respect
to Kirkuk, that conditions there were such that  the  claimant  (and  indeed
his wife) would fall within the test contained within  Article 15c  of  the
Qualification Directive. The claimant also asserted he and his wife did  not
have identity documentation and, in particular, said that neither  possessed
a CSID card. That is a very important identity document  in  Iraq  which  is
used to access many services and to access employment. There is  no  dispute
as to its importance. It was effectively contended that without  CSID  cards
he and his wife would face destitution and would not be able  to  internally
relocate.

4.    The Secretary of State disbelieved the claimant's  account  almost  in
its entirety.  It was accepted that he is a national  of  Iraq  and  it  was
seemingly accepted that he and his wife are Kurdish.  But it  was  concluded
that neither would be at risk upon return to Iraq either  at  the  hands  of
ISIS or the claimant's wife's  family.   So,  the  international  protection
claim was refused.

5.    As noted, the tribunal dismissed the appeal. Amongst  its  conclusions
was a comprehensive rejection of  the  contention  that  there  had  been  a
family dispute involving the claimant's wife and her  family  members  as  a
result of her marriage. Although I did not preserve anything else  from  the
tribunal's decision, I did preserve its  conclusion  as  to  that.  It  said
this:

         "36.     The appellant and his  wife  are  not  credible  in  their
         account of their fear of her family  in  the  IKR.   When  screened
         Parween was asked to briefly explain all  the  reasons  she  cannot
         return to her home country and she said at 4.1 that it was  because
         they have been threatened by ISIS; her husband  was  approached  by
         ISIS to work for them and he refused; he knew better than she about
         the matter.  She made no mention of  her  family.   I  accept  that
         screening is just that but her screening answers are detailed and I
         would have expected her to make mention of something so  apparently
         important.

         37.      She said in her witness statement that  she  felt  like  a
         prisoner in Kirkuk and covered herself on the journey  to  work  to
         avoid being recognised by her family or their associates.  However,
         she had worked at a public government owned hospital in Kirkuk  for
         some 7 or 8 years 3 days pw 8 hour night shifts  treating  patients
         in the emergency department and was working  up  until  the  family
         left Iraq.  She travelled to and from work alone on foot.   It  was
         only when the family had lived  further  away  that  the  appellant
         drove her to work.  She said in her witness statement that she  was
         in constant fear and would wear a hijab when she went out  and  did
         not make many friends or socialise.  She avoided going  out  alone.
         She explained in oral evidence that when she went out of the  house
         she wore a hijab and burka so not to be recognised but at work  she
         wore the hijab not the burka and her face  was  uncovered  although
         she was careful at work avoiding anyone connected  to  her  brother
         and his friends  and  acquaintances.   She  never  saw  anyone  she
         recognised.

         38.      This claim to have lived  in  hiding,  in  fear  from  her
         family and to avoid being recognised is totally contrary to and  at
         odds with her ability to work as she did treating  patients  in  an
         emergency department when anyone could be brought in;  she  made  a
         friend at the hospital; she went out alone.  The appellant did  not
         profess to know anything about her family's links with the security
         forces or the Peshmerga and she gives no details whatsoever  merely
         asserting that her brothers and  their  friends  had  influence  or
         links.  She has not seen them or contacted them for 10 years.   The
         appellant and his wife experienced no problems in Kirkuk  from  her
         family.  They claimed to have lived in hiding and to  have  changed
         their home address 3 or 4 times within Kirkuk;  her  family  looked
         for them but did not find them.  I do not find the  account  to  be
         reasonably likely given her and his openly working in public places
         for long periods of time without any  difficulty.   They  were  not
         hidden in Kirkuk; quite the reverse.  It would have  been  easy  to
         find them.  She claimed to have relatives in Erbil  and  throughout
         Kurdistan but gave no details."

6.    So, those findings represent my starting point. But  it  is  necessary
for me to make my own findings and  reach  my  own  conclusions  as  to  the
various other strands to the appeal as set out above. I have been  aided  in
my task by the provision of documentation which, by the end of  the  hearing
of 15 February 2019, included the various documents which  had  been  before
the tribunal when it heard the appeal; a supplementary  bundle  provided  on
behalf of the claimant for the purposes of the  hearing  before  me;  and  a
copy of the Home Office Country Policy  and  Information  Note  relating  to
Iraq which had been released in October 2018, and another  similar  document
which had been released in November 2018. During the course of  the  hearing
I heard oral evidence from the claimant and his wife  and  I  received  oral
submissions from the representatives.  In  remaking  the  decision  in  this
case, I have taken all of that into  account.  In  considering  whether  the
claimant is  entitled  to  international  protection  either  on  asylum  or
humanitarian protection grounds, or whether he is  eligible  for  protection
in consequence of the content of article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights (ECHR) I  have  applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof  often
described as the "real risk test".

7.    Since I have preserved the adverse findings concerning the  claimant's
wife's family, I shall say nothing further about that. But I  must  consider
what to make of the claimant's account  concerning  the  claimed  events  in
Kirkuk involving the two men and the  truck.  Even  to  the  lower  standard
referred to above I do not accept that  the  claimant  has  told  the  truth
about this. That is because it is inherently improbable that the  men  would
take a car to a garage to be repaired and leave incriminating articles  such
as grenades in the car to be found by a person they  did  not  know.  To  my
mind, this is a very damaging credibility point. Additionally, the  claimant
has asserted that although he was frightened of the second of  the  two  men
(the one who had not been arrested) he nevertheless returned to  the  garage
the following day. I do not think he would have done that if he  feared,  as
he claims, that serious harm might be done to him.  I  conclude,  therefore,
that it has not been shown to  the  necessary  standard  that  the  claimant
would be at risk at the hands of any particular individuals if  he  were  to
return to Kirkuk.

8.    That, then, leads on to a consideration as to whether  Kirkuk  remains
a "contested area" as the term  was  used  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
Country Guidance decision of AA  (Article  15c)  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
(IAC). It is common ground that if it  does  then  the  claimant  cannot  be
expected  to  return  there  because  he  would  face   a   real   risk   of
indiscriminate violence  amounting  to  serious  harm  due  to  a  state  of
internal armed conflict. Since AA is a  Country  Guidance  case  it  follows
that  he  will  make  out  this  part  of  his  case  unless  the  stringent
requirements for departure from  Country  Guidance  are  met.  As  to  that,
Country Guidance should be followed unless  certain  specific  criteria  are
satisfied. The exception potentially relevant here is recorded in the  Upper
Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011  No  2  in  these
terms "If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the  issue  that  has
not been considered in the country  guidance  case...".  The  same  Guidance
records that where  Country  Guidance  has  become  outdated  by  reason  of
developments in the relevant country "It is anticipated that a judge of  the
First-tier Tribunal will have such credible fresh evidence...". It seems  to
me the same must apply to the  Upper  Tribunal  when  it  is  setting  about
remaking a decision in the circumstances in which I am now doing so.

9.    When the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claim  for  international
protection he expressed the view, in a very  short  paragraph  contained  in
the reasoned written decision (paragraph 63) that the area in  which  Kirkuk
is located is no longer a contested area but offered no  actual  explanation
other than by making a reference to an internet citation. It does  not  seem
to me that a barely buttressed assertion of that sort is capable of  showing
that the above test for  departure  has  been  met.  Before  me  Mr  Diwnycz
concisely asserted that the relevant region was no longer contested  because
the threat there  from  ISIS  had  diminished.  He  mentioned  the  November
Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) referred to above but he did  not
orally draw my attention to any provisions  specifically  relating  to  that
issue, though he did provide me with a copy which had a number  of  relevant
pages flagged.

10.   It is well known that and has been extensively reported that ISIS  has
sustained heavy defeats recently when fighting various forces opposed to  it
in Iraq. But in terms of the actual evidence before me, I do  not  think  it
shows that the conditions for departure have  yet  been  met.  At  paragraph
8.1.2 of the latter CPIN reference is made to some limited ongoing  fighting
in parts of northern Iraq albeit not the Kirkuk region. At  paragraph  8.3.2
there is a suggestion of ongoing tension in that region  between  Government
and Kurdish forces. So, there is some evidence  of  ongoing  instability.  I
note the overall tenor of the CPIN to the effect that ISIS was, at the  time
that CPIN was released, in significant  retreat  and  had  effectively  been
defeated in at least most parts of Iraq. But I am  not  persuaded  that  the
evidence before me is sufficiently cogent (though perhaps  it  comes  close)
to show that the test for departure has yet been met. I therefore  apply  AA
and conclude the claimant will not be able to  safely  return  to  his  home
area of Kirkuk.

11.   I now move on to consider identity documentation. There is  reason  to
doubt the claimant here because he has, on my findings,  sought  to  mislead
about the incident involving two men and some grenades. There is  reason  to
doubt what his wife says about the  couple  not  having  such  documentation
because I have preserved findings which  show  she  has  sought  to  mislead
regarding risk from her family. Those matters do not, though, mean that  the
claimant and his wife have been  dishonest  about  everything.  So,  I  must
still make findings about identity documentation but  against  a  background
of previous dishonesty.

12.   The claimant told me  in  oral  evidence,  and  also  in  his  witness
statement of 19 January 2019, that he gave his own and his  wife's  identity
documents  including  passports  and  CSID  cards  to  the  people  smuggler
involved in bringing them to the UK.  He has  been  consistent  about  that.
He says the identity documents were demanded  by  the  people  smuggler  and
suggests that he had wanted them as insurance as to  payment  of  his  fees.
The claimant says he was never  given  them  back.  But  his  wife,  in  her
screening interview, is  recorded  as  having  said  that  her  passport  (a
document the claimant says he handed to the agent) was  in  fact  left  with
her  family  in  Iraq.  Unsurprisingly   Mr   Diwnycz   relies   upon   this
inconsistency to a significant extent. I  have  noted  that  the  claimant's
wife also said at a later point in the same screening  interview,  that  she
had used her  passport  to  fly  from  Erbil  to  Turkey.  So,  she  is  not
internally consistent in that same interview.

13.   I have found it difficult, applying  the  lower  standard,  to  decide
what I should make of all this. Both of them have lied about  other  things.
But it seems to me to be plausible that a people smuggler would demand  that
identity documents be handed over,  possibly  to  seek  to  ensure  eventual
payment or possibly to retain control over his customers,  before  embarking
on the journey from Turkey to the UK.  The content of the claimant's  wife's
screening interview seems damaging but  the  fact  she  could  not  even  be
internally consistent suggests to my mind she was not seeking to trot out  a
pre-planned deliberate lie but that rather, she was, as is suggested by  her
and on her behalf, fatigued and lacking in concentration after  a  long  and
probably difficult journey during an interview conducted shortly  after  its
completion. Mr Diwnycz in cross-examination,  focussed  his  fire  upon  the
claims concerning the  lack  of  documentation  but,  in  my  judgment,  his
careful questioning did not damage either the claimant or his wife.  Indeed,
notwithstanding my conclusion they have lied about  other  matters,  I  felt
strongly that each of them appeared to be telling me the  truth  about  this
aspect of the case. There answers were internally consistent and  consistent
with each other. Although I am hesitant about this I have concluded  to  the
lower standard that I should believe them. I find, therefore,  that  neither
of them has any identity documentation whatsoever  including  passports  and
CSID's.

14.   So, where does  all  of  this  leave  the  claimant  and  his  family?
Following what is said in AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
UKUT 00212 (IAC) return will be to Baghdad.  That  is  so  even  though  the
claimant's wife is from the IKR. There is nothing to suggest  they  will  be
able to obtain CSID cards in the UK via the Iraqi Embassy absent some  other
form of identity documentation. In any event  I  accept  the  evidence  they
gave to me that they have tried and failed.  I do not see  how,  absent  any
documentation, any family members could obtain CSID's for them in  Iraq  and
send them to the UK. Nor do I see how they might  be  able  to  obtain  such
documents in Baghdad and, indeed,  it  has  not  been  suggested  that  they
could. Without such documents they will  not  (following  AAH)  be  able  to
travel by air to  either  Kirkuk  or  the  IKR  because  they  will  not  be
permitted to board a plane. Mr Diwnycz argues  I  should  decide  otherwise,
relying upon the content of two letters sent on behalf of the Iraqi  Embassy
to (I think) the Home Office, copies of which are attached  to  one  of  the
CPIN documents. Those letters suggest that travel would be  much  easier  by
air or road and that there would not be a need for a  CSID  or  passport  to
board a flight or pass through checkpoints. But the letters  are  brief  and
unsourced. Travel  issues  were  extensively  considered  in  AAH  which  is
Country Guidance. I am not able to depart from AAH on  the  basis  of  those
brief letters so, instead, I apply it.  In  doing  that,  I  find  that  the
claimant and his family will be unable  to  travel  by  air  and  unable  to
safely travel by road. That would leave them  stranded  in  Baghdad.  So,  I
must ask whether they can safely relocate to Baghdad and, if so, whether  it
would it be unduly harsh to expect them to do so.

15.   I consider the claimant's will  not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
Baghdad as they have no enemies in that city. But I consider that  requiring
them to relocate there would be unduly harsh. That is because  without  CSID
cards they would be unable to  officially  work;  they  would  similarly  be
unable to access services; they  would  lack  family  or  other  support  in
Baghdad; they are from an ethnic minority group in that part  of  Iraq;  and
they would be unable to economically support themselves  and  the  children.
So, although they cannot point to a 1951  Refugee  Convention  reason,  they
succeed on humanitarian protection grounds and under article 3 of the  ECHR.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside. In remaking the
decision, I allow the claimant's appeal against the decision of 12  December
2017 on humanitarian protection grounds and under article 3 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made for the reasons set out above.


Signed:     Date: 20 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




To the Secretary of State
Fee Award

No fee is payable so there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 20 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


