
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13315/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th November 2018                         |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    Gmab
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Butler of Counsel, instructed by the Migrant
                    Legal Project Cardiff
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of South Sudan who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 10th October 2014 and claimed asylum on 26th November  2015.



2.   The application for asylum was refused by the respondent by a  decision
    of 29th November 2017.  The appellant sought  to  appeal  against  that
    decision, which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson  at  a  hearing  on  10th  April  2018.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 16th April 2018 the appeal was dismissed.

3.   The appellant  sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision  and  lodged
    detailed grounds of challenge.  Leave to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was granted.  Thus the matter comes before me.

4.   In essence the appellant had  a  job  working  as  a  media  monitoring
    officer who would write a report for the minister.  He also set up with
    friends a website  called  info@southsudantribune.com  where  he  would
    write and edit newspaper articles critical of the Sudanese  government.
    At the relevant time he had the support of a particular minister of the
    government and he was sponsored to study in the United Kingdom.

5.   Whilst in the United Kingdom, however, the government  in  South  Sudan
    underwent changes.  He was  alerted  to  the  fact  that  his  previous
    critical comments about  the  government  may  not  be  well  received.
    Indeed that he may be in danger.

6.   It would also seem, on the basis of evidence produced at  the  hearing,
    that his ethnicity as a member of the Kakwa clan would render  him  now
    more liable to persecution than previously might be the case.

7.   The grounds of challenge are set out in detail and I do not propose  to
    address them in great detail because it was most fairly conceded by  Mr
    Howells on behalf of the Secretary of State that,  notwithstanding  the
    nature of the Section 24 notice that was submitted,  he  accepted  that
    there were material errors of law in the approach taken by the Judge.

8.   Just by way of example the Judge did not  believe  that  the  appellant
    had submitted the reports to the website as claimed, stating that the e-
    mails relied upon were only private e-mails.  It is clear from  looking
    at the e-mails as produced that  they  were  copied  certainly  to  the
    particular website.  Criticism was also made that  the  nature  of  the
    claim had moved from that of fearing persecution because of  the  media
    monitoring to persecution as a member of the  Kakwa  clan.   The  Judge
    considered that that undermined credibility and that it was an  attempt
    to boost a claim to remain.

9.   It is  clear  that  there  is  expert  evidence  which  was  not  fully
    addressed by the Judge,  which  showed  a  deteriorating  situation  in
    Southern Sudan over recent years and that there is indeed a very active
    persecution of that particular clan going on.  Such was  very  relevant
    both to the issue of asylum  and  to  humanitarian  protection  and  Mr
    Howells most fairly conceded that the Judge had not properly  addressed
    those issues in the determination.

10.  In the circumstances  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge contained material errors such that  it  should  be  set
    aside.  All issues should be remade by the First-tier Tribunal  upon  a
    de novo hearing.  In accordance with the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Direction I remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  to
    happen.  Any directions should be a matter for the Tribunal to issue in
    due course although I did ask the parties to  produce  a  comprehensive
    bundle of documents for that hearing.

Decision

11.  The First-tier Tribunal decision is set  aside.   The  appeal  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing  on  all
    issues.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                               Date  12 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
