
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13788/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 22nd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   HIDY [F]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr A Henderson, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga
and Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. For ease of reference, I  shall  refer  to  the  appellant  in  the
         proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and
         to the Respondent as the claimant.

      2. This is the remaking of  the  decision  in  the  claimant's  appeal
         against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  25  November  2016,
         refusing her protection and human rights claims. The  claimant  had
         been successful before the First-tier Tribunal, but in  a  decision
         promulgated on 21 November 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  found
         there to be material errors of law in the judge's decision and  set
         it aside.

      3. The resumed hearing first came before me on 1 May 2019.  Due  to  a
         change in legal representation and the late granting of legal  aid,
         that hearing was not effective. In adjourning the appeal, I  issued
         directions concerning the  provision  of  any  additional  evidence
         sought to be relied upon. I also set out the scope  of  the  remake
         decision in the following terms:

          a) The claimant's assertion to have been threatened  by  a  named
             individual in  respect  of  a  possible  forced  marriage  was
             rejected by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  finding  was
             specifically preserved by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede. This is
             no longer a live issue;

          b) The Secretary of State continues to accept that  the  claimant
             is a Coptic Christian from birth;

          c) The core question is that of risk on return to Egypt. This  is
             to be  assessed  by  consideration  of  the  country  guidance
             decision in MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG  [2013]  UKUT  611
             (IAC) ("MS"), together with current country information;

          d) The claimant is arguing that the  Upper  Tribunal  should,  in
             this particular case, depart from the guidance set out in MS.

      4. As set out in Mr Henderson's skeleton argument, the claimant's case
         is predicated upon a combination of what is  said  to  be  relevant
         factors going to risk of persecution and/or article 3 ill-treatment
         or, in the alternative,  to  the  existence  of  "very  significant
         obstacles" under para.  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
         These factors are:

          a) the claimant's Coptic Christian faith;

          b) her gender;

          c) her single status.




    The evidence

      5. In reaching my decision in this appeal I have  had  regard  to  the
         following sources of evidence:

          a) the Secretary of State's original appeal bundle,  under  cover
             of letter dated 21 December 2016;

          b) the claimant's consolidated bundle, indexed and  paginated  1-
             400, prepared for the resumed hearing;

          c) the Secretary of State's current  Country  Policy  Information
             Note ("CPIN") on the position of  women  in  Egypt,  published
             June 2019;

          d) the oral evidence of the claimant given at the hearing  before
             me with the assistance of an Arabic interpreter (a  full  note
             of this evidence is contained in the record of proceedings).




    Submissions of the parties

    For the Secretary of State

      6. Ms Everett relied on the Secretary of State's reasons  for  refusal
         letter dated 25 November 2016.

      7. In respect of the claim is now stood,  Ms  Everett  relied  on  the
         claimant's own evidence, which indicated that she had been able  to
         live and work as a single Coptic Christian woman in  Alexandria  in
         the past. The claimant was well educated and would likely  to  have
         family support on return. The current country information indicated
         that the Egyptian authorities are seeking to improve  the  position
         of Coptic Christians and women. It  was  submitted  that  I  should
         follow  the  guidance  set  out  in  MS.  In   respect   of   para.
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, the claimant's ability in the  past  to
         have lived alone show that there  would  be  no  "very  significant
         obstacles" to her re-integration into Egyptian society.

    For the claimant

      8. Mr Henderson relied on his skeleton argument. He confirmed that the
         claimant's case rested upon a cumulative view of three factors: her
         faith, her gender, and her single status. In general terms, it  was
         submitted  that  there  was   sufficiently   strong   new   country
         information to depart from MS. Alternatively, on the facts of  this
         case, Mr Henderson submitted that the claimant fell within the risk
         categories set out in that case.

      9. I was referred  to  specific  passages  within  the  CPINs  on  the
         position of Christians, women, and background information in Egypt,
         as well as additional  country  information  contained  within  the
         claimant's bundle.  The  effect  of  this  evidence,  submitted  Mr
         Henderson, was that the position for Coptic Christians in Egypt had
         deteriorated since MS, that single women  faced  significant  risks
         and  discrimination,  that  the  claimant  came  from  an  area  of
         heightened hostility towards Coptic Christians, and  that  internal
         relocation would be unduly harsh. Mr Henderson  accepted  that  the
         claimant would not be at risk in other large urban areas away  from
         her home city of Sohag.

     10. In response to Ms Everett's reliance on the claimant's own evidence
         of her past experiences in Alexandria, Mr Henderson submitted  that
         even then it was difficult and on return now, the  time  away  from
         the  country  and  the  lack  of  a  support   network   represents
         significant factors. Any  assistance  from  the  claimant's  sister
         would not be long-term and her brother in Canada would be unable to
         provide meaningful support.

     11. As regards the article  8  claim,  Henderson  relied  on  the  same
         factors said to have relevance to the protection claim.




    Findings of primary fact

     12. Although of course the claimant has not been believed in respect of
         the alleged forced marriage, there is little substantial dispute as
         to the core facts. In light of the written and oral evidence  as  a
         whole, together with the  country  information,  I  find  that  the
         claimant has  provided  an  essentially  reliable  account  of  her
         circumstances, both past and present.

     13. As my determination of this appeal involves both a protection claim
         and an article 8 claim, two different standards of proof  apply  to
         my assessment of the claimant's evidence. In light of what  I  have
         said in the preceding paragraph and  the  nature  of  the  evidence
         itself, I find that the matters set out below have been  proved  on
         both the lower standard of proof and the balance of probabilities.

     14. For the avoidance of any doubt, I find that the  claimant  was  not
         subject of an attempted forced marriage in Egypt.

     15. I find that the claimant is, and always has been, single.  She  has
         no children.

     16. The Secretary of State has accepted throughout, and  I  find,  that
         the claimant is a Coptic Christian from birth. I find that she  has
         practised her faith openly in the  past,  does  so  in  the  United
         Kingdom, and would continue to do so if returned to Egypt.

     17.  There  has  been  no  suggestion  that  the  claimant   was   ever
         specifically targeted whilst in Egypt on account of  her  faith.  I
         find that to be the case. The only particular problem the  claimant
         has asserted occurred  in  Sohag  related  to  the  alleged  forced
         marriage, an issue that has been rejected.

     18. I find that the appellant's home city is Sohag, a relatively  small
         city within the Governorate of the same name, situated on the Nile,
         nearly 400 km south of Cairo, and with a population of some 200,000
         people.

     19. The claimant has described her background as being  "middle-class",
         and I find that to be the case.

     20. I find that claimant's father passed away in 2009, followed by  her
         mother in 2010. She  has  a  sister,  who  is  married  with  three
         children, living in Sohag, and a brother who  lives  in  Canada.  I
         find that there are also a number of cousins living in the USA  and
         Canada, and one who lives in Sohag.

     21. I am willing to accept that the  sister's  circumstances  are  such
         that she has not in the past, and would  not  be  able  to  in  the
         future, provide meaningful assistance  to  the  claimant.  In  this
         regard I accept the consistent evidence contained  in  the  witness
         statement, together with that provided orally. Similarly, I  accept
         that the claimant's brother Canada is not in a position to  provide
         meaningful financial assistance. I have no evidence as  to  whether
         the cousins have ever been asked to provide assistance, nor have  I
         been told about their financial circumstances. There  has  been  no
         suggestion that the claimant is estranged  from  the  cousins,  and
         indeed her witness statement confirms she retains contact with  the
         individual who lives in Sohag. I find it to  be  likely  that  some
         form of financial assistance, albeit probably  not  of  significant
         value (not, for example, accommodation), would be forthcoming  from
         one or more of the cousins if a request was made. Finally, I accept
         the claimant's evidence that the Coptic church in  Sohag  is  in  a
         poor financial state and is very unlikely to  be  able  to  provide
         meaningful assistance to her.

     22. I find that the claimant lived and  worked  in  Alexandria  between
         2013 and her departure from Egypt in 2015.  On  her  evidence,  she
         worked in a gallery owned by a friend and used her earnings to rent
         accommodation in the city. In cross-examination, the claimant  told
         me that there were "always  problems"  whilst  she  was  living  in
         Alexandria. No  further  details  were  provided  as  to  what  the
         "problems" consisted  of.  I  find  that  there  were  no  specific
         instances of harm or serious threats made to  the  claimant  during
         her time in that city.  Having  said  that,  although  her  claimed
         problems were not expanded on, the country information  and  expert
         evidence clearly shows that women, particularly single women,  face
         significant discrimination in Egypt. I am prepared to  accept  that
         the claimant did experience what may be described as  "generalised"
         discrimination and stigmatisation.

     23. I accept the  oral  evidence  that  the  friend's  business  is  in
         financial difficulties. It is unlikely that the claimant  would  be
         able to obtain new employment there.

     24. In respect of the claimant's circumstances in the United Kingdom, I
         find that she resides with a  friend,  and  that  she  is  in  good
         health.




    Conclusions on the protection claim

     25. In assessing whether I should depart from the country  guidance  in
         MS, I direct myself to what said in para.  47 of SG (Iraq) [2013] 1
         WLR 41:

             "47.      It is for these reasons, as well as the desirability
             of consistency, that decision makers and tribunal  judges  are
             required to take Country Guidance determinations into account,
             and to follow them unless very  strong  grounds  supported  by
             cogent evidence, are adduced justifying their not doing so."

     26. I have also taken account the observations of Sir Stephen  Richards
         in para. 28 of KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172,  to  the  effect
         that a judge who concludes that country guidance should be departed
         from need not set  out  each  and  every  specific  aspect  of  the
         evidence considered: the emphasis is on the adequacy  of  reasoning
         for the basis upon which the conclusion is reached.

     27. The starting point is, of course, the country guidance itself. This
         is contained in para. 151 of MS:

             "1. Notwithstanding that there is inadequate state  protection
             of Coptic Christians in Egypt, they are not at a general  risk
             of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.

             2.  However, on current evidence there are  some  areas  where
             Coptic Christians will face a real risk of persecution or ill-
             treatment contrary to Article 3. In general these will be  (a)
             areas outside the large cities; (b)  where  radical  Islamists
             have a strong foothold; and (c) where there have  been  recent
             attacks on Coptic Christians or their churches, businesses  or
             properties.

             3.  On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal,  the  following
             are particular risk categories in the sense that those falling
             within them will generally be able to  show  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3,  at  least  in
             their home area:

                  (i)  converts to Coptic Christianity;

                  (ii)  persons  who  are  involved   in   construction   or
                  reconstruction/repair  of  churches  that  have  been  the
                  target for an attack or attacks;

                  (iii)       those  accused  of  proselytising  where   the
                  accusation is serious and not casual;

                  (iv) those accused  of  being  physically  or  emotionally
                  involved with a Muslim woman where the accusation is  made
                  seriously and not casually.

             4.  Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not in general at real
             risk of  persecution  or  ill-treatment,  although  they  face
             difficulties  additional  to  other  women,  in  the  form  of
             sometimes being the target of disappearances, forced abduction
             and forced conversion.

             5.  However, depending on the particular circumstances of  the
             case, Coptic Christian women aged between 14-25 years who lack
             a male protector, may be at such risk.

             6.  If a claimant is able to establish that in their home area
             they fall within one or more of the risk categories identified
             in 3 (i)-(iv) above or that they come from an area  where  the
             local Coptic population faces a real risk of  persecution,  it
             will not necessarily follow that they qualify as  refugees  or
             as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or  Article  3  ECHR
             protection. That will depend on whether  they  can  show  they
             would not have a viable internal  relocation  alternative.  In
             such cases there will be need for a  fact-specific  assessment
             but, in general terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists
             are not strong would appear to be a viable option.

             7.  None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian
             in  Egypt  from  being  able  to  establish  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or ill-treatment in the  particular  circumstances
             of their case, e.g. if such an individual has been the  target
             of attacks because he or she is a Coptic Christian."

    Conclusions on the MS country guidance

     28. On an application of the country guidance set out in MS,  based  as
         it is upon evidence considered as at  September  2013,  I  conclude
         that the claimant would  not  be  at  risk  of  persecution  and/or
         article 3 ill-treatment on  return  to  her  home  area  in  Egypt,
         whether that risk was assessed on her faith alone or in combination
         with her gender and marital status. In short  terms,  the  claimant
         could not bring herself within any of the risk  categories  and  is
         unable to show that there were any particular circumstances in  her
         background (for example, having been targeted  in  the  past)  that
         would stand her out, as it were.

    Conclusions on the cumulative effect of the evidence in this appeal

     29. I turn to consider the  country  information  and  expert  evidence
         before me, all of which post-dates MS.

     30. I begin by considering the CPIN on Christians in  Egypt,  published
         in July 2017. The  passages  to  which  I  have  been  specifically
         referred by Mr Henderson relate to the "policy guidance" section of
         the document, in which the Secretary of State sets out his  overall
         view of the effect of the country information cited thereafter  (as
         the "guidance" represents the considered view of the  Secretary  of
         State on particular issues, it makes it very difficult for  him  to
         disavow what is said in this section).

     31. Paras. 2.2.5-2.2.7 of the document read as follows:

             "2.2.5    Following the case of MS, which relied  on  evidence
             up to the end of 2013,  the  political,  security  and  social
             situation for Christians improved up to 2015.  However  during
             2016 and early 2017 there has been an  increase  in  non-state
             sectarian violence against Christians.

             2.2.6     Some laws reportedly discriminate against Christians-
             cops appear more likely to face prosecution and conviction for
             blasphemy  than  Muslims-the  LCC  government  has  sought  to
             improve law and order, and has taken  several  highly  visible
             steps towards bettering state relations with, and  to  provide
             support  for,  the  Coptic  community.  Christians   are   not
             generally at risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  from  the
             state.

             2.2.7      Christians  continue,  however,  to  face  societal
             discrimination and some violence. The number and  severity  of
             violent  incidents  targeting  cops  and  their  property  has
             increased since 2015. This includes attacks by  Daesh  (a.k.a.
             Islamic  State),  which  has  stated  its  intent  to   target
             Christians  and  claimed   responsibility   for   high-profile
             bombings in Cairo, Alexandria and Tanta in December  2016  and
             April 2017 resulting in scores of casualties."

     32. On the issue of internal relocation, para. 2.4.2 states:

             "Some Egyptian Copts  have  internally  relocated  because  of
             sectarian  tension  either  voluntarily  or  as  a  result  of
             Reconciliation  Committees.  If  means  allow,  families  will
             usually help with finding shelter  and  financial  assistance.
             The Church can also sometimes assist.  It  has  been  reported
             that rural and poor Coptic women will find it  more  difficult
             to find shelter unemployment.  Women,  and  especially  single
             women, with no support network, may be particularly vulnerable
             and face destitution."

     33. In respect of the country information  itself,  paras.  6.6.4-6.6.5
         quotes  the  2015  United  States  State  Department  International
         Religious Freedom Report on Egypt:

             "The government frequently failed to prevent,  investigate  or
             prosecute  crimes  targeting  members  of  religious  minority
             groups... The government often failed  to  protect  Christians
             targeted by kidnappings and extortion according to sources  in
             the Christian community... The government failed to respond to
             or prevent sectarian violence in  some  cases,  in  particular
             outside of major cities, according to rights advocates."

     34. Paras. 7.2.1-7.4.5 cite specific examples of attacks against Coptic
         Christians during the period 2015-2017, including violent incidents
         in Al Minya, Sohag, Alexandria, and Upper Egypt in general.

     35. On the issue of female Coptic Christians, paras.  7.6.1-7.6.3  cite
         evidence that Coptic women are generally able to  work  and  travel
         unaccompanied in most areas of  Egypt,  although  there  have  been
         reports of harassment  and  discrimination  where  their  faith  is
         identified. There is evidence indicating that Coptic women who have
         been kidnapped have also been raped.

     36. Para. 8.1.3 confirms that a large number of Coptic Christians  have
         moved to cities for economic reasons and  that  urban  middle-class
         women are more likely to have a greater ability to  find  work  and
         shelter and up  also  likely  to  have  access  to  better  support
         networks. This is echoed in para. 7.1.3 of the CPIN  on  background
         information in Egypt. The same  document  confirms  that  there  is
         freedom of movement within Egypt. In  a  section  entitled  "Policy
         Summary", the Secretary of State concludes that there is general  a
         willingness and ability on the part of the Egyptian authorities  to
         provide individuals with protection against non-state  actors,  and
         that internal relocation is  likely  to  be  reasonable  "but  will
         depend on the nature and origin  of  the  threat  as  well  as  the
         person's circumstances and profile."

     37. I turn to the current version of the Secretary of State's  CPIN  on
         the position of women in Egypt, published in June 2019 (the version
         referred to in Mr Henderson  skeleton  argument  dates  from  March
         2017). In light of the country  information,  at  para.  2.4.1  the
         Secretary of State acknowledges that:

             "... discrimination towards women remains widespread and Egypt
             has one of the highest gender gaps in the world.  In  practice
             women do not have the same opportunities as men  and  continue
             to face widespread societal discrimination, threats  to  their
             physical security,  and  workplace  bias  in  favour  of  men.
             Aspects of the  law  and  traditional  practices  continue  to
             disadvantage women in family, social, and economic life."

     38. Country information contained in section 8 of the document  clearly
         shows that sexual harassment against women is a serious problem and
         that  the  effectiveness  of  protection  by  the  authorities,  in
         particular the police, can be "unpredictable" and "limited".

     39. Section 10 deals with women's access to  employment,  housing,  and
         other matters relating to  public  life.  The  country  information
         shows that in 2016 the unemployment rate for women  was  more  than
         double that of men.

     40. There is a reference in the 2017 CPIN to what is described  in  the
         country  information  as  a  "pressing  social  crisis   known   as
         "spinsterism"", a phenomenon viewed  negatively  by  society.  This
         particular reference does not appear in the  current  CPIN,  but  I
         nonetheless take it into account as  it  is  properly  sourced  and
         relates to evidence from December 2016.

     41. Aside from the information contained in the CPINs, Mr Henderson has
         referred me  to  several  additional  materials  contained  in  the
         claimant's bundle, with specific page references provided in  para.
         15 of his skeleton argument. In summary, this evidence provides the
         following picture:

          a) women continue to face inadequate protection from  sexual  and
             gender-based violence, as well as discrimination under the law
             and in practice;

          b)  there  is  impunity  for  sectarian  attacks   on   Christian
             communities,  with  violence  by  non-state   actors   against
             Christians increasing significantly;

          c) a great many  incidents  of  attacks  against  Christians  are
             recorded, including one in June 2019 in a  location  close  to
             the claimant's home city of Sohag;

          d) there have been increasing numbers of attacks on Christians in
             the years between 2014 and 2018, with  one  article  from  The
             Guardian newspaper describing the levels as "unprecedented";

          e) significantly, a report by the Open Doors organisation  refers
             to  the  "regular"  attacks  and  harassment  against   Coptic
             Christian  women.  It  is  said  that  girls  and  women   are
             "strategically targeted" in order to humiliate and create fear
             amongst Christian communities in general;

          f) an item from the same organisation dated June 2018, refers  to
             an increase in the disappearance of  Coptic  Christian  women,
             including one aged 40 years.

     42. I now turn to the two expert reports from Ms Alison Pargeter, dated
         12 July 2018 and 9 June 2019. This expert  evidence  has  not  been
         challenged before me, and there is no sound  reason  as  to  why  I
         should place anything less than significant weight upon it. This  I
         do, bearing  fully  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  aspect  of  the
         claimant's case relating to the alleged forced  marriage  has  been
         rejected by the First-tier Tribunal  (the  judge's  decision  post-
         dated the first of Ms Pargeter's reports. The  Secretary  of  State
         has not suggested that this invalidates the remainder what is  said
         in that report as it relates  to  the  position  of  single  Coptic
         Christian women in Egypt).

     43. The 2018 report states that there had been a "notable increase"  in
         attacks against Christians in the past three  years.  A  number  of
         specific examples of attacks are provided, and  it  is  noted  that
         these have not been restricted to the area of Minya where there  is
         a large Christian population: churches and  communities  in  Cairo,
         Alexandria, and Tanta have been targeted. Serious  concerns  as  to
         the effectiveness of state protection are raised. Para. 4.7 states:

             "... Relocation poses  certain  challenges  given  Miss  [F]'s
             status  as  a  lone  Coptic  female.  It  would  be  extremely
             difficult for her to try and settle in a rural area  or  in  a
             suburb or a poor neighbourhood of a town or  city.  Given  the
             traditional and conservative nature of Egyptian society, it is
             not generally accepted for women to  live  alone  unless  they
             live near to a relative. Any female living alone  without  the
             protection of a relative nearby  could  well  find  themselves
             vulnerable  to  harassment,  particularly  that  of  a  sexual
             nature. Being a Copt could well make her  more  vulnerable  in
             this respect, given  the  cultural  assumptions  about  Coptic
             women explained above.  Furthermore  with  sectarian  tensions
             between Egypt's Muslim and  Christian  community  still  high,
             someone in Miss [F]'s position could be regarded  as  an  easy
             target."

     44. Para. 4.10 states:

             "However, as  explained  above,  although  there  is  a  large
             Christian  population  in  Egypt,  sectarian   tensions   have
             increased significantly over recent years and Christians  have
             suffered harassment,  discrimination  and  in  some  instances
             attacks and violence. Although  Christians  in  certain  areas
             where there are high concentration of Copts,  such  as  Minya,
             are most at risk, attacks are also taking place  elsewhere  in
             the country, including Cairo,  placing  Christian  communities
             throughout Egypt at risk."

     45.  The  following  paragraph  acknowledges  that  the  government  of
         President Al-Sissi had made apparently positive approaches  to  the
         Coptic Christian community and that there had been  an  improvement
         in relations between the state and the Coptic Church. However,  the
         author goes on to say that "... Discrimination and violence against
         Christians persists and  has  worsened  over  the  past  couple  of
         years."

     46. The updated report of June  2019  states  that  the  situation  for
         Coptic Christians has not improved since the first  report,  noting
         that attacks have continued. Specific examples of such violence are
         then set out. At  para.  2.7,  the  author  concludes  that  Coptic
         Christians  are  still  a  target  of  violence,  persecution   and
         discrimination. At para. 3.1, the author cites a source  describing
         "an epidemic of kidnapping, rape, beatings and torture" suffered by
         Christian women in Egypt, although it appears  as  though  many  of
         these incidents in fact have  been  examples  of  Coptic  Christian
         women eloping with Muslim boyfriends.

     47. The expert cites various sources on the issues of problems faced by
         single women living alone in Egypt.  At  the  end  of  the  updated
         report,  Ms  Pargeter  concludes  that  it  would   be   "extremely
         challenging" for the claimant to live in Egypt as a  single  female
         Coptic Christian. The possibility of finding work is  acknowledged,
         although the high rate of unemployment for women is also noted.  In
         the absence of a job and familial support, it is said that there is
         a "real risk" that the claimant could end up destitute.

     48. In light of the foregoing and the evidence as a whole,  I  conclude
         that there are very strong grounds, supported by  cogent  evidence,
         to depart from, at least to a material extent, the country guidance
         set out in MS. In so concluding, I have taken all of  the  relevant
         country information  into  account,  including  that  to  which  no
         specific reference is made, below.

     49. My reasons for the conclusion stated in the preceding paragraph are
         as follows.

     50. First, my evaluation of  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  evidence
         before me relating to outright hostility against Coptic Christians,
         whether through actual attacks or very serious  discrimination  and
         harassment, is that the situation has significantly deteriorated in
         recent years. In my view, this is very important. In paras. 133-135
         of MS,  under  the  sub-heading  "Prognosis",  the  Upper  Tribunal
         expressed a quite understandable note of caution in respect of what
         the future held for Coptic Christians in Egypt following  the  fall
         of President Morsi only a couple of months before  the  hearing  of
         that appeal. There were, it was  said,  some  potentially  positive
         indicators. However, the current evidence paints  a  bleak  picture
         and undermines whatever grounds for optimism there might have  been
         in late 2013. At para. 2.7 of her report, Ms Pargeter states:

             "The toppling of President Morsi in July 2013 and  the  coming
             to power of President Al-Sissi brought high hopes for  Egypt's
             Christian  community  that  their  situation  would   improve.
             However, these hopes were  short-lived...  Moreover,  violence
             against Christians and their properties has continued under Al-
             Sissi's rule."

     51. I would add that the evidence does not show that the  worsening  of
         the situation has been driven by the authorities themselves.

     52. Second, the evidence of the  deterioration  in  safety  for  Coptic
         Christians discloses a wide geographical spread. Whilst it is clear
         that the most dangerous place for the Coptic Christian community is
         Minya, the evidence provides numerous examples of  attacks  in  the
         major cities, including Cairo and Alexandria. Taken as a whole, the
         evidence is sufficiently strong  to  indicate  that  the  worsening
         situation is not confined to areas outside of large cities.

     53. Third, and following from the preceding point, there is evidence to
         show that attacks have occurred in and close to the claimant's home
         city of Sohag. This not only supports my view as to the  scope  and
         geographical reach of the increasing problems faced by  the  Coptic
         Christian community,  but  it  locates  a  manifestation  of  these
         problems in the place to which the claimant would  be  expected  to
         return, at least in the first instance.

     54. Fourth, there is nothing in the evidence before me to significantly
         undermine the conclusions  in  MS  that  Egyptian  authorities  are
         unable to provide sufficient protection against non-state actors.

     55.  Fifth,  the  evidence  shows  that  the  particular   difficulties
         experienced by Coptic women  are  significant,  with  reference  to
         "regular"  attacks  and  harassment,  and  girls  and  women  being
         "strategically  targeted"  in  order  to  humiliate  the  Christian
         community. That particular source is entirely consistent  with  the
         overall picture portrayed in the  expert  evidence.  Ms  Pargeter's
         reports, to which I  have  attached  considerable  weight,  clearly
         identifies  the  combination  of  female  gender   and   faith   as
         representing a significant risk factor.

     56. Two additional points can be made on this issue.  The  difficulties
         for Coptic women are not confined to the occurrence of  abductions,
         nor are they specifically linked to  just  girls  and  young  women
         (although the majority of victims would appear to fall within  that
         category).  I  conclude  that  the  evidence  before   me   differs
         significantly from that considered by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MS,
         with reference in particular to paras. 95 and 150 of that decision.

     57. Sixth, the issue of a woman's unmarried status  was  considered  in
         MS, albeit on what appears to be a  relatively  limited  evidential
         basis. The country  information  and,  in  particular,  the  expert
         evidence before me, specifically identifies a woman's single status
         as representing a highly material factor, both in terms of standing
         the individual out as a potential target for  harm  and/or  serious
         harassment, and an ability to lead  a  relatively  reasonable  life
         even in the absence of a risk. Importantly,  the  evidence  is  not
         restricted to single girls/women without a male  protector  between
         the ages of 14-25. The phenomenon of "spinsterism" clearly  relates
         to somewhat older women and the expert reports are specific to  the
         claimant's circumstances (i.e. with her age in mind).

     58. Bringing all of  the  above  together,  I  conclude  that,  on  the
         evidence before me, the position for single Coptic Christian  women
         in Egypt is significantly worse than it was at the time that MS was
         decided.

     59.  I  now  apply  this  conclusion  to  the   claimant's   particular
         circumstances. Certain factors count against  the  existence  of  a
         risk to her on return. She is an educated woman from a middle-class
         background. As a matter of fact, she  lived  alone  and  worked  in
         Alexandria for a period of some two years in the past. She does not
         have a specific history of being targeted on account of  her  faith
         and/gender. There is a possibility  of  limited  financial  support
         from at least one cousin.

     60. Notwithstanding these factors, I am satisfied on the lower standard
         of proof that the claimant is, by virtue of a  combination  of  her
         faith, gender and single status,  at  risk  of  persecution  and/or
         article 3 ill-treatment on return to her home  area  of  Sohag.  My
         conclusion on the country information and expert evidence, set  out
         in detail above, is that the situation for  Coptic  Christians  has
         significantly  worsened  in  recent  times.  More  specifically,  I
         conclude that matters have got worse since the claimant was last in
         Egypt in 2015. Sohag has  not  been  immune  from  attacks  against
         Coptic Christians. It is not by any stretch a large city and it  is
         very likely that an individual who practices their faith openly, as
         a claimant would, is likely to come to the attention of  the  wider
         populace. Whilst not, in and of itself enough to disclose  a  risk,
         her faith would stand her out as a potential target in  combination
         with her gender and single status. On  my  findings  of  fact,  she
         would not have a relevant male protector. Her  educated  background
         and passed work history but not go to reduce the level of  risk  to
         her.

     61. There would be no sufficient state protection.

     62. The Secretary of State has accepted throughout that women in  Egypt
         comprise a particular social group.

     63. I turn to the issue of internal relocation. Mr  Henderson  has  put
         his case on the basis that there would be no risk  in  one  of  the
         largest cities in Egypt,  and  therefore  I  do  not  address  that
         particular issue here. The core question is  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable for the claimant to move to either Cairo or Alexandria.

     64. Absent the country situation relating to  single  Coptic  Christian
         women, I would be  likely  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  could
         reasonably relocate. She is healthy, educated, and  has  worked  in
         the past.

     65. The country situation and my conclusions thereon are,  however,  of
         great significance in this case. As Ms Pargeter puts it in her most
         recent report, it would be "extremely challenging" for the claimant
         on return. In view of her evidence as  a  whole,  and  the  country
         information on the position of women in general and single women in
         particular, I  agree  with  that  analysis.  On  my  findings,  the
         claimant would not be able to simply go back  into  the  employment
         she previously had  in  Alexandria.  She  would  not  have  a  male
         protector in the place of relocation.

     66. On the particular facts of this case, I conclude that the  claimant
         could not reasonably internally relocate.

     67. Therefore, the claimant is a refugee and  a  person  whose  removal
         would expose her to article 3 ill-treatment. Her appeal succeeds on
         this basis.




    Conclusions on the article 8 claim

     68. Article 8 has been put forward as an alternative basis of claim  in
         this appeal and I therefore determine the issue on the  alternative
         basis that the current country information and expert evidence does
         not disclose a risk to the claimant in her home area and  therefore
         the issue of internal relocation does not arise.

     69. In applying paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules,  I
         apply the guidance set out in para. 14 of Kamara [2016] 4 WLR  152.
         I make a broad evaluative judgment based upon all relevant matters.
         I direct myself that the threshold  of  showing  "very  significant
         obstacles" is high.

     70. On my findings of primary fact, the factors  counting  against  the
         claimant are:

          i. she is educated and from a middle-class background;

         ii. she is healthy;

        iii. she has worked in the past;

         iv. there are no linguistic barriers;

          v. she has only been away from Egypt for some 3 � years.

     71. The factors counting in the claimant's favour are:

         vi. she is a single, Coptic Christian  woman  without  a  relevant
             male protector;

        vii. on  my  assessment  of  the  country  information  and  expert
             evidence, she will be returning to a  milieu  in  which  those
             three characteristics,  when  viewed  cumulatively,  represent
             powerful barriers to her ability to re-establish a  reasonable
             private   life   without   having   to   endure    significant
             discrimination and/or harassment.

     72. In my judgment, the overarching  country  situation  outweighs  the
         particular  characteristics  which  would  in  most   circumstances
         indicate the absence of "very significant  obstacles".  I  conclude
         that, on the particular facts  of  this  case,  such  obstacles  do
         exist. The claimant succeeds on this alternative basis.




    Anonymity

     73. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  order,  nor  did
         Judge Kebede when making  her  error  of  law  decision.  In  these
         circumstances, and in the absence of a specific request to make  an
         order at this stage, I make no order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




    Notice of Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

    I re-make the decision by allowing the claimant's appeal on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State's refusal protection claim is  contrary  to
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention and  that
    the refusal of her human rights claim is unlawful under  section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.




    Signed [pic]       Date: 16 July 2019

    Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13788/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 19 November 2018                |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  HIDY [F]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Head, instructed by Terence Ray Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Adio  allowing  Ms  [F]'s
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse her asylum and human
    rights claim.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and Ms [F] as the appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 17 March 1975. She  arrived
    in the UK on 13 December 2015 on a visit visa valid until 12 May  2016.
    She made an asylum claim on 27 May 2016. Her claim was  refused  on  25
    November 2016 and she appealed against that decision.

 4. The appellant is a Coptic Orthodox Christian. She claims to fear a  man
    whom she refused to marry. Following the death of her parents this man,
    [MS], asked her to marry him and convert to Islam and when she  refused
    he threatened forcibly to marry her. She came to the UK in January 2011
    and when she returned a month later he called her and then continued to
    threaten her. He threatened to pour acid in  her  face.  She  moved  to
    Alexandria in 2013/2014 to get away from him but he  tracked  her  down
    through her place of employment and threatened to rape or disfigure her
    if she refused to marry him. She decided to leave Egypt at the  end  of
    2015 to visit the UK. Since coming to the UK,  [M]  has  threatened  to
    rape her sister. She feared him and his family if she returned to Egypt
    as his family was linked to the Muslim  Brotherhood  and  some  of  his
    family members were MPs and in the police.

 5. In refusing the appellant's application, the respondent  accepted  that
    she was Coptic Christian but rejected her account of facing  harassment
    and problems from [MS]. The respondent considered the country  guidance
    in MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 611 and  concluded  that
    the appellant would not be at risk on return to Egypt.  The  respondent
    considered Article 3 and 8 and concluded that the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK would not breach her human rights.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was  initially
    heard in the First-tier Tribunal on  13  January  2017.  The  appellant
    appeared in person, but her  appointed  legal  representative  did  not
    attend. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered there  to  be  serious
    professional failings by the appellant's solicitors, but decided not to
    adjourn the proceedings and to proceed in their absence  and  she  then
    went on to dismiss the appeal. Following the appellant's appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was set  aside
    on grounds of  unfairness,  in  light  of  the  appellant  having  been
    unrepresented at the hearing, and the case was remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

 7. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on  16  July
    2018. The appellant gave oral evidence about her  problems  with  [MS],
    whom she claimed to work in the police and to come from  a  famous  and
    prominent family. The appellant relied upon a police report  which  had
    been issued in 2014  when  she  made  a  complaint  to  the  police  in
    Alexandria  and  an  expert  report  from  Alison  Pargeter  about  the
    situation   for   Coptic   Christians.   Judge   Adio   noted   various
    inconsistencies and discrepancies in the appellant's evidence and found
    that her account of being harassed and threatened by  [MS]  was  not  a
    credible one and that  the  documentary  evidence  was  unreliable.  He
    therefore rejected the appellant's claim to be at  risk  on  return  on
    that basis.  However  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  risk  of
    persecution as a Coptic Christian  and  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on the grounds  of  religion  and  as  a  lone  Coptic
    female. He allowed the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the judge, in allowing the  appellant's  appeal  on
    the basis of her being a lone Coptic female, had erred  by  failing  to
    adhere to the findings in the  country  guidance  case  of  MS  (Coptic
    Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 611 and had failed to  provide  proper
    reasons for departing from that country  guidance,  in  line  with  the
    principles in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  3
    October 2018.

10. At the hearing before me both  parties  made  submissions.  Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that the judge had failed to provide any strong  reasons  for
    departing from the country guidance in MS and  that  the  incidents  of
    violence in Egypt upon which the judge relied were isolated  incidents,
    with no evidence to show that  the  appellant  could  not  relocate  to
    another part of Egypt such as Alexandria. Ms Head  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to depart from the country guidance in light of  the
    evidence of the deterioration of the situation for Coptic Christians in
    Egypt and in particular in light  of  the  expert  report  from  Alison
    Pargeter.

11. I find myself entirely in agreement with Mr  Lindsay,  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for departing from the country guidance
    in MS and for rejecting the evidence of improved conditions  in  favour
    of the evidence of the deteriorating conditions without  giving  proper
    reasons  for  doing  so.  As  Mr   Lindsay   submitted,   the   judge's
    consideration of internal relocation  was  particularly  lacking,  with
    inadequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  evidence  justified  a
    departure from MS.

12. In the circumstances I set aside the judge's decision in the matter. No
    challenge has been made to the judge's adverse credibility findings  on
    the appellant's account in relation to  [MS]  and  indeed  the  judge's
    findings in that regard were fully and properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. Accordingly, those findings are preserved. Ms Head  requested
    that the appeal be  listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  so  that  further
    evidence could be adduced as to the current circumstances in Egypt.  Mr
    Lindsay had no objection.

13. Accordingly, the case will be listed for a resumed hearing in the Upper
    Tribunal for consideration of the question of risk  on  return  to  the
    appellant as a female Coptic Christian. I would add that it seems to me
    to me that there has been an inadequate assessment of  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances on return to Egypt, which is relevant  to  the
    question of risk on return in line with [5] of the headnote to MS,  and
    that is a matter which will need to be  addressed,  either  by  way  of
    further oral evidence or otherwise.




    Directions

    No later than 14 days before the hearing:

    (1)    The  appellant  is  to  provide  a  consolidated  appeal  bundle
    containing the evidence previously submitted and any  further  evidence
    relied upon.

    (2)    Any further evidence relied upon by either party is to be  filed
    with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.

    (3)    Any request for an interpreter for the appellant is to  be  made
    to the Tribunal, should one be required.




    Signed:      [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede   Dated: 20 November 2018
