
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13837/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 June 2019                     |On 21 June 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                  S.A.H.S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Malik, Counsel, instructed by direct access

For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    issued on 24 January 2019, by which the asylum appeal of the  appellant
    was refused.

Anonymity

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He arrived in this country  in
    2011  and  married  a  British  citizen  in  2012.   He   applied   for
    compassionate leave to remain, outside of  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    March 2013 and this application was refused by the respondent on 22 May
    2013. The appellant divorced his wife in June 2014, and he applied  for
    leave to remain on human rights (article 8)  grounds  by  means  of  an
    application dated July 2014. The respondent refused this application in
    September 2014. He claimed asylum in April 2018 asserting that he had a
    well-founded fear of persecution due to his bisexuality.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appeal was heard on 17 January 2019. The appellant was supported by
    two witnesses  who  attended  the  hearing.  The  Judge  accepted  that
    appellant's identity and nationality but found him incredible as to the
    core of the claim. She acknowledged that  a  young  person's  sexuality
    evolves, but the appellant had provided very different  answers  as  to
    how he came to realise that he was bisexual. She further found that the
    appellant, who has  lived  in  the  south-west  of  England  since  his
    marriage ended, provided no valid reason as to why he  did  not  attend
    LGBT clubs in his local area.

 5.  As  to  the  appellant's  personal   history,   the   Judge   observed
    contradictions in his evidence. His statement that his  marriage  ended
    due to an affair with a male that lasted seven months was not borne out
    by  the  marriage  having  continued  for  some  20  months  after  the
    relationship was said to have ended. It  was  further  noted  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide a clear and consistent  account  as  to
    how he fell out with his family  over  his  sexuality.  Inconsistencies
    between the witnesses as to the whereabouts of the appellant's  present
    partner, who  did  not  attend  the  hearing,  was  noted  as  was  the
    appellant's lack of knowledge as to matters such as his partner's  date
    of birth.

 6. The Judge determined that that the appellant was  inconsistent  in  his
    observation that he would openly inform black and white  people  as  to
    his  bisexuality,  but  not  members  of  the  Pakistani  and/or  Asian
    community.

 7. The appellant gave evidence supported by a witness, Mr.  Ali,  that  he
    did not attend Mr. Ali's LGBT club in London because the club does  not
    have dark rooms available for intimate liaisons, which he prefers.  The
    Judge decided, 'I find that going to a dark club where no one  can  see
    what is going on can also be because then it is not necessary  to  have
    intimate relationships and it is the ideal  place  to  go  if  you  are
    trying to give the impression of being bisexual without you  having  to
    become involved with anyone.  I  can  find  no  valid  reason  why  the
    appellant, who is not working and has little money, would choose to  go
    all the way to London where there are LBGT clubs in his home city.'

Grounds of appeal

 8. Grounds of appeal were drafted  by  the  appellant's  then  solicitors,
    detailing:

    i)     The Judge provided  inadequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
         appellant's account as to the  realisation  of  his  sexuality  was
         vague and inconsistent;


    ii)    The Judge failed to consider evidence presented as  to  why  the
         appellant only attends a club in London; and


    iii)    The  Judge  failed   to   consider   the   evidence   presented
         holistically, in particular a record of conversations conducted  on
         Grindr.

 9. I granted permission to appeal, as a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    by way of a decision sent on 4 April 2019. I observed, inter alia:

         'It is arguable that  the  Judge  may  have  failed  to  adequately
         consider relevant conscious cultural sensitivities that  may  arise
         in the appellant being open to heterosexual members  of  the  wider
         Asian community [54], failed to provide adequate reasons as to  why
         it is implausible that the  appellant  would  prefer  a  particular
         style of LGBTQ club [55] or provide  adequate  reasons  as  to  why
         attendance at one LGBTQ club for six years  'does  not  demonstrate
         that the appellant is living an openly bi-sexual life  in  the  UK'
         [55]. It is further arguable that there is inadequate reasoning  as
         to why the appellant's non-attendance  at  a  club  operated  by  a
         friend adversely impacts upon his credibility: reasons having  been
         provided for such non-attendance by both the appellant and Mr.  Ali
         [56]. It is also arguable that the Judge has failed  to  apply  the
         appropriate standard of proof when deciding: 'I  found  it  telling
         that other than a few photographs of the  appellant  sitting  on  a
         man's lap in a club, which could be posed as well  as  genuine  ...
         the appellant was not able to produce anything to substantiate  his
         relationships' [65].  It  is  arguable  that  the  arguably  flawed
         findings materially impacted upon the judge's assessment of risk.'

The hearing

10. The appellant attended the hearing before us. Mr. Malik  asserted  that
    the decision was unsafe consequent to numerous material errors of  law.
    With regard to the purported contradiction of the appellant being  open
    as to his bisexuality, other than with members  of  the  Pakistani  and
    Asian communities, he drew our  attention  to  the  respondent's  'COI:
    Pakistan, sexual orientation and gender identity'  (version  2),  April
    2016 where it is confirmed  that  sexual  relations  between  males  is
    illegal and that there is a well-established stigma  to  being  gay  in
    Pakistan.

11. As  to  the  finding  that  attending  one  club  in  London  does  not
    demonstrate that the appellant is living an  open  bisexual  life,  Mr.
    Malik contended that it was a decision made in isolation and was not an
    accurate reflection of the overall evidence presented as to  sexuality.
    At its core, it is said to be no more  than  a  bare  assertion  as  to
    credibility. Further, Mr.  Malik  contended  that  the  Judge  provided
    inadequate reasons as to why the appellant is not credible as to why he
    does not attend Mr. Ali's club. His evidence is supported by Mr. Ali, a
    person holding a respected position in the LGBT community and no  clear
    findings are made as to Mr. Ali's credibility. The Judge further  erred
    by failing to undertake a holistic assessment, in particular by failing
    to consider the Grindr messages filed with the Tribunal which evidences
    how the appellant interacts publicly and how his identifies himself.

12. We  note  Mr.  Malik's  candour  in  observing  that  elements  of  the
    appellant's evidence were  reasonably  considered  problematic  by  the
    Judge, whose reliance upon several clear discrepancies were accepted to
    be unimpeachable.

13. Ms. Everett expressed  sympathy  with  the  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    finding that the appellant's evidence  as  to  being  open  as  to  his
    sexuality but not willing to discuss it with members of  the  Pakistani
    and Asian community, was contradictory but observed that this  did  not
    adversely impact upon the Judge's overall assessment. She also accepted
    that the Judge's consideration as to why the appellant did  not  attend
    Mr. Ali's club may be  problematic,  but  significant  weight  was  not
    placed upon it within the  subsequent  assessment.  The  appellant  was
    wrong in asserting  that  no  consideration  was  given  to  Mr.  Ali's
    evidence as the Judge addressed discrepancies between his evidence  and
    that of the appellant at [64]. She noted that the  appellant  attending
    only one club in London and not attending clubs closer to his home  was
    one where an  unfavourable  inference  could  reasonably  be  made  and
    ultimately it was not considered by the Judge to be a significant  blow
    to the appellant's credibility. Further, the Judge  clearly  noted  the
    Grindr evidence at [19].

Decision on error of law

14. We find that the Judge erred by failing to provide adequate reasons  in
    finding at [54] that the appellant was contradictory  in  his  evidence
    when asserting  that  he  was  open  as  to  his  bisexuality,  by  his
    subsequent clarification that he was open to  persons  outside  of  the
    Pakistani and Asian communities. Consideration of this element  of  the
    appellant's evidence  should  properly  have  expressly  addressed  the
    respondent's COI 'Pakistan: Sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity'
    (version 2.0) April 2016, in particular its observations at 7.1.1:

         'The Immigration and Refugee Board  of  Canada  (IRB)  reported  in
         January 2014 that, according  to  Inter-Press  Service,  Pakistan's
         "conservative Muslim society"  views  homosexuality  as  a  sin.  A
         survey  conducted  by  the  Washington-based  Pew  Research  Centre
         published in June 2013 showed that 87 per cent  of  respondents  in
         Pakistan were of the opinion that 'homosexuality should be rejected
         by society'. Several sources indicated that gay  men  and  lesbians
         were rarely open about their sexual orientation.'

15. Further, the COI details at 7.1.2:

         'The Canadian IRB noted  in  a  report  of  9  January  2015  that,
         according to the BBC, "homophobia has  wide  social  and  religious
         sanction" and that according to the International New  York  Times,
         discrimination and prejudice against sexual minorities  "run  deep"
         in  Pakistani  society.  Other  media  sources  described  the  gay
         community  in  Pakistan  as  "underground".  The  Pakistan  country
         advisor for the IGLHRC said that transgender people  are  the  only
         "visible" sexual minority in Pakistan, while there  is  "a  lot  of
         invisibility" among gay men and lesbians,  who  keep  their  sexual
         orientation hidden. According to a WEWA representative, no lesbians
         or gay men could be open about their sexuality and move "freely" in
         Pakistani society.'

16. We further find that the Judge failed to provide adequate reasons as to
    why the appellant would prefer a particular style of  LGBTQ  club  over
    another when determining at [56] that 'I find that going to a dark club
    where no one can see what is going on can also be because  then  it  is
    not necessary to have intimate relationships and it is the ideal  place
    to go if you are trying to  give  the  impression  of  being  bi-sexual
    without you having to become involved with anyone.'  The  reasoning  is
    couched in terms of commencing from a position of disbelief rather than
    undertaking a plausibility assessment.

17. As to the Judge's approach  to  the  photographs  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, she makes no firm finding of fact as  to  whether  they  are
    staged or not. However, she places no adverse weight upon them, and  we
    find she considered the evidence before her in the  round.  We  further
    accept that the same approach was  adopted  towards  the  filed  screen
    shots from Grindr, which are clearly referenced at [19]  and  so  forms
    part of the Judge's general assessment.

18. Upon consideration of the decision as a whole we are satisfied that the
    Judge did not err in law in her assessment of the evidence presented by
    Mr. Ali as to why the appellant did not visit his club. The  Judge  was
    aware that Mr. Ali  enjoyed  a  respected  position  within  the  LGBTQ
    community and had been accepted as a  credible  witness  in  two  other
    appeals before the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  she  provided  clear
    reasons as to concerns in relation to his evidence, at [64], and  noted
    a significant discrepancy on another issue between the evidence of  the
    appellant and Mr.  Ali.  Whilst  the  Judge  could  have  expanded  her
    reasoning at [56], we find that her explanation as to why she  did  not
    accept to the lower standard  that  the  appellant  and  Mr.  Ali  were
    reliable on this particular issue was sufficient in the circumstances.

19. Further, we find that the Judge provided adequate reasons as to why the
    appellant's history of visiting only one LGBTQ club  in  London  during
    some six years' residence in this country was implausible.  The  burden
    was placed upon the appellant to establish  his  claim  and  he  simply
    stated that he went to the club because it had dark  rooms.  The  Judge
    noted that the appellant had provided no valid reason as to why  whilst
    residing in the south-west of the country,  unemployed  and  possessing
    little money, he would travel to London when there were suitable  clubs
    in his home city. Such reasoning cannot be considered to be  irrational
    in the circumstances.

20. We remind ourselves that any error must be material in order to  render
    the decision unlawful.  As  observed  by  Brooke  LJ  in  R  (Iran)  v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982;  [2005]
    Imm AR 535, at [15], appellate courts are anxious  not  to  overturn  a
    judgment at first instance  unless  it  really  cannot  understand  the
    original  judge's  thought  process  when  s/he  was  making   material
    findings. Upon careful consideration of the decision  and  reasons,  we
    accept  Ms.  Everett's  submission  that  the  Judge  did   not   place
    significant weight on the erroneous elements of her  decision.  Rather,
    she placed appropriate weight upon the significant discrepancies in the
    evidence presented before her  and  we  note  Mr.  Malik's  appropriate
    concession  that   these   findings   were   unimpeachable.   In   such
    circumstances, we find that the errors identified at [14] - [16]  above
    were not material in substance and do not undermine the  lawfulness  of
    the Judge's conclusions on the evidence before her.
Notice of Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  D. O'Callaghan


Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 19 June 2019
