
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13218/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th April 2018                      |    On 01st May 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     NS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FO R THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Grant made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 28th April 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran and claimed asylum on  22nd  January
    2015 on the grounds that she would be persecuted on a  return  to  Iran
    because she had converted from Islam to Christianity.

 3. The respondent initially accepted that the appellant  was  a  Christian
    but argued that she had been a Christian from birth and therefore would
    not be at risk on return.  The appellant appealed against that decision
    and her case came before Judge Birkby on 12th June 2015.   He  did  not
    accept that the appellant was a Christian at all, finding that she  was
    brought up as a Muslim, and that her claim was a complete fabrication.

 4. The appellant then made a fresh application and was refused in a letter
    dated 10th November 2016.  In that letter the  respondent  adopted  the
    conclusions of Judge Birkby, maintaining that the appellant was and has
    been at all material times of the Islamic faith.

 5. Judge Grant noted that the appellant's claim had been roundly dismissed
    by Judge Birkby.  She said that the appellant was cynically  trying  to
    use a conversion to Christianity to further her claim to remain in  the
    UK.  She said that in  reaching  her  conclusion  she  had  taken  into
    account evidence of a psychotherapist and trauma specialist  and  three
    witnesses who had given evidence on her behalf.

 6. It was argued before Judge Grant that the appellant would be at risk on
    account of her  social  media  posts,  which  showed  that  she  was  a
    Christian convert.  Judge Grant however found that the pages  were  not
    genuine, since the appellant had used a different name,  and  that  she
    probably had her own genuine Facebook  account,  which  would  have  no
    mention of Christianity.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in respect of the social media evidence, indulging  in
    speculation and failing to apply AB and  Others  (internet  activity  -
    state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257.

 8. It was also argued that the judge had made no attempt to  evaluate  the
    oral evidence of three church  witnesses  and  that  the  determination
    lacked a close and  anxious  scrutiny  failing  to  take  into  account
    material evidence.

 9. At the hearing Mr Hussain relied on his grounds and Mr McVeety defended
    the determination.  Mr McVeety submitted that the  judge's  conclusions
    were ones which were open to her.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude
    that the  Facebook  accounts,  in  a  different  name,  would  pose  no
    difficulty for the appellant.   The  judge's  starting  point  was  the
    adverse credibility findings  of  Judge  Birkby,  which  could  not  be
    relitigated.  The appellant was putting forward  essentially  the  same
    case before Judge Grant as she had before him.  It was  open  to  Judge
    Grant to conclude that the passage of time did not materially alter the
    appellant's case, particularly since the church  witnesses  could  only
    reasonably  give  their  opinion  of  the  sincerity  or  not  of   the
    appellant's faith which could not be objectively proved.



Conclusion

10. I accept Mr McVeety's submissions with  respect  to  the  social  media
    point insofar as it was open to the judge to conclude that  they  would
    not prove a risk to the appellant on return  because  they  were  in  a
    different name.  Moreover, if the judge's findings that  the  appellant
    had used a Christian conversion as a cynical ploy were sustainable,  it
    would not be unreasonable for the appellant  to  delete  the  Christian
    postings on her accounts since she could not rely upon  an  untruth  to
    establish her case.  HJ (Iran) protects an appellant from  lying  about
    matters which are an intrinsic part of a person's  character,  such  as
    sexuality or indeed religious faith.  However, if the appellant is  not
    in fact a Christian convert there can be no objection to  her  removing
    any  offending  posts.  Moreover,  if   the   judge's   findings   were
    sustainable, they would be most unlikely to come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities in Iran since they are in a different name.

11. However, I am persuaded that the judge has not  adequately  dealt  with
    the substantial body of evidence which was before her in support of the
    claim put forward by the appellant.

12. Judge Birkby's findings are unambiguous and highly critical of her.  He
    heard evidence from one of the witnesses who also appeared before Judge
    Grant.  However, Judge Birkby dealt with that evidence  by  making  the
    reasonable point that he had only known the appellant for a few  months
    at that stage.  By the time of the hearing before Judge  Grant  he  had
    known her for over two years.

13. Judge Grant makes no reference  to  his  evidence.   Neither  does  she
    engage with the evidence of the two other witnesses.   Moreover,  there
    are a large bundle of letters written in  support  of  the  appellant's
    claim including letters written by the priest and assistant  priest  at
    the church where she worships.   The  letters  are  extremely  detailed
    giving extensive evidence of the appellant's activities both  with  the
    church and in undertaking courses and attending conferences.

14. I am satisfied that in fact the appellant  provided  a  large  body  of
    evidence to Judge Grant which had to be considered in some  detail  and
    which was not adequately considered.



Notice of Decision

Accordingly I am satisfied that Judge Grant erred in law by failing to  take
into account all of the relevant evidence.  Her decision is set  aside.   It
is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  must  be  reheard  there  at
Bradford on a date to be notified before a judge other than Judge Grant.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 30 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



