
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13524/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2020                   |On 07 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 RAMEEZ KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Moffatt
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on  7  June  1992  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 15 November 2018 refusing his  application
    for international protection. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 November 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Tribunal had before it a medical report detailing scarring  on  the
    appellant's body. The  appellant  claimed  that  he  been  tortured  in
    Pakistan. The judge rejected that account but he did find [92] that two
    scars in particular identified by the expert could not  have  been  the
    subject of accident or self-infliction by proxy.  The  judge  concluded
    that the scars, whilst not inflicted in the  manner  described  by  the
    appellant, could have been  inflicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  'in  a
    scenario which the appellant does not rely upon.'

 3. The grounds of appeal challenge the decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had given inadequate reasons for not  accepting  the  appellant's
    account  and  are  given  and  clear  and/or  inadequate  reasons   for
    distinguishing on the facts present  case  from  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in KV (Sri Lanka) [2019] UKSC 10.

 4. I agree with Ms Moffat, who appeared for the appellant before both  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, the judge's reference to KV
    somewhat obscure ('The facts of this appeal are highly  distinguishable
    from those in KV despite principles arising therefrom requiring  to  be
    applied.') The judge does not give any reasons for concluding that  the
    facts are  'highly  distinguishable'.  However,  at  [44],  the  judge,
    referring to KV, directed himself  that  the  expert's  report  on  the
    scarring is  strongly  corroborative  'at  least  of  elements  of  the
    appellant's  account.'  To  an  extent,  the  judge  appears  to   have
    understood ratio of the Supreme Court  guidance.  Moreover,  given  the
    totality of the findings  and  the  evidence  made  by  the  judge,  in
    particular his rejection of the documentary  evidence  upon  which  the
    appellant relied, I find that it was open to the judge to find, on  the
    one hand, that the appellant had scars which were not the subject of an
    accident or self-infliction by proxy are otherwise, was, on  the  other
    hand, rejecting the appellant's account of past events in Pakistan. The
    judge's observation that the scars could have inflicted in  the  United
    Kingdom in circumstances which the appellant  has  not  revealed  seems
    reasonable in that context. Nor is it an observation at odds  with  the
    guidance of KV.

 5. The second ground concerns the judge's  treatment  of  the  documentary
    evidence (and application of  the  principles  of  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439). The judge devotes a  large  part  of  the  decision  to  robust
    criticism of the documents put forward by the appellant in  support  of
    his appeal. The judge notes that the appellant's own representative had
    referred to 'oddities' in the documents, some of  which  did  not  even
    appear to refer to the appellant or to any part of his account of  past
    events at all. The appellant now complains that the judge had no  basis
    for commenting that the documents were likely to be 'fraudulent'  given
    that the respondent had never made any allegation to that effect.

 6. There is some force in this ground. It would appear that the judge  got
    carried away with his criticism of the documents  and,  whilst  he  was
    entitled for the reasons which he has given, to attach no weight at all
    to them it was unnecessary for him to go so far as to suggest that  the
    documents were forgeries when no such  allegation  had  been  advanced.
    However, I have to consider  whether  such  an  error  undermines  this
    decision to the extent that I should set it aside. In  my  opinion,  it
    does not. In terms of the outcome of the appeal, nothing turns upon the
    judge's reference to forgery; the  documents  attracted  no  evidential
    whether  they  were  forgeries  or  simply  irrelevant  or  unreliable.
    Although the judge  should  have  been  more  careful  in  his  use  of
    language, I can understand  his  frustration  in  having  to  read  and
    consider the relevance of documents which even  the  appellant  himself
    appears to have considered had nothing at all to do with his case.  The
    judge also does not appear to have been  assisted  by  the  appellant's
    representatives. Ultimately, the documents were given  no  weight  and,
    significantly, before the Upper Tribunal the appellant did  not  submit
    that any of the documents in question should be given weight.  Instead,
    the challenge  was  only  to  the  description  of  the  documents  has
    forgeries. In all  the  circumstances,  I  decline  to  set  aside  the
    decision for the reasons advanced in ground 2.

 7. The third ground also concerns  the  documentary  evidence.  The  judge
    appears to have rejected documents other than those referred to  above,
    including a newspaper article relating to the appellant's father's  ex-
    wife's father.  Although  the  judge  appeared  to  accept  that  minor
    variations in names could be explained  by  cultural  differences,  the
    appellant complains that he gave no weight to the documents.  Moreover,
    the appellant submits that the judge also given too much weight to  the
    appellant's inability to explain  fully  the  documents  which  he  had
    produced in support of his appeal.  That  was  unfair  given  that  the
    appellant  was  himself  reliant  upon  hearsay  concerning   documents
    emanating from Pakistan after his departure from that country.

 8. I reject that ground. I find of the judge was entitled to attach little
    weight to documents the significance of which even the appellant  could
    not explain. The  appellant  had  placed  these  documents  before  the
    Tribunal to support his case. That he could not explain  the  relevance
    of the documents when asked to do so in court is, in my opinion, highly
    significant and properly impacted on the appellant's credibility.  That
    remains the case even if the appellant had been sent the  documents  by
    third parties after he left Pakistan. If the appellant choses to put  a
    particular document before the judge, then, whatever its provenance, he
    should not be surprised that the judge should take a dim  view  of  the
    appellant's failure to explain its relevance.

 9. The fourth ground concerns the judge's treatment of the evidence of  Dr
    Green, a  chartered  psychologist.  The  judge  gives  his  conclusions
    regarding Dr Green's evidence at [94]. The judge notes that the  doctor
    appears to have proceeded in his assessment with the appellant's 'false
    history in his mind.' The judge was not satisfied that the  doctor  had
    approached the matter entirely impartially. The judge quotes  Dr  Green
    as having stated that the appellant 'has had a  significant  trauma  in
    his life...' before noting that Dr Green is  not  'the  master  of  the
    facts. It was quite wrong of him  to  reach  such  a  conclusion.'  The
    grounds complain that the judge failed to take account of the fact that
    Dr Green was aware of the circumstances in which  the  appellant  given
    his evidence in the earlier stages of the asylum claim and  litigation.
    The judge did not challenge the twin diagnoses of  the  doctor,  namely
    PTSD and depression.  The  judge  himself  had  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had suffered non-accidental injuries which had not been self-
    inflicted, by proxy or otherwise. To that extent, the  appellant  could
    be properly said to have suffered a significant trauma and it was wrong
    for the judge to have criticised the doctor for saying so.

10. There is some force in that latter point, namely that, on  the  judge's
    own finding,  the  appellant  had  suffered  injuries  which  were  not
    accidental  or  self-inflicted.  It  follows  that  the  injuries  were
    inflicted by third-party so Dr Green's statement that the appellant had
    suffered  'a  significant  trauma'  is  not  inconsistent  with   those
    injuries. I also agree that to describe Dr Green is not being impartial
    may be somewhat harsh. However, it is clear, when one reads the  entire
    report, that the doctor's reference to significant trauma  only  really
    makes sense in the context of the appellant's claim  (rejected  by  the
    judge) that he been tortured in Pakistan. I  do  not  believe  that  Dr
    Green was referring to any trauma which may have occurred later in  the
    United Kingdom such as that postulated by the judge.  To  that  extent,
    the doctor based his findings on an account of events in Pakistan which
    the Tribunal has completely rejected. Accordingly, I am satisfied  that
    the judge was entitled to attach less weight to Dr Green's report.  The
    suggestion of partiality is unfortunate  but  does  not  constitute  an
    error so serious that I find that I need to  set  aside  the  decision.
    Moreover, the  judge's  treatment  of  the  medical  evidence  (at  the
    beginning and the end of the decision) clearly shows that  he  has  not
    made up his mind and only subsequently turned to consider  the  medical
    reports; indeed, the reports are central to the analysis  (see  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367).

11.  I find that the judge  has  produced  a  robust  but  even-handed  and
    legally sound decision. There are infelicities of  expression  and,  in
    the case of KV, possibly a failure fully to explain  his  reasons  but,
    read as a whole, I am satisfied that the  decision  is  not  flawed  by
    legal error either as asserted in the grounds or at  all.  Accordingly,
    the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                              Date 5 February 2020

         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
