
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13024/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 January 2020                   |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                   M H M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Galliver-Andrew, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

      1. The  appellant  appeals  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Suffield-Thompson, promulgated on 30 October 2019,  dismissing  his
         appeal against a decision of the respondent,  made  on  1  November
         2018, refusing his protection and human rights applications.

      2. The appellant is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity. He  claimed
         to be entitled to international protection on the basis he  was  at
         risk of 'honour killing' in his home country  following  an  extra-
         marital relationship with A, who was a  member  of  an  influential
         family or a family closely connected  to  influential  people.  The
         respondent did not accept that the appellant had had a relationship
         with A or that he had  received  threats  from  them.  Nor  was  it
         accepted that A's family had political influence in Iraq.

      3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  also  received  an
         expert report, photographs and a DVD said to contain video clips of
         A. The judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
         appellant and concluded he was not at risk on return.

      4. The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  challenged  the  judge's
         assessment of the appellant's credibility. The First-tier  Tribunal
         granted permission on all grounds. There are four:

          1. The judge made  a  mistake  of  fact  in  concluding,  without
             evidence, that the appearance of the  girl  portrayed  in  the
             clips, who was "heavily made up, wearing jewellery  and  quite
             liberal clothes" did not fit with the  image  painted  by  the
             appellant of A  being  from  a  very  traditional  and  strict
             family. The judge also applied too high a standard of proof.

          2. The judge made findings which did not  correctly  reflect  the
             evidence,  such  as  finding  there  were  inconsistencies  as
             between how the appellant described how his relationship  with
             A was discovered and in relation to an incident  in  which  he
             was threatened.

          3. The judge's reliance on the fact he was targeted rather than A
             was inconsistent with the background evidence submitted.

          4. The judge failed to consider the evidence holistically.

      5. Granting permission to appeal, Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         O'Brien said,

             "3.  It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  applied  her  own
             preconceptions of how a girl from  a  traditional  and  strict
             household might dress. It is also arguable that the Judge  has
             failed to assess credibility holistically."

      6. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

      7. Mr  Galliver-Andrew  developed  his  grounds  at  the  hearing.  In
         relation to the first ground, he cited the well-known passage  from
         the judgment of Keene LJ in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223:

             "...

              25. There seems to me to be very little  dispute  between  the
                  parties as to  the  legal  principles  applicable  to  the
                  approach which an adjudicator, now known as an immigration
                  judge, should adopt towards  issues  of  credibility.  The
                  fundamental one is  that  he  should  be  cautious  before
                  finding an account to be  inherently  incredible,  because
                  there  is  a  considerable  risk  that  he  will  be  over
                  influenced  by  his  own  views  on  what  is  or  is  not
                  plausible, and  those  views  will  have  inevitably  been
                  influenced by his own background in this  country  and  by
                  the customs and ways of our own society. It  is  therefore
                  important that he  should  seek  to  view  an  appellant's
                  account of events, as Mr Singh  rightly  argues,  in  the
                  context of  conditions  in  the  country  from  which  the
                  appellant comes. The dangers were  well  described  in  an
                  article by Sir Thomas Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in
                  a passage quoted by the IAT in Kasolo v SSHD 13190,  the
                  passage being taken  from  an  article  in  Current  Legal
                  Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

                      "'An English judge may have, or think that he has,  a
                      shrewd idea of how  a  Lloyds  Broker  or  a  Bristol
                      wholesaler, or a Norfolk farmer, might react in  some
                      situation which is canvassed in the course of a  case
                      but he may, and I think should, feel very much  more
                      uncertain about the reactions of a Nigerian merchant,
                      or an Indian ships' engineer, or a  Yugoslav  banker.
                      Or even, to  take  a  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh
                      shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No  judge  worth  his
                      salt could possibl[y] assume that  men  of  different
                      nationalities, educations, trades, experience, creeds
                      and temperaments would act as he might think he would
                      have done or even - which may be quite different - in
                      accordance with his concept of what a reasonable  man
                      would have done."

               1. None of  this,  however,  means  that  an  adjudicator  is
                  required to  take  at  face  value  an  account  of  facts
                  proffered by an  appellant,  no  matter  how  contrary  to
                  common sense and experience of human behaviour the account
                  may be. The decision maker is not expected to suspend  his
                  own judgment, nor does Mr Singh contend that he should. In
                  appropriate cases, he is entitled to find that an  account
                  of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason  as  to
                  be incapable of belief. The point  was  well  put  in  the
                  Awala case by Lord Brodie at paragraph 24  when  he  said
                  this:

                      "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily accept
                      an applicant's  account  simply  because  it  is  not
                      contradicted at the relevant hearing. The tribunal of
                      fact is entitled to make reasonable findings based on
                      implausibilities, common sense and  rationality,  and
                      may reject evidence if it is not consistent with  the
                      probabilities affecting the case as a whole".

                  He then added a little later:

                      "... while a decision on credibility must be  reached
                      rationally,  in  doing  so  the  decision  maker   is
                      entitled to draw on his common sense and his ability,
                      as a practical and informed person, to identify  what
                      is or is not plausible".

               1. I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an account
                  as incredible by such standards, but he must take care not
                  to do so merely because it would not seem reasonable if it
                  had happened in this country. In  essence,  he  must  look
                  through the spectacles provided by the information he  has
                  about conditions in the country in question. That  is,  in
                  effect, what Neuberger LJ was saying in the case of HK and
                  I do not regard Chadwick LJ in the passage referred to as
                  seeking to disagree."

      8. Mr Howells accepted that the first ground disclosed an error of law
         but argued that it was not material because  the  judge  had  given
         other reasons for not giving weight to the  video  clips.  He  also
         agreed with Mr Galliver-Andrew that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
         misdirected herself as to the standard of proof but argued, for the
         same reasons, that this error was immaterial.

      9. Mr Howells argued the judge did not err in the manner described  in
         the second and third grounds and she was  entitled  to  find  there
         were  material  discrepancies  which  undermined  the   appellant's
         credibility. Matters had been put to the appellant for explanation.
         He also argued that ground four was not made out because the  judge
         was entitled to find there was no evidence showing the man  in  the
         photos was A's father.

     10. Mr Galliver-Andrew replied briefly and asked me to  find  that  the
         errors, taken cumulatively, were material and the  decision  should
         be set aside. I reserved my decision as to whether the decision  of
         the judge contains a material error of law.

     11. I  note  that  a  previous  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         dismissing the appeal was set aside by the Upper  Tribunal  because
         the judge had failed to consider properly  whether  the  video  and
         photographic evidence provided showed a  link  between  A  and  the
         appellant (because A addresses the appellant by name in the videos)
         and the photographs which show A with her family and prominent  PUK
         members, the identities of the prominent PUK  matters  having  been
         confirmed by the expert in his  report.  It  is  clear  that  those
         decisions and the same evidence were before the judge  who  re-made
         the decision, including the same expert report.  The  judge  viewed
         the video clips.

     12. The judge set out a number of reasons for  finding  inconsistencies
         in the claim before turning to the video and photographic  evidence
         at [40] to [48], concluding that, whilst she accepted the  expert's
         evidence that the prominent people in the photographs were who  the
         appellant said they were, the link between A and those people could
         not be substantiated "and these pictures could have been  given  to
         him by anyone or obtained from social media". At  [51]  she  added,
         "[t]he videos could be any female friend of the Appellant assisting
         him in his claim. The photo ... may or may not be of the same  girl
         but again I have no proof this is A. I have no idea who the man the
         Appellant claims is her father is and no proof of his  relationship
         to the girl. I have no proof of the relationships between the other
         people in the  photographs  and  the  Appellant  and  his  supposed
         girlfriend."

     13. I now turn to the reasons given by the  judge  for  reaching  these
         conclusions. It is clear that the judge erred in [41] by making her
         own assumptions about what a girl  from  a  strict  Kurdish  family
         might wear when making a private video message for  her  boyfriend.
         The judge's beliefs are not supported by any evidence. I agree with
         Judge O'Brien. The dicta of Keene LJ are entirely apposite.

     14. However, in the same paragraph, the judge says she finds  the  fact
         the girl was able to record herself  and  send  a  video  clip  was
         inconsistent with  the  appellant's  account  of  her  being  under
         surveillance  with  no  access  to  a  phone.  She  considered  the
         explanation offered that the  girl  used  her  mother's  phone  but
         rejected this as well for sound reasons. I consider  this  part  of
         the judge's reasoning to be sound.

     15. In [42] the judge explains that  two  of  the  clips  are  of  poor
         quality such that she cannot identify the girl as  being  the  same
         person. She also notes that there are no marks on the girl's  neck,
         whereas the appellant claimed she had been strangled. The clips did
         not show any date and, more generally, the girl could be anyone.  I
         consider the point made about the absence of marks  on  the  girl's
         neck to be contradictory with the point about the poor  quality  of
         the clips. However, the general point  about  identification  holds
         good.

     16. It is important to  recall  that  the  purpose  of  the  video  and
         photographic evidence was  to  demonstrate  the  link  between  A's
         family and the PUK. In the ensuing paragraphs the judge goes on  to
         consider the photographs which were submitted.  The  appellant  did
         not submit a photograph of  himself  with  A  (at  least,  not  one
         showing their faces), which is why the video clips were potentially
         important. As I understand it, the speaker named the appellant  and
         addressed him.

     17. The judge continues her analysis at [45], dealing with  the  expert
         report. The judge is critical of his acceptance of the  appellant's
         word that A's family are  powerful.  At  [46]  she  criticises  the
         expert's assertion that the girl depicted in the  photographs  with
         her father is the same girl  as  in  the  video  clips.  She  gives
         reasons for doubting this based on her own viewings and she  points
         out that the author of the report is not a face recognition expert.
         She does accept the expert's evidence that there are well-known PUK
         figures depicted in the photographs. She then makes  the  point  in
         [47] to the effect that the link has not been made between the girl
         and the man, said to be her father. Then she makes the point  again
         at [48] that there is no  way  to  substantiate  the  claimed  link
         between A and the PUK people.

     18.  However,  there  is  a  further  issue.  Mr  Galliver-Andrew  drew
         attention to the judge's use of language in [41] and [46] ("...  it
         is not possible to say for certain ...", "... I cannot definitively
         find ..." and "not clear enough to be able to say for certain  that
         ...") as indicating the judge was applying  an  impermissibly  high
         standard of proof. I have noted that  Mr  Howells  also  recognised
         this was the wrong standard but again pointed out there were  other
         reasons given by the judge.

     19. The judge noted the lower standard of proof applicable in [21].  At
         least in [47] she concluded the paragraph by stating that she could
         not accept that the man in the photographs was A's father  "to  the
         required standard of proof". However, she also repeated the  phrase
         "I cannot be sure". I do not consider that even the  most  generous
         reading of these paragraphs entitles me to conclude that the  judge
         maintained the application of the lower  standard,  notwithstanding
         her correct self-direction at [21], when she  reached  her  overall
         conclusion in [51] that there was "no proof" of the link.

     20. Mr  Howells  can  only  be  correct  in  suggesting  the  error  is
         immaterial if the judge made no error in her primary  finding  that
         the appellant's account of the relationship with A  (regardless  of
         her family's connections) was a fabrication. This takes  me  to  Mr
         Galliver-Andrew's second ground, which argues mistake of  fact  and
         failure to consider all the evidence. This  ground  refers  to  two
         separate findings by the judge.

     21. Firstly, she found in [28] that the appellant had given  "two  very
         different accounts". That is because, in the  screening  interview,
         the appellant had said A's family became aware of the  relationship
         when someone sent them a letter and, in the substantive  interview,
         he said it was when A's mother saw them together.  The  discrepancy
         was put  to  the  appellant  in  cross-examination  and  the  judge
         rejected the explanation given. Mr Howells  argued  the  judge  was
         entitled  to  regard  this  as  an  unexplained  discrepancy  which
         undermined the appellant's credibility.

     22. However, as Mr  Galliver-Andrew  pointed  out,  the  appellant  was
         answering  two  different  questions.  At  4.1  of  the   screening
         interview, he was answering the question, when did you  realise  it
         was a problem? At the substantive interview, he was asked,  why  do
         you  fear  the  appellant's  father?  Furthermore,  prior  to   the
         substantive interview the appellant had explained that his problems
         began when someone threw a letter into the yard of A's house saying
         they were together but it was only 2-3 months later that they  were
         discovered together at A's house by A's  mother.  This  explanation
         was carried forward to the appellant's witness statement, which was
         before the judge. Mr Galliver-Andrew  appeared  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing and he said he pointed this out to the judge.

     23. It does appear that the judge may have misunderstood the  evidence.
         I gain some limited  support  for  that  view  from  the  fact  the
         previous judge hearing the appeal, Judge O'Rourke, recorded in  his
         summary of the claim that there were two separate  incidents  which
         led to the appellant having problems (see [15 (i) and (ii)).

     24. The second point is that in [31]  and  [32]  the  judge  finds  the
         appellant  gave  two  "totally  different  accounts"  regarding  an
         incident in which he was  attacked  by  a  member  of  A's  family.
         Specifically, at his  interview,  he  described  being  kicked  and
         punched in an alleyway by A's father and a man  called  Hazhar.  In
         his witness statement, he described being accosted by A's  brother,
         Hoger, in the bazaar. As far  as  I  can  see,  only  the  alleyway
         incident was referred to in the interview (see Q86).

     25. Mr Galliver-Andrew pointed out that the appellant had described two
         incidents in his witness statement. I  consider  that  it  is  less
         clear-cut that the judge erred on  this  point.  However,  it  does
         appear that the appellant had maintained prior to the hearing  that
         there were two separate incidents, albeit  similar.  As  such,  the
         judge may have erred.

     26. Mr Galliver-Andrew also argued the judge's reference at [36] to the
         appellant's chronology of events being "also totally different"  as
         between the interview and statement is unexplained.  I do  consider
         the judge has not  provided  adequate  reasons  for  this  finding.
         Neither the  preceding  nor  the  subsequent  paragraph  refers  to
         inconsistencies in the chronology. There is no way of knowing  what
         the judge had in mind.

     27. It is not necessary to consider the other grounds.  Overall,  I  am
         driven to conclude that the judge's finding about the  relationship
         and therefore the risk on return is unsafe and therefore the  whole
         decision must be set aside. It may well be that a third judge  will
         also conclude that the claim is not credible but this  decision  is
         erroneous and must be set aside.

     28. Having considered the Senior President's Practice Direction  of  15
         September 2012, I make an order under section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.  The  appellant  is
         entitled to have his appeal heard again.

     29. The appeal is therefore allowed and the decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal grounds  is  set  aside.
         The appeal must be heard again in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
         judge other than Judges  O'Rourke  and  Suffield-Thompson  with  no
         findings preserved.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and  her
decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Direction Regarding Anonymity

Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 7 February 2020
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

