

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/13149/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons  promulgated   |
|on 17 July 2017                        |on 30 August 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           CHAUDHRY PERVEZ AKHTAR
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs C Nicholas instructed by Nationwide Law Associates

For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Meah promulgated on 26 January 2017 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  was  born  on  8  May  1959,
        claimed he will face a real risk on return to Pakistan as a  result
        of his support for the APML. The Judge noted  this  but  found  out
        [12] "The appellant gave a significant number of answers  regarding
        his support for the APML at his  main  asylum  interview  with  the
        respondent, which were inconsistent  with  the  background  country
        information. These are highlighted in greater detail in the RFRL."
     3. The Judge noted that the  inconsistencies  included  the  appellant
        getting the date wrong when President Musharraf was in  power,  the
        date the organisation he claims to support was founded, and a claim
        that President Musharraf had named  the  party  whereas  background
        information shows that name was derived from  a  different  source.
        The Judge sets out the concerns at [13 - 27] of the decision  under
        challenge.
     4. The Judge noted  the  appellant  also  claimed  to  remember  of  a
        different party, the Pak Sar Zameen  Party,  but  was  unable  when
        asked by the interviewer at his main asylum interview  to  properly
        state the aims or to give  details  about  the  appearance  of  the
        party's official logo. The Judge noted the appellant  was  able  to
        give detailed evidence regarding these issues at the hearing, as he
        did for other aspects of the evidence, but attached  little  weight
        to the responses as proof of a genuine adverse political profile in
        light of the fact that  the  appellant  has  clearly  enhanced  his
        "vague clarification" by the time of the hearing [28]. In  relation
        to this party, the Judge also finds that no  real  risk  on  return
        would flow from membership if his point relating to  membership  in
        the UK had been made out [29].
     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis that although the application for permission
        largely amounted to disagreement with the conclusions reached on
        the evidence, the last paragraph was said to give rise to an
        arguable legal error. This paragraph stated "Learned Judge failed
        to evaluate the evidence of the death certificates, FIR's and
        newspaper reports. Therefore, the Learned Judge clearly made an
        error of law in reaching his decision".




Error of law


     6. Mrs Nicholas, on behalf of the appellant, had a bundle  of  legible
        documents in her possession which she confirmed were  the  same  as
        those that had been produced  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  These
        included  a  police  report  referring  to  the  appellant's  son's
        shooting in January 2010 with translation, three newspaper  reports
        regarding a death in 2016, a police report regarding the killing of
        an  opposition  party  member  in  2014,  a  newspaper  translation
        regarding the death of the appellant's cousin, two identical  death
        certificates, a post-mortem report of  the  appellant's  cousin  in
        2016, a post-mortem of a party member killed  in  2014,  a  medical
        report relating to the appellant's cousin  dated  2016,  a  medical
        report regarding the killing  of  the  appellant's  cousin  and  an
        opposition party member. In addition, it  was  said  there  are  18
        pages of clear photographs in which the appellant could be seen  on
        some talking to President Musharraf on a visit.
     7. It is not  disputed  that  permission  has  only  been  granted  in
        relation to the one issue, the failure to consider the  documentary
        evidence, but it is submitted that on the  basis  of  the  evidence
        provided it was clear the appellant is a close supporter of General
        Musharraf and that the evidence of the deaths referred  to  in  the
        other documentary evidence  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  to  the
        appellant on return to Pakistan.
     8. I do not accept the appellant has made out that there is any  merit
        in the submission the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  documentary
        evidence provided. At [5] the Judge states:


         5.    I have taken into  account  the  following  documents  placed
         before me:


   i. The respondent's bundle comprising  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
      (RFRL), Screening Interview Record, Main Asylum Interview Record (AIR)
      alongside some other documents pertinent to his application.
  ii. Appellant's bundle comprising a witness statement for his  appeal  and
      some other documents purporting to support the appeal.


     9. The Judge makes further reference to the documents at [6 -8]  where
        there is a specific reference to the entirety  of  the  documentary
        and oral evidence having been considered. At [11] the Judge  refers
        to having considered all the evidence.
    10. It is not an error of law for a judge not to set out  reference  to
        each and every aspect of a claim, as otherwise decisions  would  be
        far longer than some already are, but it is necessary for  a  judge
        to take into account all the evidence provided and  to  incorporate
        the same within the decision-making process.
    11. A reading of the material in the First-tier Tribunal file  together
        with the determination does not make out that the Judge has  either
        been selective in relation to the evidence considered,  has  failed
        to consider  the  same,  or  has  misunderstood  the  evidence  the
        appellant sought to rely upon. It is of relevance  with  regard  to
        documentary and photographic evidence that consideration  is  given
        to [30 - 31] of  the  decision  under  challenge  where  the  Judge
        writes:


        30.  In relation  to  the  documentary  and  photographic  evidence
             submitted to support the  application  for  asylum,  this  was
             dealt with by the respondent at paragraphs 40 and  41  of  the
             RFRL.  The  same  evidence  was  provided   to   support   the
             appellant's  appeal  alongside  a  CD-ROM  and  a  USB   stick
             purporting to contain evidence of the appellant's  involvement
             in Pakistani politics in the UK.


        31.  Mr Mahmood made no reference to any of these during  his  very
             brief submissions, however, I find that  I  must  nevertheless
             view  all  the  evidence  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
             incredible testimony and consequently, I am  not  prepared  to
             attach any weight to any of this as I do not believe that  the
             appellant will be in danger if returns to Pakistan now Tanveer
             Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318*


    12. As the Judge clearly  considers  the  evidence  with  the  required
        degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  for  the
        adverse credibility  findings  made  and  reasons  for  the  appeal
        failing, the weight to be given to the evidence was  a  matter  for
        the Judge.
    13. It was also submitted by Miss Isherwood  that  the  2014  documents
        referred to a dispute concerning an  illegal  relationship  with  a
        woman which does  not  form  part  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
        international protection.
    14. I find the appellant has failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof
        upon him to the required standard to show that any  arguable  error
        of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal has been made
        out and, accordingly, the determination must stand.

Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 August 2017












