
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13406/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th August 2018                           |On 27th November 2018         |
|and 13th November 2018                        |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett on 28th August 2018 & Mr A Gilbert on
                  13th November 2018 (both instructed by Wick & Co
                  Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow on 28th August 2018 & Mr T Wilding on
                  13th November 2018 (both Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officers)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  who  is  a
    national of Egypt born on 1st February 1986. The Appellant had  made  a
    protection claim on the basis that he would be at risk  of  persecution
    on return to  Egypt  on  account  of  his  affiliation  to  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood. The Secretary of State  refused  his  application  on  1st
    December 2017. The Appellant's appeal against that refusal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer sitting at Taylor house on 12  February
    2018. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 27th February 2018 Judge
    Freer dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


 2. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal by the  Upper
    Tribunal on 28th June 2018. The matter first came  before  me  on  28th
    August 2018 to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had made an error
    of law and if so whether and to what extent the  Decision  and  Reasons
    should be set aside.

 3. The grounds had asserted that the Judge had  acted  in  a  procedurally
    unfair manner in making various comments throughout  the  Decision  and
    Reasons as to, for example, why the Appellant had not  left  Egypt  and
    travelled to another Middle Eastern country as his family  members  had
    done. I do not find that those comments were material  to  the  Judge's
    conclusion or credibility findings. However, I did find  there  was  an
    error of law on the basis of an inadequate  consideration  of  risk  on
    return as a member the Muslim  Brotherhood  in  the  current  political
    climate in Egypt and the Government view  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.
    With the agreement of both representatives I adjourned  the  matter  on
    that day to be listed for a resumed hearing to decide the sole issue of
    whether a person with the Appellant's profile as found  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal would be at risk on return. Either party was  at  liberty
    to file additional documents in relation to country information.

 4. The Appellant's representatives filed a  fairly  slim  bundle  for  the
    purposes of the resumed hearing. Unfortunately, they had not heeded  my
    indication that I would be dealing with one single issue,  namely  risk
    on return for an ordinary member of the Muslim Brotherhood  and  sought
    to put in further evidence  regarding  the  Appellant's  background.  I
    indicated to Mr Gilbert that that information was of  no  relevance  to
    the issue that I was to decide. The  only  documents  relevant  to  the
    issue that I had to decide were an  expert  report  provided  by  a  Dr
    Imranali  Panjwani  and  another   document   concerning   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood.

 5.  Additionally,  Mr  Gilbert  provided  me  with  a  small   bundle   of
    authorities,  YB  (Eritrea)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360,  a   decision   of
    Westminster Magistrates Court in the case of the Queen  v  Viscount  St
    Davids, the Home Office "Country  Policy  and  Information  Note-Egypt:
    Muslim Brotherhood (July 2017) (CPIN) and KS (Burma)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    67.

The Appellant's profile

 6.  The  Appellant  has  a  long-standing  affiliation  with  the   Muslim
    Brotherhood,  as  has  his  family.  He  has   not   attended   violent
    demonstrations and is  not  a  violent  person  nor  does  he  advocate
    violence. He  has  not  been  in  any  position  of  seniority  in  the
    organisation. In the UK he has attended demonstrations  and  spoken  at
    only one and that  a  small  one.  He  has  posted  on  Facebook  posts
    supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and against the regime. That Facebook
    account has been closed although it is not possible  to  say  by  whom,
    although the Appellant claimed it was by the government in Egypt.


 7. The First-tier Tribunal  had  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    surveillance carried out by the  Egyptian  authorities  such  that  the
    Appellant's activities would be known.

The Hearing

 8. I gave an indication at the outset that I  was  singularly  unimpressed
    with the "expert" report. The author gave no indication as  to  how  he
    was an expert on Egypt. He is an academic who has written a  number  of
    reports but does not detail how it is that he has  any  expertise  with
    regard to Egypt. Furthermore, he has not confined himself to the  issue
    before the court  but  has  strayed  into  making  submissions  on  the
    Appellant's behalf and reopening matters which I have not set aside.


 9. In his submissions Mr Wilding  confined  himself  to  criticising  that
    expert report and his criticisms largely  were  in  line  with  my  own
    concerns.

10. Mr Gilbert took me through various pieces of  evidence  concerning  the
    situation in Egypt. He said that the relevant issues for the  Appellant
    were his previous behaviour in Egypt including his family's profile  as
    supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, his behaviour in the UK  and  on-
    line activity and how he would behave in future in  Egypt  noting  that
    the Appellant has been a long-standing member of the Muslim Brotherhood
    and been involved in activities for a long time.

11. Mr Gilbert took me to the CPI N document  referring  to  the  following
    passages.

12. At 2.2.4 it is stated that under the Penal Code, the government is able
    to detain anyone suspected of membership  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.
    However, in practice arrests and prolonged  detentions  have  primarily
    been of high and mid-level leaders, and those taking part  in  protests
    against the government which became violent.

13. At 2.2.5 it states that  the  authorities  are  unlikely  to  have  the
    capacity, capability or interest  in  seeking  to  target  all  persons
    associated with the Muslim Brotherhood given the size  and  variety  of
    its membership and support base. The evidence does not  establish  that
    merely being a member of, or, in particular, a supporter of the MB,  or
    being perceived to support the MB, will  place  a  person  at  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm.

14. At 3.1.4 it says that low-level, non-political or inactive members  and
    supporters, or those perceived to  be  supporters,  are  not  generally
    being targeted and it is unlikely that they will be able to demonstrate
    a real risk of persecution. The onus is on the  person  to  demonstrate
    that they are at risk of persecution, however each case will need to be
    considered on its facts.


15. Those statements are however contradicted by the rest of the evidence.


16. At 6.1.1 the US State Department report  covering  events  in  2016  is
    quoted stating that according to Article 86, membership of a designated
    terrorist group may incur penalties of  up  to  5  years  imprisonment.
    Article 86 also criminalises the distribution of materials, in  writing
    or in speech, pertaining to a proscribed organisation or in service  of
    its objectives.

17. At 6.2.21 there is reference to the DFAT report of  2017  which  states
    that tens of thousands of Brotherhood members have  been  arrested  and
    detained since July 2013 and courts throughout the country have  handed
    down a series of harsh sentences (including the death penalty) in  mass
    trials of those charged with participating in violent protests or riots
    following the military takeover. Mr Gilbert referred to the fact that a
    person charged was not necessarily present in a violent protest.

18. Further, in the same paragraph DFAT assesses  that  Muslim  Brotherhood
    leadership  figures  and  members  who  continue  to  pursue  political
    activities actively either within or outside the  party  structure  are
    highly likely to be arrested and prosecuted. Ordinary inactive members,
    party supporters and those with family links to members  face  a  lower
    risk of being targeted for arrest, but  may  be  subject  to  arbitrary
    arrest during wider security actions. They are likely to come under the
    close attention of the authorities and be subject to  surveillance  and
    monitoring of their activities.

19. Mr Gilbert drew my attention to the fact that  the  Appellant  was  not
    inactive.

20. At 6.2.4 Amnesty International's report is referred  to,  stating  that
    security forces arrested 11,877 members of "terrorist  groups"  between
    January and the end of  September  2015,  according  to  the  Assistant
    Minister for Public Security at  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.  The
    crackdown was thought to include members and  perceived  supporters  of
    the Muslim Brotherhood and other government  critics.  The  authorities
    previously stated that they had arrested at least 22,000 people on such
    grounds in 2014. It goes on to say that in September 2015 president al-
    Sisi pardoned 100 men and women including  journalists  and  scores  of
    activists imprisoned for participating in protests. The pardon did  not
    extend to imprisoned  leaders  of  Egypt's  youth  movement  or  Muslim
    Brotherhood leaders and that at least 3000 civilians stood trial before
    unfair military  courts  on  "terrorism"  and  other  charges  alleging
    political violence. Many, including leaders of the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    were tried in mass trials. Amnesty International says  military  trials
    of civilians are fundamentally unfair.

21. At 6.2.8 it is said that thousands of Muslim  Brotherhood  leaders  and
    supporters have been imprisoned - the group said in 2015 29,000 of  its
    sympathisers were in custody.


22. At 6.2.12 Human Rights Watch stated that military courts have tried  at
    least  7420  Egyptian  civilians  since  October  2014  and  that  most
    defendants were sentenced after mass trials that  violated  fundamental
    due process rights and some  courts  relied  on  confessions  extracted
    under torture according to relatives.


23. At 6.2.13 it is said that civil society organisations estimate that  as
    many as 40,000 people were being detained for political reasons  as  of
    2016,  most  of  them  for  real  or  suspected  links  to  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood.

24. At 6.2.16 Amnesty International said in July  2016  that  thousands  of
    people in Egypt are currently detained without trial or serving lengthy
    prison sentences imposed after unfair trials on account of  their  real
    or  perceived  opposition  to  the  government  of  President  al-Sisi.
    Supporters of ousted President Mohammed Morsi as well  as  leaders  and
    members of the Muslim Brotherhood continue to be particularly targeted.
    It then says that, according to the  government,  its  security  forces
    arrested almost 22,000 suspects in 2013 and 2014, including  some  3000
    top and middle level Muslim Brotherhood leaders and members.  In  2015,
    according to the Ministry of Interior,  the  security  forces  arrested
    almost 12,000 further suspects, mostly MB members  and  supporters.  It
    goes on to say that some rights groups estimate that as many as  60,000
    people have been detained for political reasons since July 2013 and the
    10 new prisons are reported to  have  been  built  to  accommodate  the
    rising numbers of detainees.

25. At 6.2.18 it is reported that Janes reported  in  June  2017  that  the
    authorities arrest people for alleged  Muslim  Brotherhood  ties  on  a
    regular basis.

26. At 6.3 there is reference to disappearances and at 6.3.2 it  is  stated
    most of those who disappeared were males ranging from adults  in  their
    50s to boys aged 14.

27. At 6.3.4 Amnesty  International  said  that  most  of  the  victims  of
    enforced disappearance were supporters of former President Morsi and it
    also indicates that there is a reported average of three or four people
    subjected to enforced disappearance each day  since  the  beginning  of
    2015 and that many of the detainees who suffered abuses were accused of
    sympathy with or membership of the Muslim Brotherhood.

28. Mr Gilbert submitted that all of the points identified above  from  the
    CPIN indicated that the Secretary of State's claim  that  the  risk  is
    only to high-level members of the Muslim Brotherhood  is  quite  simply
    not made out.

29. Mr Gilbert then took me to the  bundle  submitted  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

30. He referred me to a Human Rights Watch report of September  2017  which
    states that torture has long been endemic in  Egypt's  law  enforcement
    system and that since 2013 when Egypt's military removed the  country's
    former President,  Mohammed  Morsi,  the  Interior  Ministry's  regular
    police and National Security agency have used torture on  a  systematic
    and widespread basis against perceived  dissidents  to  force  them  to
    confess or divulge information or to punish them.

31. He referred to a report from  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada entitled "Egypt: treatment of members of the Muslim Brotherhood,
    including  leaders,  returnee  members  and   suspected   members,   by
    authorities following the removal of President  Mohammed  Morsi"  dated
    11th June 2017. That document states  that  in  December  2013  it  was
    reported  that  the  government  declared  the  Muslim  Brotherhood   a
    terrorist group thereby criminalising all its activities, financing and
    even membership of the group.

32. Freedom House's Freedom in the World  2017  report  states  that  large
    numbers of Muslim Brotherhood members and supporters, including  nearly
    all of the organisation's senior leadership and Mohammed Morsi  himself
    were arrested following the coup and that the arrests continued through
    2016.

33. The report goes on to state that there had been mass  trials  and  that
    hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood members and supporters have been put  on
    trial and given harsh sentences in  multiple  cases.  Rights  advocates
    have repeatedly criticised  the  mass  prosecutions  saying  they  lack
    guarantees for a fair trial.  Three defence lawyers had stated that the
    prosecution had not put forward any evidence implicating any individual
    defendant and that the court prevented defence lawyers presenting their
    case or calling witnesses. It is said that lawyers  are  absent  during
    trial and one defence lawyer said that no defendants  were  present  in
    court. There is further information  that  according  to  Human  Rights
    Watch in a trial it reviewed, the State presented little evidence  that
    the defendants had done anything but spread news about a  mass  sit  in
    opposing the coup or organise  and  publicise  peaceful  opposition  to
    Morsi's removal.

34. Amnesty International had said that men were held incommunicado  before
    the trial and that the men had wounds when produced.

35. This evidence, Mr Gilbert submitted, indicated that  it  was  not  just
    those involved in violent opposition who were targeted nor was it  just
    the leaders.

36. The same document reports that in February 2017 a Reuters  article  had
    said that human rights groups estimate that  about  40,000  people  had
    been detained for political reasons since Morsi was deposed.  There  is
    further reference to the enforced disappearances also.

37. Mr Gilbert referred me to another  document  which  indicated  that  at
    least 240 people from opposition parties and political youth groups  in
    17 cities had been arrested in relation to comments  they  posted  that
    were critical of the Egyptian president and referred to Article  28  of
    Law 94 which states that  "any  person  who  promotes  or  prepares  to
    promote, directly or indirectly, the commission of a terrorist crime...
    whether through writing,  speech,  or  any  other  medium...  Shall  be
    imprisoned for five years.

38. Mr Gilbert then took me to a document entitled Egypt's Country  Profile
    dated 2017 which referred  to  the  government's  surveillance  of  and
    behaviour with regard to social media. It is said that Internet freedom
    declined dramatically in 2017 after the government  blocked  dozens  of
    critical new  sites  and  there  was  a  crackdown  on  encryption  and
    circumvention tools. It says that security forces detained  individuals
    for criticising  the  government's  human  rights  record  and  mocking
    president al-Sisi on social media and  several  had  been  arrested  or
    sentenced for allegedly administering Facebook pages that poked fun  at
    government  officials  or  expressed  legitimate  opposition  to  their
    policies.

39. There is  reference  to  the  Egyptian  government  having  centralised
    Internet  infrastructure  and  fibre-optic  cables  to  create   highly
    controllable choke  points.  There  is  reference  to  the  authorities
    blocking the websites of various tools which help circumvent censorship
    and that a satirical Facebook page  with  over  800,000  followers  was
    closed down after poking fun at the President. It is also said that  in
    December 2016 the  Ministry  of  Interior  claimed  it  shut  down  163
    Facebook pages and arrested 14 administrators for  allegedly  "inciting
    people to commit  acts  of  vandalism  against  State  institution  and
    citizens"

40. There is reference to a rising  number  of  arrests  for  social  media
    posts, including satirical images and comedy videos and it goes  on  to
    say that digital activism and political organising  have  been  largely
    subdued over the past several years due to fears of arrest, harsh  jail
    sentences and even murder by police forces while attending protests. It
    says that Egyptians continue to face heavy penalties for their  on-line
    activities.

41. It goes on to say that surveillance is a significant concern  and  that
    research  and  leaked  documents  have  indicated  that  the   Egyptian
    authorities have purchased  or  received  surveillance  equipment  from
    international companies and that one company was appointed over another
    because it offered to provide access to its consumer data.

42. Mr Gilbert also made reference to the expert report but I indicated  to
    him that I could attach little weight to that report as it  was  highly
    subjective and there was no evidence of the author's expertise.

43. Finally, in his submissions, Mr Gilbert argued that the Appellant had a
    long-standing affiliation to the Muslim Brotherhood.  He  had  attended
    demonstrations in the UK and posted articles  on  Facebook.  There  was
    adequate evidence to indicate that the authorities did use surveillance
    and in that regard he referred me to YB  (Eritrea)  and  in  particular
    paragraph 18 of that case which indicates that where a  government  has
    the objective of suppression of political opponents  then  it  requires
    little or no evidence or speculation to arrive at a strong  possibility
    and perhaps more that its foreign legations not only film or photograph
    its nationals who have demonstrated in public against  the  regime  but
    have informers among expatriate opposition organisations who  can  name
    the people who are filmed  or  photographed.  Similarly,  YB  (Eritrea)
    states that it does not require affirmative  evidence  to  establish  a
    probability that the intelligence services of such states  monitor  the
    Internet for information about oppositionist groups.

44. Mr Gilbert referred me to the Westminster Magistrates  Court  judgement
    only to indicate that there is no such  thing  as  a  private  Facebook
    page. Anyone who posts on Facebook, even where it is available only  to
    their "friends" is subject  to  onward  publication  by  those  friends
    sharing it with other friends and it thus becomes far more while widely
    available. Essentially, there is no such thing as  a  private  Facebook
    page.

45. Mr Gilbert argued therefore that this Appellant is a person who has had
    links to the Muslim Brotherhood for many years and his family were also
    supportive of that organisation. In the UK he has attended a number  of
    demonstrations, albeit non-violent and that based  on  the  information
    that  he  had  referred  me  to  it  is  highly   likely   that   those
    demonstrations  are  monitored  using  modern  technological   methods,
    relying on what was said in YB (Eritrea).

46. The evidence in this case, Mr Gilbert urged me  to  find,  demonstrated
    that the Egyptian authorities,  being  so  determined  to  destroy  the
    Muslim Brotherhood, were  such  a  government  as  referred  to  in  YB
    (Eritrea)  and  that  they  would  without  doubt   be   carrying   out
    surveillance.

47. He also argued that the Appellant's online activity,  albeit  that  his
    Facebook page has been closed, would also put him  at  risk  given  the
    government's monitoring of the Internet.

48. Mr Gilbert argued, on the basis  of  the  country  information  he  had
    referred me to that the Appellant's  support  for  many  years  of  the
    Muslim Brotherhood, his attendance at  demonstrations  in  the  UK  and
    Facebook posts and his continuing support for that  organisation  would
    place him at risk on return. His support for that organisation held, as
    it has been over a  number  of  years,  is  something  which  he  would
    continue upon return.

49. Mr Wilding did not make any further submissions in response.

50.  I have already indicated that I share Mr Wilding's low opinion of  the
    expert report and that I place little reliance upon  it.  However,  the
    other evidence that Mr Gilbert took me to as I have set out above I  do
    find to be persuasive. While there is reference  to  only  leaders  and
    high-level members of the Muslim Brotherhood being targeted,  there  is
    also  a  great  deal  of  evidence  that  any  association  with   that
    organisation is enough to put a person at risk. It seems clear  on  the
    basis of  the  evidence  I  have  that  the  Egyptian  authorities  are
    demonstrating  a  determination  to  completely  destroy   the   Muslim
    Brotherhood and that they are meting out  very  severe  punishments  to
    anyone they come across who supports it. This is clearly designed,  not
    only as a punishment to  those  but  as  a  deterrent  to  others  from
    continuing their support. On the evidence that I was taken to I am also
    satisfied that the Egyptian  authorities  will  be  monitoring  matters
    outside their embassy in the UK, that they are monitoring the  Internet
    and the Appellant having been involved in both, I am satisfied, bearing
    in mind the low standard of proof, that there is a real  risk  that  he
    will have been identified or will be on return. The evidence  does  not
    show that it is only high-profile members of the Muslim Brotherhood who
    are risk, but anybody perceived to have links with or to be  supportive
    of the organisation.


51. For all of the above reasons and bearing in mind the  low  standard  of
    proof I find this Appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Egypt's
    because of his affiliation with,  support  of  and  membership  of  the
    Muslim Brotherhood.

Decision

52. The appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed [pic]                            Date 16th November 2018









