
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13854/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 September 2017                   |On 3 October 2017              |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Boyle, of Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1.  To  preserve  the  anonymity  order   which   the   First-tier   thought
appropriate, I make an  anonymity  order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bircher promulgated on 27 February 2017, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1996 and is a national of Iraq.

4. On 1st December 2016 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bircher ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22  June  2017  Judge  Dineen
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "The four grounds of application may be summarised as complaining that
      the Judge erred in law  by  departing  from  country  guidance  in  AA
      without very strong grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  and  by
      erroneous application of country guidance regarding returned to IKR.

      These grounds are arguably material errors of law."

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Boyle, for the  appellant,  adopted  the  terms  of  the  skeleton
argument and the grounds of appeal. He told me that although  the  appellant
was born in the IKR, his family moved to Jalawla when he was  only  6  or  7
years old. The appellant is from Kirkuk, which is outside the IKR.  At  [23]
of the decision the Judge finds that the  appellant  can  safely  return  to
Jalawla. At [28] and  [29]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant can safely go to the IKR, and that there is no  article  15c  risk
to the appellant in his home area.  Mr Boyle told  me  that  those  findings
are the foundation of a material error of law.

(b) Because the appellant is from  Jalawla,  in  Diyala  province,  he  will
return to Baghdad. Mr Boyle told me that the Judge failed  to  consider  the
pre-clearance requirement for entry to IKR set out in AA  (Iraq)  CG  [2017]
EWCA Civ 944. He told me that the Judge failed to  consider  the  importance
of a CSID card, and that the Judge had failed to consider how the  appellant
could get from Baghdad to IKR. He told me that the  decision  is  devoid  of
consideration of what would happen to the appellant if  he  enters  IKR.  He
told me that the decision is fundamentally flawed.

(c) Mr Boyle referred me to AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  He  asked  me
to allow the appeal, to  set  the  decision  aside  and  substitute  my  own
decision allowing the appeal on article 3 ECHR grounds and  on  Humanitarian
Protection grounds.

7. Mr Diwyncz, for the respondent formally opposed the appeal and relied  on
the rule 24 note, dated 12 July 2017. He told me that he was limited in  the
submissions that he could make because the case of AA (Iraq) CG [2017]  EWCA
Civ 944 was handed down after  the  judge's  decision  was  promulgated.  He
conceded that in light of AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  the  appellant
comes from a contested area and if internal relocation is  unduly  harsh  is
entitled to humanitarian protection. He accepted that a single man  from  an
ethnic minority who does not speak fluent Arabic is unlikely to be safe.  He
also accepted that a humanitarian crisis is unfolding in Iraq, and the  life
of an internally displaced person there amounts to destitution.

Analysis

8. The Judge's  decision  was  written  in  February  2017  and,  relied  on
background materials which were carefully considered by the  Judge.  Relying
on those background materials, the Judge found (at  [29]  of  the  decision)
that the appellant's home area (in Diyala) no longer meets the threshold  to
engage article 15(c). On 22 June 2017, the Court of  Appeal  issued  updated
country guidance on Iraq. In the annex to  the  decision  of  AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 the Court of Appeal said

      A.     INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

9. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what  was  said  in
AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC)

10. The Judge's finding at [29] is therefore not safe. The Judge finds  that
the appellant's claim does not succeed on any grounds, however  the  country
guidance given by the Court of  Appeal  in  June  2017  indicates  that  the
appellant's claim for humanitarian protection  must  succeed.  The  guidance
given by the  Court  of  Appeal  four  months  after  the  Judge's  decision
confirmed the guidance given in  2015,  and  is  directly  contrary  to  the
background reports the respondent relied on.

11. Because what is contained at [29] is a material error of law I must  set
the Judge's decision aside. But there is sufficient material  before  me  to
enable me to substitute my own decision. The Judge's error  of  law  relates
to the assessment of risk on return to Iraq.

12. The appellant's claimed fear is of forced  recruitment  into  Daesh.  At
[23] the Judge finds that the appellant has never been an individual  target
of Daesh. The appellant is not known to Daesh. Taking the  evidence  at  its
highest. All the appellant has done is discretely avoid a  general  call  to
arms. He is not known to Daesh; Daesh are not searching  for  him  and  have
not threatened him. His claim is really that he  fears  the  internal  armed
conflict in Iraq. I find, on the facts as the Judge found them  to  be,  the
appellant cannot succeed under the refugee convention.

13.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  comes  from  Diyala.  The
respondent intends to return him to Baghdad and insists that he  can  return
to his home area. The guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 clearly indicates  that  the  respondent's  position  is
wrong. If the appellant return to his home area  he  must  succeed  both  in
terms of article 15(c) of the qualification directive and on article 3  ECHR
grounds. The question for me to determine  becomes  whether  or  not  it  is
reasonable for the appellant to internally relocate.

14. The appellant is a Kurdish Sunni Muslim. He has only a  basic  grasp  of
the Arabic language. The background materials indicate  that  there  are  so
many internally displaced persons in Iraq that UNHCR refers  to  the  plight
of internally displaced people there as a humanitarian  crisis.  The  simple
question that I have to answer is whether or not it is  reasonable  to  make
the appellant a displaced person anywhere in Iraq.

15. I take the following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).




    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.


16. On the facts as the Judge found them to be, the  appellant  has  only  a
limited grasp of Arabic. He is  distinguishable  by  his  religion  and  his
ethnicity, and so will be viewed as a member of  a  minority  community.  He
has no network of support in Iraq. Although he is a Kurd, he has  not  lived
in IKR since he was 6 years old. With that profile, it cannot be  reasonable
to return the appellant to Iraq. If returned to Iraq the appellant would  be
treated as a Kurd who is not from IKR. As a Sunni Muslim and a young  single
Kurd the appellant would be treated as a man from a minority  ethnic  group.
The appellant no longer has a CSID; he  does  not  have  family  members  or
friends in Baghdad able to accommodate him; there is no suggestion that  the
appellant can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or  rent  accommodation;
He has no network of support in Iraq.  It is most likely that  he  will  not
have access to accommodation and employment within Iraq. He therefore  faces
the prospect of destitution if returned to Iraq.

17. Perhaps the appellant could be admitted to IKR for 10 days. That 10  day
period may be extended for a further 10 days. He would only have 20 days  to
try to  establish  himself  with  a  job  and  accommodation.  He  would  be
competing with other young men in a region which  is  starting  to  struggle
with an influx of refugees. As a non-Arab from a minority  group  without  a
means of support in Baghdad, there will  be  significant  obstacles  to  the
appellant negotiating his way from Baghdad to IKR.  Following  the  guidance
given in AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944, I find that  internal  relocation
is unduly harsh

18. The appellant is  therefore  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and
succeeds on article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

19. The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated  on  27  February  2017  is
tainted by material errors of law. The decision is set aside.

20. I substitute my own decision.

21. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds

22. The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

23. The appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 2 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




