
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13987/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 11 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Council.
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claimed to be Eritrean and appealed against a decision of
    the Respondent refusing his application for  international  protection.
    Following a hearing, and in a decision  promulgated  on  31  May  2019,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cope, dismissed his appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. This was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth on 26 June 2019. His reasons
    for so granting were: -

         "1.  At paragraph 81 of the decision the Judge has stated that  the
         Judge has given as much credit as the Judge could to the  Appellant
         for the degree of consistency accepted by the Judge that there  was
         both internally and with the background evidence in the Appellant's
         claim to be at  risk  of  death  or  persecutory  ill-treatment  if
         removed to Eritrea. The Judge goes on at paragraph 82 to state that
         the factors which might point towards the Appellant being a witness
         of truth are completely outweighed by the  difficulties  which  the
         Judge had identified. The Judge then went on to state  that  whilst
         the Judge would accept that some at least of  these  might  not  in
         themselves lead to his appeal being  refused  there  were  so  many
         difficulties, many of them  significant  in  themselves,  with  the
         evidence  that  they  could  not  be  classed  as   peripheral   or
         unimportant. At paragraph 83 the  Judge  referred  to  in  addition
         there being the  very  high  degree  of  implausibility  concerning
         significant parts of the Appellant's claim. It is arguably  unclear
         how the Judge has drawn  the  boundaries  between  the  consistency
         shown by the Appellant internally and with the background  evidence
         and the difficulties as the Judge refers to these identified in the
         decision. Given that the Judge accepted that some at least of these
         difficulties might not in  themselves  lead  to  the  appeal  being
         refused it is arguably unclear how  those  difficulties  have  been
         construed  in  the  credibility  exercise  given  that  the   Judge
         immediately proceeds  to  describe  many  of  the  difficulties  as
         significant in  themselves.  It  is  arguable  that  a  significant
         difficulty in relation to credibility would go to the  core  of  an
         account. The Judge refers to difficulties significant in themselves
         not falling within the classification, in effect, of peripheral  or
         unimportant. It is unclear where the boundary has been drawn by the
         Judge between inconsistency leading to a rejection  of  credibility
         and implausibility. The Judge has referred to a very high degree of
         implausibility concerning  significant  parts  of  the  Appellant's
         claim. It is arguably unclear how factors which might point towards
         the Appellant being a witness of truth as referred to by the  Judge
         at the opening of paragraph 82 of the decision are  capable  of  so
         pointing and thereby capable of being completely outweighed by  the
         difficulties to which the Judge refers if in fact they are affected
         by a very high  degree  of  implausibility  concerning  significant
         parts of the Appellant's claim given that  such  significant  parts
         must go to the core of the Appellant's account. At paragraph 84 the
         Judge concludes this part of the decision by reaching the view that
         the Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant had  shown  that  it
         was reasonably likely  that  he  had  been  telling  the  truth  in
         connection with his  claim  for  international  protection.  It  is
         arguably unclear how the standard of proof in  a  protection  claim
         has been applied by the Judge  given  the  conceptual  analysis  in
         relation to credibility and implausibility set  out  at  paragraphs
         81, 82 and 83 of the decision. At paragraph 85 of the decision  the
         Judge states that the Judge would make it clear that the Judge  did
         not believe that the events described  by  the  Appellant  actually
         took place. It is arguably unclear where the boundary lies  between
         belief as formulated by the Judge in this context and the  standard
         of proof set against  the  varying  concepts  referred  to  in  the
         preceding paragraphs. At paragraph 87 of  the  decision  the  Judge
         states that the Judge was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
         shown that it is reasonably likely that he had the specific fear of
         persecution or serious harm which he had claimed.  It  is  arguably
         unclear how the standard of reasonable likelihood has  been  geared
         to the standard of proof in the protection claim put forward by the
         Appellant given the conceptual analysis in relation  to  proof  set
         out from paragraph 81 of the decision onwards. It is arguable  that
         an insufficient analysis has been set out in relation to background
         material in assessing credibility. "


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4.  Both  representatives  indicated  to  me   that   they   found   Judge
    Hollingworth's grant of permission to appeal confusing and were  unable
    to understand it. They did though acknowledge that permission had  been
    granted on all grounds and in the circumstances the appeal proceeded by
    a consideration of whether the grounds drafted by Ms Cleghorn disclosed
    material errors within the Judge's decision.

 5. Ms Cleghorn put forward three grounds albeit that the vast majority  of
    her arguments related to the first which relates to a  submission  that
    the Judge's decision contains a  "paucity  of  reasoning".  The  second
    ground relates to the failure to  consider  country  guidance  and  the
    final ground perversity.

 6. Ms Cleghorn argued that at the nub  of  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's claim was the issue of whether or not  he  could
    speak Tigrinya. At interview, presumably for the purposes of  obtaining
    an interpreter, he was asked  which  language  he  spoke  and  he  said
    Amharic. He said the same in his SEF. He was asked a specific  question
    and he gave a specific answer. He has been consistent  throughout  that
    he understands some Tigrinya yet, she acknowledged, he has contradicted
    himself slightly in his  statements  by  saying  that  he  speaks  some
    Tigrinya also. She says that there are obvious reasons  for  this.  The
    Appellant wanted to conduct the interviews in the language that he felt
    most comfortable. There are she submitted "levels of  foreign  language
    speaking". She gave the example of a person being able to order  a  cup
    of  coffee  in  say  "French"  but  without   necessarily   considering
    themselves to be a French speaker. She submitted that this issue alone,
    in itself, is the only real reason that the claim  has  been  dismissed
    and is "not enough in the circumstances". The Judge has  accepted  that
    it is possible that the Appellant does not speak  Tigrinya  because  he
    has spent  most  of  his  life  in  Ethiopia  in  an  Amharic  speaking
    community, the friends of his father were all Amharic speaking, and the
    limited  education  he  had  was   within   Amharic   schools.   Whilst
    acknowledging that it is possible that this was the situation the Judge
    also finds it is consistent with someone who is not  from  Eritrea.  He
    does this at paragraph 47 of his decision. This, Ms Cleghorn submitted,
    did not afford the Appellant  the  "benefit  of  the  doubt"  from  the
    outset. The Judge, rather than assessing the evidence in the round  has
    indicated a predisposition toward not believing him.

 7. This predisposition  is  clear  throughout  the  rest  of  the  Judge's
    decision. For example,  he  notes  that  "Miss  Cornford  (Home  Office
    Presenting Officer) quite properly accepted that the Appellant  and  Ms
    [M] (witness) had been consistent (after  cross-examination)  in  their
    evidence to me about the circumstances that they had known  each  other
    in Ethiopia and Eritrea". Nonetheless the Judge goes on to  immediately
    find that the witness is untruthful.  There  is  no  justification,  Ms
    Cleghorn asserts, for such a conclusion.

 8. She then took me to the Judge's rejection of the  Appellant's  evidence
    when making enquiries at the Ethiopian embassy in London to see whether
    he would be accepted or regarded as an  Ethiopian  citizen.  The  Judge
    notes that if the account given by the Appellant and Ms [M]  are  taken
    at face value then "the replies apparently given by the  woman  at  the
    embassy are not necessarily based on him giving a truthful  account  of
    his circumstances to her. If he were  not  truthful  and  instead  gave
    false information then any assessment would not be reliable". Again, Ms
    Cleghorn submits that without any reasoning, other than his witness  is
    a liar and he must not have told the embassy staff the truth, the Judge
    has fallen  into  "assertion/speculation"  and  has  not  provided  any
    tangible  reason  to  doubt  the  Appellant's  evidence.  Ms   Cleghorn
    submitted  that  the  Judge's  "determination"  not  to  believe   this
    Appellant is pervasive throughout  his  assessment.  For  example,  his
    conclusion that the Appellant's  witness  cannot  be  believed  for  no
    reason  and  that  the  Appellant  must  not  have  given  the  correct
    information at the embassy and neither he nor his witness can again  be
    believed (for no reason) and instead of the Appellant learning  Amharic
    because he was immersed in  it  his  whole  life,  it  must  mean  that
    actually the Appellant is an Ethiopian.

 9. Further, the Judge has failed to apply relevant caselaw  (MA  (Disputed
    Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032). The Appellant's approach  to
    the embassy ought to have been considered in  the  context  of  country
    guidance but this has not been mentioned.

10. Beyond that, albeit that she accepted that the issue of  Pentecostalism
    was really at the periphery of the Appellant's claim, it  is  difficult
    to see  how  the  Judge  came  to  conclusions  that  he  did,  without
    specialist knowledge, not only of Pentecostalism but  of  how  services
    are conducted in Ethiopia. The Judge has failed to provide reasons  for
    coming to the conclusions that he did.

11. Beyond this, there is an  element  of  perversity  within  the  Judge's
    decision. At paragraph 81 the Judge states: -

         "81. I have given as much credit as I can to the Appellant for  the
         degree of consistency that I accept that there is, both  internally
         and with the background evidence, in his claim to  be  at  risk  of
         death or persecutory ill-treatment if he  were  to  be  removed  to
         Eritrea."


12. The Judge then goes on at paragraph 82 of his decision  to  state  that
    the factors which might point toward the Appellant being a  witness  of
    truth are outweighed by the difficulties that the Judge has identified.

13.  Ms  Cleghorn  submits  that  those  difficulties  are  no  more   than
    conclusions that the Appellant's  witness  is  not  telling  the  truth
    because the Judge says so, that neither the Appellant or  witness  told
    the truth at the embassy and that the Appellant speaks Amharic  because
    although it is possible that the  Appellant  does  not  speak  Tigrinya
    because although he has spent all but one year and eight months of  his
    life immersed in Amharic speaking communities it is equally  consistent
    with someone who is not from Eritrea, therefore he is not from  Eritrea
    because the Judge says so.

14. Ms Petterson argued that the Judge had  in  fact  developed  his  point
    regarding  the  issue  of  language  and  in  coming  to  his   adverse
    credibility findings did not simply rely on the issues identified by Ms
    Cleghorn in her submissions.  Consistency  does  not  necessarily  mean
    credibility. The Judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that  he
    did.  The  Judge  did  err  in  his  assessment  of   the   Appellant's
    Pentecostalism but, in terms of the decision as a whole, this was not a
    material error. The Judge was entitled not to accept  the  explanations
    that were given by the Appellant in  relation  to  issues  relating  to
    language. Adequate reasons have been given.

15. I find, despite the unhelpful grant of permission to  appeal,  that  Ms
    Cleghorn's grounds are made out. In essence I need deal with only  one.
    For the reasons put forward by Ms Cleghorn  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    adequately reason the decision that he has come to. In coming  to  this
    conclusion, I have carefully considered the  Judge's  decision  in  its
    entirety and I am not satisfied that it is one which would  enable  the
    losing party, the Appellant, to understand just why it is that  he  has
    not been believed. For example, the Judge has not  adequately  reasoned
    why he rejects consistent evidence from  both  the  Appellant  and  the
    witness. He acknowledges at paragraph 81 the level that this reached in
    terms of internal consistency and consistency with background evidence.
    The Judge though does not go on to explain why this was not enough.  He
    refers to there being  "so  many  difficulties"  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence that they cannot be  classed  as  peripheral  or  unimportant.
    However, those difficulties are not highlighted within his decision.

16. Ms Cleghorn's grounds "run into each other" but it seems to me that the
    inadequacy of reasoning within  the  adverse  credibility  findings  is
    sufficient, acknowledging as I do that  even  most  of  an  Appellant's
    story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it  is
    not true, to render the Judge's decision unsafe.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Cope.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date:  9  October
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

