
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13342/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 14 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                 MOHAMED [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher of Counsel instructed by ABN Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas promulgated on 3 July  2019  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  9  November  2018  on
    protection grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born  on  13  June  1984.  The
    Appellant entered the UK on 3 June 2010 pursuant to entry clearance  as
    a Tier 4 student valid until 15 November 2011. On 30 April 2018 he  was
    served with documents as an  overstayer.  On  2  May  2018  he  claimed
    asylum; a screening  interview  was  conducted  on  the  same  date.  A
    substantive asylum interview was held on 10 October 2018.


3.   The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  summarised  at
    paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "4. ... He stated that he helped people travelling to and from  Sri
         Lanka to Canada because he had been asked to do by a friend.  After
         his arrest, he became aware that the people he was  assisting  were
         involved in the LTTE.

         5. He stated that the two contacts called Ramaman and Bala were the
         ones who got him involved. He  assisted  them  between  2007  until
         December 2009. He stated that he was detained for  twelve  days  on
         the 22nd December 2009. He stated that he was  accused  of  helping
         the LTTE. He was able to apply and leave Sri Lanka with  a  Student
         Visa in 2010. He stated that there is an arrest warrant for him  in
         Sri Lanka because he breached his reporting conditions. He believes
         that if he returns to Sri Lanka he will be arrested,  detained  and
         "maybe they will kill me"."


4.   Written Submissions prepared by  the  Appellant's  counsel  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal sought to emphasise aspects of his  'profile',  and
    to argue that this gave rise  to  a  risk  of  persecution  within  the
    framework of the country guidance in GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC).  Pertinent  elements
    were pleaded as: arrest, detention and ill-treatment in  2009;  leaving
    detention on payment of a bribe and being placed on reporting condition
    that was breached; passing through  the  airport  undetected  with  the
    assistance of an agent; the authorities maintaining a continued adverse
    interest in him after leaving detention; and the issuing of  an  arrest
    warrant. The Appellant also pleaded that he had a deteriorating  mental
    health condition and  that  there  would  be  insufficient  psychiatric
    treatment available to him in Sri Lanka. The Appellant  further  relied
    upon 'diaspora  activity',  specifically  being  involved  in  pro-LTTE
    demonstrations  and  the  Transnational  Government  of   Tamil   Eelam
    ('TGTE'), an organisation proscribed in Sri Lanka.  (See  e.g.  Written
    Submission at paragraph 2)


5.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')  dated  9  November  2018.   The
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had been accused of  being
    an LTTE supporter, or that he was ever arrested and detained,  or  that
    he was a genuine supporter of Tamil Eelam, or that he was wanted by the
    authorities in Sri Lanka (see summary of findings at  paragraph  50  of
    the RFRL).


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 3 July 2019.  Essentially  the
    First-tier Tribunal rejected the credibility of the Appellant's account
    of events in Sri Lanka, characterising aspects of his account variously
    as  "not...  at  all  convincing  or  plausible"  (paragraph  47),  and
    "concocted" (paragraph 50); supporting documentary evidence from  a  JP
    in Sri Lanka was considered to  be  "of  little  corroborative  weight"
    (paragraph 56), and a 'scarring report'  not  to  "greatly  assist  his
    claim" (paragraph 58). The Judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant's
    mental health condition "is in any way related to well-founded fear  of
    persecution", and otherwise considered  that  his  symptoms  could  not
    avail him in immigration terms (paragraph 59). The Appellants political
    activities  in  the  UK  were  found  to  be  "entirely  opportunistic"
    (paragraph 64).


8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 13 August 2019.


Consideration of 'Error of Law' challenge

9.   I am persuaded that there is merit in  two  aspects  of  the  challenge
    raised against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


10.  At the core  of  the  Appellant's  case  is  his  claimed  activity  in
    assisting persons to leave Sri  Lanka.  In  his  asylum  interview  the
    Appellant said that he had been "helping some Tamil  youths"  (question
    34), but denied that he had known at the time that  any  of  them  were
    LTTE members. He had become involved through a classmate, Ramanan,  who
    had introduced him to Bala (questions 42 and 43);  on  the  Appellant's
    account Bala was the principal mover in the  operation;  the  Appellant
    was asked to assist Tamil youths not fluent  in  Sinhala  in  obtaining
    passports and documents. By  way  of  context,  at  the  interview  the
    Appellant referred to the heightened security situation at the time:

         "So at this time 2007-8, the war was at  a  severe  level  at  LTTE
         members were fleeing the country. All around the country there were
         checkpoint and everything. So  he  wanted  me  to  help,  not  just
         because of  LTTE  members,  in  Sri  Lanka,  whoever  cannot  speak
         Sinhala, mean they could be from the north. They could detain  them
         for no reason. Bala wanted me to help these people  to  go  to  the
         passport office to do the documents for them." (question 43)


11.  At question 49 the Appellant was asked if Bala had ever spoken  to  him
    about the conflict. He replied "No, nothing about LTTE. He was  telling
    me about the police treating these people, just  because  they  do  not
    know  the  language,  the  basic  difficulties  getting   things   like
    passports, so I just wanted to help those people."


12.  The Appellant gave further information at interview in respect  of  the
    location of the passport office (question 44) and the number of  people
    he had helped (question 50). He also  described  the  process  at  some
    length and in some detail (questions 51-64, and 71).


13.  Although the Appellant spoke of wanting to help 'those people',  it  is
    also apparent that he thought that in due course Bala  would  help  him
    reach Canada (e.g. see at questions 42 and 43); he was  also  paid  for
    his work (question 65).


14.  At question 67 the Appellant was asked  if  there  was  any  indication
    that the people he was  helping  were  affiliated  with  the  LTTE.  He
    responded in these terms:

         "Most were innocent people, even when I was talking to  them,  they
         would not talk about the fighting or anything. They just  say  they
         are fleeing the  country,  they  said  they  had  problems  in  the
         country, the government was cracking down on things by the  end  of
         the war. Even when I was in Colombo they would  check  my  ID,  the
         police department, there were checkpoints all over the place.  When
         it was someone who could not  speak  Sinhalese,  without  ID,  they
         definitely going to take him, it was difficult for them to stay  in
         Colombo."


15.  In  my  judgement  it  is  adequately  clear  that  the  Appellant  was
    describing the real phenomenon of many Tamil youths  seeking  to  leave
    Sri Lanka - irrespective of any actual  involvement  with  the  LTTE  -
    because of (at the very least subjective) fears of persecution.


16.  It is the Appellant's case that he was arrested on  22  December  2009,
    and questioned about an individual, Suresh, whom he had  helped  a  few
    days earlier - including, relatively unusually,  dropping  him  at  the
    airport. The Appellant claims that he was accused of helping the  LTTE.
    At interview he was asked if the suspected connection was specified  to
    him (question 82):  the  Appellant  said  that  on  his  third  day  of
    questioning Suresh had been mentioned, and, it  appears  to  have  been
    suggested to the Appellant that Suresh had informed on him. (I pause to
    note that in an interrogation, the  suggestion  that  the  interrogator
    already has information that condemns the  suspect  might  possibly  be
    employed as  a  tactic  of  questioning  irrespective  of  whether  the
    interrogator actually has such information.)


17.  At question 46, the Appellant claimed that  he  did  not  know  he  was
    helping the LTTE until he was arrested.


18.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt  with  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    account in the following way:

         "47. The Tribunal  does  not  find  his  account  of  his  asserted
         activities in Sri Lanka to be at all convincing  or  plausible.  He
         states that he was reliant upon a person called Ramaman because  he
         asked him to help him and he did not feel  that  he  could  refuse,
         because he wished to emigrate to Canada. His intention to leave Sri
         Lanka therefore existed prior to his claimed difficulties.

         48. It is neither plausible nor  conceivable  that  this  Appellant
         would not have been informed that he was assisting LTTE members  in
         Sri Lanka.

         49. The period 2007-2009 was a period of effective war in Sri Lanka
         and it is inconceivable that the Appellant, a  student  would  have
         asked no questions or been informed about the  risks  of  assisting
         LTTE members. It makes no sense.

         50. In the view of the Tribunal, the Appellant has simply concocted
         this claim and simply concocted the assertion that some call Suresh
         named him as an assistant for the LTTE."


19.  In my judgement in reaching this conclusion the  Judge  has  failed  to
    engage with the detailed evidence of the Appellant at interview  as  to
    'process'. I consider  an  evaluation  of  this  should  have  been  an
    inherent part of an assessment of whether the Appellant's  account  was
    'plausible'.


20.  Moreover, and more particularly, I cannot identify in the Decision  any
    sustainable basis for the conclusion that the  Appellant's  account  in
    this regard was 'concocted'. The Judge's reasoning rests  on  it  being
    'inconceivable' that the Appellant would not have  known  that  he  was
    assisting  LTTE  members.  Although  the  Judge  has   identified   the
    heightened security situation, he has not engaged with the  Appellant's
    explanation that there were numbers  of  essentially  'innocent'  Tamil
    youths seeking to flee the country precisely because of the  heightened
    security situation. It is  a  matter  of  record  that  throughout  the
    conflict in Sri Lanka the Respondent and  the  IAC  have  received  and
    rejected numerous asylum claims from persons who have  fled  Sri  Lanka
    with the assistance of agents on the basis that such persons  were  not
    members  of,  or  otherwise  significantly  connected  to,  the   LTTE.
    Manifestly, there has been a significant 'market' in people seeking  to
    leave Sri Lanka: necessarily not all such 'customers'  will  have  been
    members of the LTTE, or even helpers  or  supporters;  'customers'  for
    agents will reasonably likely have included people  not  involved  with
    the LTTE but who had fallen  under  suspicion,  people  just  generally
    concerned about the  security  situation,  and  mere  opportunists  and
    economic migrants; some person leaving Sri Lanka  may  even  have  been
    seeking to evade the LTTE. I also observe that  it  is  not  clear  the
    extent to which genuine LTTE members make use of  the  same  agents  as
    others, or the extent to which they might have had  access  to  a  more
    exclusive network of support - for example exiting  Sri  Lanka  through
    LTTE controlled territory in the North towards India before  travelling
    beyond Asia.


21.  The Judge's reasoning rests on the  premise  that  Bala  was  knowingly
    assisting LTTE members: it seems to me that that is not an  established
    premise, and no consideration has been given to the possibility that it
    was otherwise. Allowing for the possibility  that  Bala  was  knowingly
    assisting LTTE members, it seems to me not remotely inconceivable  that
    Bala would not have volunteered such information  to  the  Appellant  -
    whether asked or not. Indeed in this context the Judge's  reasoning  is
    significantly undermined by his own  apparent  acknowledgement  to  the
    effect that  if  the  Appellant  were  involved  as  described  he  was
    essentially "a dupe" (paragraph 53). It also seems to  me,  recognising
    the Appellant to have been a young man still in education engaging with
    an internationally travelling Canada-based lawyer, out of whom he hoped
    to secure some personal advantage in due  course,  he  would  not  have
    considered it his place to question Bala.


22.  The Judge's reasoning also rests on the premise  that  Suresh  actually
    was an LTTE member. There is no objective evidence for this:  it  seems
    to me that it cannot be dismissed out of hand - and therefore  pursuant
    to Karanakaran is a relevant consideration -  that  in  relating  their
    suspicions in this regard to the Appellant, the  security  forces  were
    possibly misconceived, or not being truthful.


23.  In all such circumstances I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    characterisation of the notion that the Appellant was unaware  that  he
    was assisting LTTE members as "neither plausible nor conceivable" to be
    unsustainable to an extent that it is an error of law. Plainly this was
    a significant and key element in the Judge's reasoning in rejecting the
    Appellant's account, and therefore  claim  for  protection.  It  was  a
    significantly material error such as to require  the  decision  in  the
    appeal to be set aside.


24.  I also  find  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's consideration of the Appellant's sur place  activities.  The
    Judge addresses these at paragraph 60-64. The Judge concludes that  the
    Appellant's political activities in the UK "are entirely  opportunistic
    and had been adopted in an attempt to add weight to  a  claim  that  is
    otherwise lacking in any credibility or plausibility" (paragraph 64).


25.  The Judge's reasoning at paragraphs 61-63 is, in  my  judgement,  clear
    and  rational,  and  sustainably  supports  the  conclusion  that   the
    Appellant was being  'opportunistic'  in  engaging  himself  with  such
    activities. However, the Judge failed to go on to  consider  what  risk
    might  arise  to  the  Appellant  by   reason   of   such   activities,
    notwithstanding his lack of any genuine conscientious commitment to the
    cause of Tamil separatism. This was to fail  to  reach  a  decision  in
    respect of an aspect of the Appellant's protection claim.


26.  Had this been the only error of law, it may  well  have  been  possible
    for the Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision in this regard, or  even
    to conclude that ultimately the Appellant would have  been  seen  as  a
    mere 'hanger on' (cf. BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)
    Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and KS (Burma) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 67),
    and that no risk would  arise.  However,  for  the  reasons  identified
    above, it is not  the  only  error:  this  issue  may  be  reconsidered
    pursuant to the  setting  aside  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


27.  The Appellant has raised other bases of challenge to  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, but I have concluded that in significant  part
    these lack merit, being more in the nature of  disagreements  with  the
    outcome than examples of error of law. In my judgement  the  Judge  was
    entitled to have regard to the delay in claiming asylum as  an  adverse
    factor in assessing credibility: even if it might be  said  that  there
    was no full engagement with the  Appellant's  offered  explanations  in
    this regard - that he had never wanted to claim asylum, and was  hoping
    a change in government in 2015 would  lead  to  improvements  -  it  is
    difficult to see how such matters adequately explain the delay at least
    from the expiry of leave  in  2011  until  2015.  The  Judge  was  also
    entitled to conclude that the 'scarring' report  added  little  to  the
    Appellant's account - although it is to be acknowledged that the  Judge
    was in part informed by his overall assessment of  the  credibility  of
    the Appellant, a matter which I have concluded is to  be  vitiated  for
    error of law.


28.  The grounds of challenge to the effect that the Judge appears  to  have
    disregarded the power of bribery and the extent of  corruption  in  Sri
    Lanka - and how this might impact upon an evaluation of the Appellant's
    account of being released from detention and the intervention of  a  JP
    friend of the Appellant's father, and the Appellant's ability  to  pass
    through Colombo airport - are of more weight.  However,  because  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal requires  to  be
    set aside for the reasons identified above, it is not necessary for  me
    to reach a definitive conclusion in this regard.


29.  Similarly, I  do  not  propose  to  engage  in  an  evaluation  of  the
    challenge in respect of the Appellant's mental health.  No doubt, given
    the possibly fluid nature of a mental health  condition  the  Appellant
    will wish to bring forward more up-to-date evidence in the  context  of
    remaking the decision in the appeal - both  as  to  his  condition  and
    symptoms, and the availability of treatment in Sri Lanka. The extent to
    which such evidence might provide corroboration of past events, and the
    extent to which it might indicate such difficulties on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka to support a human  rights  claim  irrespective  of  the  claimed
    history of events in Sri Lanka, will be matters for the  next  judicial
    decision-maker.


30.  Although I have indicated above that there are aspects  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision that in the abstract are  sustainably  reasoned,
    because of the nature of my finding of error of law and  it  impact  on
    the issue of credibility, in my judgement it is not possible  to  remit
    the appeal on a partial basis, or to preserve any findings of fact. The
    decision in the appeal will need to be remade with all issues at large.


Notice of Decision

31.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


32.  The decision in the appeal requires to be remade before the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lucas  with
    all issues at large.


33.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 13 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
