
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13289/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th December 2017                   |On 5th January 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                    M J F
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr R Worthington, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by M J F  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Batiste,
    promulgated on the 24th March  2017,  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against
    refusal of his Protection Claim. I extend the anonymity direction  made
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. M J F is an Iranian national who was born on the 22nd December 1993. He
    sought asylum on  the  basis  that  he  had  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity and would thus be persecuted as an apostate upon return to
    Iran. Judge Batiste found that the appellant was not a genuine  convert
    and there is no challenge to that finding in the present appeal. It  is
    however submitted that the Tribunal erred in its approach to  the  fact
    that, as at the date of the hearing, the  appellant  had  an  Instagram
    account containing overtly Christian material and a  visible  Cross  on
    his finger. It was argued before Judge Batiste that these matters  were
    likely to lead to the Iranian authorities questioning the appellant  on
    return, thereby placing him at risk of persecution  by  reason  of  his
    imputed (if not actual) religious faith.

 3. In dealing with the above submission, Judge Batiste said as follows:

         [41] On the evidence that was placed before me I do accept that  he
         has  placed  such  images  on  Instagram  and  they  are   publicly
         accessible. Equally as I am not an expert on  tattoos,  it  may  be
         that he has created a genuine tattoo on his finger (I looked at the
         finger close up and was  unable  to  ascertain  whether  it  was  a
         genuine  or  transferred  tattoo).  I  am,  on  all  the  evidence,
         satisfied that these are not genuine outpourings  of  his  newfound
         faith, as was suggested by the Appellant. I find  on  the  evidence
         that these were blatant attempts to engineer a sur place  claim  as
         an insurance policy for his asylum claim. [42] I do accept that  if
         the authorities on return did see the tattoo of a cross or examined
         his Instagram account, it would cause suspicions that might lead to
         significant problems for the Appellant. However I am not  satisfied
         on the evidence that the Appellant would allow that to  occur.  The
         Appellant could easily remove his Instagram account and delete  the
         images that linked him to the Christian faith. He could also  alter
         his privacy  settings.  In  the  absence  of  other  factors  I  am
         satisfied that the authorities would not therefore be aware of  the
         images that previously appeared on his Instagram page. Equally with
         regard to the tattoo, I am aware that Tattoos  can  be  removed  or
         indeed covered up with other body art. As such if the Appellant  is
         aware that he is likely to be returning to  Iran,  I  am  satisfied
         that he will remove or cover up the tattoo in a  manner  that  will
         mean that this does not cause him to be at risk on return.

 4. Before turning to the main thrust of Mr Worthington's submission, it is
    first necessary to deal  with  his  suggestion,  made  in  the  renewed
    application for permission to appeal,  that  the  judge  had  impliedly
    accepted (to the  lower  standard  of  proof)  that  the  mark  on  the
    appellant's finger was a "genuine" tattoo. It is however clear from the
    judge's remarks that he was in fact unable to make any finding  at  all
    on this point. The appellant had thus failed to discharge the burden of
    proving that the mark on his finger was indelible.

 5. At the risk of oversimplifying it,  the  essence  of  Mr  Worthington's
    argument was that Judge Batiste had erred in making findings  that  the
    Instagram account and/or mark on  the  appellant's  finger  would  have
    ceased to exist at the point of return to Iran. He should instead  have
    based his assessment of the risk on return upon  the  fact  that  these
    things existed at the date of the hearing.  He  based  this  submission
    upon the decision in Ravichandran v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [1996] Imm AR 97 which, he argued,  was  authority  for  the
    proposition that the risk on return to the country of origin in  asylum
    cases should be judged exclusively upon the facts and circumstances  as
    at the date of hearing.  I  reject  that  argument  for  the  following
    reasons.

 6. Firstly, the very essence of a grant of asylum is that the refugee will
    be at risk of persecution on return to  his  country  of  origin.  This
    necessarily involves looking forward to the future. It would  therefore
    be surprising if the person making the assessment was confined  to  the
    facts and circumstances as they existed at the date of the  hearing  of
    the appeal, and I am satisfied this is not an accurate characterisation
    of the principle in Ravichandran. Rather, it was held in that case that
    asylum appeals should be determined by reference to the position at the
    time of the appellate decision rather than by reference to the  factual
    situation at the time of the original decision against which the appeal
    was brought. Secondly, if Mr Worthington's restatement of the principle
    were to be applied literally, it would follow that the appellant  would
    be entitled to succeed in circumstances where he had simply  inked  the
    symbol of a  cross  on  his  finger  notwithstanding  that  this  would
    inevitably disappear on the very  next  occasion  that  he  washed  his
    hands. That would plainly be absurd.  Thirdly, the appellant's state of
    mind at the date of the hearing was just as much  a  current  state  of
    affairs  as  was  the  existence  (permanent  or  temporary)   of   the
    appellant's Instagram page and the mark upon his finger. The judge  was
    thus entitled to conclude that it was the appellant's present intention
    (as at the date of hearing) to remove both of  these  things  prior  to
    returning to Iran.

 7. I therefore conclude that Judge Batiste did not make any error of  law,
    whether material to the decision to dismiss the appeal against  refusal
    of the Protection Claim or otherwise.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 26th December 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
