
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13399/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2019                        | On 8 May 2019                     |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     JMK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Hodson instructed by Elder Rahimi solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(S I 2008 front/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  and  until  a
Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is  granted  anonymity
and no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall
directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant  in  this   determination
identified as JMK.  The order applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with the order  could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.





                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a decision promulgated on 14 January 2019 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Stedman dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent refusing her claim for international protection.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought on 3 grounds which I summarise:

     i. The First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law in  failing  to  deal
        with the appellant's explanation about the conduct of the  interview
        and the discrepancies that  arose  evening  her  assessment  of  the
        appellant's credibility about her historical  account  of  detention
        and ill-treatment and has unquestioningly adopted  the  respondent's
        conclusions.

    ii. The First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law and her  approach  to
        the assessment of the appellant's credibility failing to  take  into
        account the medical evidence of the appellant suffering  from  post-
        traumatic stress disorder until  after  she  had  decided  that  the
        appellant lacked credibility, so that she  had  not  considered  the
        impact vulnerability may have had on her interview.

   iii. The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to take prior  account  of  the
        letter the appellant provided from UDPS in the overall assessment of
        the appellant's credibility.

 3. I find no merit in the contention of ground 1 that the judge had failed
    to take account of the appellant's own explanations. At paragraph 6 the
    judge identifies  the  discrepancies  relied  upon  by  the  respondent
    relating to the asylum interview records. At  paragraph  12  the  judge
    indicates clearly that she has read  the  witness  statement  when  she
    identifies that between paragraph 10 to 26 of the witness statement the
    appellant dealt with the challenges raised in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter. The judge would have had those explanations in  mind  when  she
    turns at  paragraph  25  to  provide  her  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant explanations when she states that she"  accepts  that  it  is
    perfectly reasonable  for  an  appellant,  in  an  interview  situation
    (particularly one where the appellant complained that the  interviewing
    officer was being harsh - which I accept was the case) to forget  dates
    or forget certain details. Such matters would not  necessarily  detract
    from the centrepiece  of  an  account."  Accordingly,  there  is  ample
    reference to the explanations offered.  Further  and  contrary  to  the
    particularisation of the ground, the judge has  not  just  adopted  the
    conclusions of the respondent because at paragraph 26  the  judge  sets
    out that she has reached her own conclusion that the inconsistencies as
    to whether she was detained just a day or 2, or whether in fact she was
    held in detention from February until May when she  left  the  country,
    have been inadequately explained. The  reference  to  the  reasons  for
    refusal merely indicates agreement.

 4.  I find force in ground 2. At paragraph  8  the  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant's claimed history of sexual violence  and  her  diagnosis  of
    PTSD and of her being under the care  of  the  community  health  team.
    Further at 12 when outlining the documentary evidence, the judge  again
    reminds herself that the appellant is a  vulnerable  witness  and  "had
    diagnosed medical conditions".  Nonetheless,  making  her  findings  on
    credibility at 25 onwards, the judge does not  give  any  reasoning  in
    respect of the impact on credibility of the appellant  suffering  PTSD.
    As the ground points out the judge  does  not  deal  with  the  medical
    evidence in the consideration and findings section until after  finding
    the appellant's account of historic detention incredible. The inference
    is that she rejects the explanation  that  PTSD  arises  from  rape  in
    detention because she  has  found  the  appellant  appellant's  account
    incredible, rather than showing that in reaching a holistic  assessment
    of credibility she has taken into account that  the  appellant  suffers
    from post-traumatic stress disorder and any impact that that might have
    on her  apparently  inconsistent  evidence  to  the  respondent.  I  am
    satisfied that that is an erroneous approach.

 5.  Whilst  the  grounds  do  not  expressly  identify   incoherence   and
    inconsistencies by cross-reference to the detail of  the  discrepancies
    identified in the decision that her vulnerability could  have  impacted
    upon in determining the credibility of her account, and  nor  does  the
    medical evidence because  it  did  not  deal  with  the  issue  of  the
    relationship of the diagnosis to the discrepancies identified, I cannot
    say with certainty that the medical evidence could not  have  made  any
    difference to the assessment of  credibility  had  it  been  approached
    through the lens of that diagnosis.  The error is material.

 6. Ground 3 takes issue with the judge's  assessment  of  the  documentary
    evidence from UDPS. There were 2 letters the  submissions  about  which
    the judge has set out in detail between paragraphs 13 and 16,  and  the
    reasoning shows good familiarity with the documents and their contents.
    Contrary to the grounds the judge was clearly aware of the  point  made
    behalf of the appellant in these grounds that the author of the  letter
    contacted a named person in charge of the  appellant's  home  area  who
    confirmed her membership and that she was in charge of  propaganda  and
    mobilisation, and  that  she  had  been  arrested  and  detained  on  3
    occasions. The judge was entitled to  find  that  the  letter  was  not
    determinative and assess it as part of the evidence in the round vis  a
    vis credibility. The difficulty is that the  error  above  infects  the
    holistic assessment of the evidence so that the findings cannot  stand.
    The remake of the decision will require the judge take account  of  the
    vulnerability of the appellant in the context of this evidence too.

 7. It follows from my findings that the decision of the judge  contains  a
    material  error  of  law  going  to  the  root  of  the  assessment  of
    credibility so that none of the findings can stand.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

 8. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, section 12 (2)
    of the TCE a 2007 requires me remake it myself or to remit the case  to
    the First-tier with directions. In this case all the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge have been set aside because of  an  incorrect
    approach to  the  evidence.  The  factual  matrix  of  this  appeal  is
    disputed; I conclude that the decision should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to determine the appeal de novo.



Conclusions:

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set the decision  aside  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, no findings preserved.

11. Anonymity: The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant  to  rule  45
    (4) (I) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.
    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

12. No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 29 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
