
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13821/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 January 2019                             |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Greer, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant IA was born in 1980 and is a  female  citizen
    of Malaysia.  She has a daughter living with her in the United  Kingdom
    (AS) who was born in 2003 and is now aged  15  years.   By  a  decision
    dated 14 December 2017, the appellant was refused asylum in the  United
    Kingdom.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew Davies)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 20 June 2018, allowed the appeal on
    asylum grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found that the appellant was entitled to asylum on the  basis
    of being a member of a particular social group (she has  a  mixed  race
    child born out of wedlock).  The judge rejected part of the appellant's
    account (that she had a fear of her ex-husband's loan shark and claimed
    that her parents have disowned her on account of the illegitimate birth
    of her child).  However, the judge accepted that the appellant's  mixed
    race child had been discriminated against in Malaysia.  The  judge  had
    the benefit of a number of expert reports.  These dealt primarily  with
    the likely deterioration of the  appellant's  daughter's  mental  state
    should she return to Malaysia.  The appellant claims that her  daughter
    was  born  following  the  appellant  being   raped   by   her   former
    African/American boyfriend.  The judge observed [33] that Dr  Singh,  a
    consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, had concluded that  there
    was  a  significant  risk  to  the  daughter's  mental   health   being
    significantly affected if  she  returned  to  Malaysia  without  social
    support networks and "individual resilience" in the face of  adversity.
    The judge also observed [34]  that  it  would  be  "optimistic  in  the
    extreme" to  expect  a  strategy  to  be  put  in  place  in  Malaysia,
    educational institutions or Social Services or  the  healthcare  system
    which might meet the requirements indicated by Dr  Singh.   It  is  not
    stated expressly in the decision but it is clear that  the  absence  or
    likely absence of such systems would be true throughout Malaysia.

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge found  that  the  appellant
    had overstated her case (viz. he reliance on  the  loan  shark  claim).
    First, it is not clear why that is relevant to the findings  which  the
    judge made in favour of the appellant and which concern matters  wholly
    discrete from the loan shark claim.  Secondly, the main thrust  of  the
    Secretary of State's  grounds  is  that  social  discrimination  cannot
    amount to persecution.  This, however, is to fail to take into  account
    the effect of the social discrimination upon the appellant's  daughter,
    in particular her propensity to self-harm as a result of being bullied,
    abused and discriminated against.   Mr  Greer,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, submitted that  the  experts  were  clear  that  if  support
    systems were not in place for the  appellant  and  her  daughter,  then
    further and serious self-harm was  a  likely  consequence.   The  judge
    agreed and made findings of fact accordingly.  The  grounds  of  appeal
    amount, in my opinion, to little more than a disagreement with findings
    available to the judge on the evidence.  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    taken into account all relevant evidence and  has  not  had  regard  to
    irrelevant matters.  I  find  that  the  judge  assessed  the  evidence
    accurately and he has reached findings which were available to  him  on
    that evidence.  The grounds do amount to a mere  disagreement  together
    with the suggestion that the judge should have rejected the entirety of
    the appellant's claim simply because he rejected part of  it.  For  the
    reasons I have given, I find that the grounds are without  merit.   The
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 10 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

