
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13927/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2018                   |On 21 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            Hastyar Ahmad Rasoul
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 16 November  2016
    refusing his asylum claim and refusing to grant humanitarian protection
    and also dismissing the human rights appeal.

2.   I need to say little about the judge's decision, since it was  appealed
    and subsequently in a decision promulgated on 13 March 2018 I concluded
    that there was an error of law in the judge's  decision  in  concluding
    that the appellant would be able to obtain preclearance  from  the  KRI
    authorities and would be granted temporary leave to enter.  In fact  he
    is not from the KRI but from Kirkuk and clearly therefore there had  to
    be an evaluation of his ability to return in the  first  place.   There
    was also an issue as to how he might  be  able  to  get  the  necessary
    documentation to return to Kirkuk and any difficulties he might face in
    Baghdad.

3.   There was subsequently a hearing listed for 25  April  2018,  at  which
    time it said by Ms McCarthy who was instructed  by  Quality  Solicitors
    (AZ Law) that they had not been able to contact the appellant  and  had
    last spoken to him on 9 January 2018.  The matter was adjourned  partly
    for the reason of his  absence  and  also  because  there  was  country
    guidance forthcoming which was likely to be of assistance in  resolving
    issues in the case.

4.   Ms McCarthy appeared again at a hearing on  28  August  2018  at  which
    time she confirmed there was still no response from the  appellant  but
    the  country  guidance  authority  was  now  out  and  she  sought   an
    adjournment during which time  the  appellant's  representatives  would
    continue to seek contact, but asked that a date for hearing  be  fixed.
    The date was fixed for today,  the  5  December  2018.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  His representatives  came
    off the record on 16 November 2018.

5.   Mr Melvin had handed up written submissions together  with  authorities
    and background evidence referred to in those submissions.

6.   I am satisfied that notice of the date, time and place of  the  hearing
    was sent to the appellant  and  to  his  representatives  and  that  is
    appropriate to proceed to decide the appeal.  I do so on the  basis  of
    the documentation before me.

7.   The judge found the appellant to lack credibility.  He had  claimed  to
    be at risk on return to Iraq fearing attempts to take  revenge  against
    him on the basis of his father who is a  member  of  the  Ba'ath  Party
    killing many Kurdish people, claiming to have been attacked previously,
    and also claiming to be at risk from ISIS.  He is from Kirkuk.

8.   As I say, the judge found the appellant's  claim  to  lack  credibility
    and concluded that he would be able to obtain travel documents  through
    the Iraqi Embassy in London with the assistance  of  his  relatives  in
    Kirkuk, remarking also that he would be able to obtain preclearance  in
    the KRI authorities and be granted temporary leave to enter.  As  noted
    above, an error of law in that regard  was  identified  in  my  earlier
    decision.

9.   The grounds of appeal contended that the  judge  had  failed  to  apply
    country guidance to assess the appellant's ability  to  reapply  for  a
    laissez-passer in return to Iraq and apply  for  a  CSID  once  he  was
    there.  Reliance was placed in the grounds on  the  Tribunal's  country
    guidance decision in AA [2017] UKUT 00119 (IAC).

10.  In his written submissions Mr Melvin, who appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, argued that bearing in mind inter alia  the  second
    report of Dr Joffe of 20 March 2018, the Iraqi authorities were now  in
    total control in Iraq and had been since the end of 2017.  He  referred
    inter alia to a decision of Sir Ross Cranston sitting as a Judge of the
    High Court in Amin [2017] EWHC 2417 (Admin), stating that the Secretary
    of State was entitled to take the realities on the ground into  account
    including the fact that Kirkuk was  no  longer  a  contested  area  and
    country guidance cases had to give way  to  the  realities.   The  Home
    Office's written submissions make the point that it is clear  from  the
    objective evidence that Kirkuk has been under the protection of Kurdish
    forces since April 2015.  It is argued that the evidence shows that the
    area of Kirkuk has not for some time come anywhere  near  reaching  the
    Article 15(c) threshold.  It was also  argued  that  there  are  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart from the  assessment  in
    AA that any areas of Iraq engage the Article 15(c) high threshold.  The
    submission is that there is no longer a high  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence anywhere in Iraq  such  that  substantial  grounds  exist  for
    believing that an applicant would, solely by being present there,  face
    a real risk threatening their life or person.

11.  With regard to the CSID issue, reliance is placed by the respondent  on
    the October CPIN Note "Iraq: internal relocation,  civil  documentation
    and returns".  There is it said that inter alia that there is a central
    register (civil status records) backup in  Baghdad  that  includes  all
    civil records of all of the provinces in  the  event  of  any  form  of
    damage or destruction.  This covers all records from 1957.

12.  The point is made that, given that the  appellant  was  found  to  lack
    credibility, the claim that he made  to  have  lost  all  contact  with
    family members in Iraq was to be treated with scepticism and given that
    he had provided  vague  evidence  that  he  had  an  Iraqi  passport/ID
    documents prior to coming to the United Kingdom, there  were  documents
    that existed  which  could  prove  his  identity  and  he  was  clearly
    deliberately withholding them in an attempt to avoid removal.   It  was
    argued that since he previously held an Iraqi  passport  there  was  no
    reason why he could not approach the Iraqi authorities  in  the  UK  to
    obtain a replacement passport/laissez-passer.

13.  There is also reference in the CSID into to the remarks  of  the  Iraqi
    ambassador that most returnees may be in possession of copies of  their
    national IDs which may have not been  disclosed  previously.   On  this
    basis it is argued that the appellant would be able to obtain  identity
    documents that would be sufficient for him to obtain a CSID  either  in
    the UK or on return to Baghdad within a reasonable period of time which
    would give him access to state agencies  to  enable  the  avoidance  of
    destitution, and he would also be eligible to apply for  the  Voluntary
    Return Scheme (relocation package) to  assist  with  accommodation  and
    onward travel Baghdad to his home area.

14.  I am grateful  to  Mr  Melvin  for  the  written  submissions  and  the
    attached documentation.  No further evidence has been put in on  behalf
    of the appellant, and it would appear that for most of this year he has
    been out of contact with his representatives.

15.  I am satisfied from the documentation provided first that Kirkuk is  no
    longer a contested area, as noted by Sir Ross Cranston in  Amin,  given
    the driving out of ISIS from the city, the  Kurdish  forces  appear  to
    accept that Kirkuk should be governed from Baghdad.  The Article  15(c)
    threshold is not crossed in Kirkuk and indeed there are grounds to  say
    that it is not crossed anywhere in Iraq in fact.  As a consequence  the
    evidence does not show that the appellant  would  face  problems  of  a
    level such as to make unlawful his return in travelling to Kirkuk after
    arrival in Baghdad.

16.  As regards the CSID issue, I am  satisfied  that  the  most  up-to-date
    evidence shows that there  is  a  central  register  in  Baghdad  which
    includes all the civil records of all  the  provinces  and  that  as  a
    consequence given that the appellant did give evidence that he  had  an
    Iraqi passport and ID documents  previously,  there  are  documents  in
    existence which could prove his identity.  I accept  that  it  has  not
    been shown that he could not approach  the  Iraqi  authorities  in  the
    United Kingdom to obtain a replacement passport/ laissez-passer.  It is
    open to him to approach the Iraqi Embassy in London  and  through  them
    obtain a CSID to enable him to return to Iraq and travel  from  Baghdad
    to Kirkuk.  As a consequence  his  claim  to  international  protection
    fails and his appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 8 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen








