
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13769/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 24 March 2021                 |On 15 April 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     KSY
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr  A  Briddock,  Counsel  instructed  by  Milestone
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   K Swinnerton promulgated on 8 January 2020 ("the Decision").  By the
   Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal challenging the
   Respondent's decision dated 27 November 2018 refusing his protection and
   human rights claims.


2. The Appellant is a national of Malaysia.  He claims that he arrived in
   the UK in February 2011.  He claimed asylum on 13 June 2018.  His asylum
   claim is based on his sexuality.  The Respondent did not accept the
   credibility of that claim.  The Judge similarly did not accept the claim
   as credible.  The majority of the credibility findings focus on the
   Appellant's life in the UK and relationships he claims to have had in the
   past and to have presently.

3. The Appellant's appeal was first dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Hamilton in a decision promulgated on 4 February 2019.  However, Judge
   Hamilton's decision was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis in
   a decision promulgated on 30 July 2019 and the appeal remitted for
   redetermination by the First-tier Tribunal.  It is in that way that the
   appeal came before Judge Swinnerton whose decision is under challenge
   before me.

4. The Appellant challenges the Decision on three grounds summarised as
   follows:


         Ground one: The Appellant did not have a fair hearing as the Judge
         descended into the
         arena.
         Ground two: The Judge failed to take into account certain evidence.
         Ground three: The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for some of
         his findings and/or
         failed to consider the evidence in the round.


5. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
   31 January 2020 in the following terms:


         "Ground 1 is without merit as the Judge was entitled to seek
         clarification of matters that had not been properly explained or
         explored by representatives who have a duty to assist the Tribunal
         but appear not to have done so.  The notes do not indicate that the
         Judge 'entered the arena'.
         Ground 2 is without merit as the Judge does not have to slavishly
         recite or make findings on every piece of evidence.
         Ground 3 is without merit as the Judge does not have to give
         reasons for reasons.  The findings were evidence-based and more
         than adequate."


6. On renewal of the application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal,
   permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan said to be on
   grounds two and three only.  I will come on to consider what was the
   effect of that grant. UTJ O'Callaghan extended time as the application
   was four days out of time.  He went on to explain the reasons for his
   decision to grant permission as follows:


         "... 4.  The grounds of appeal, drafted by counsel, are detailed.
         Ground 1 complains that a neutral observer would conclude that the
         appellant did not have a fair hearing as the Judge entered the
         arena.  Care has been taken by counsel to detail the substance of a
         number of questions asked by the Judge to the appellant, said to
         have been undertaken in the spirit of cross-examination.  Further,
         the conduct of the Judge is said to have been 'combative'.  The
         notice of appeal is not accompanied by a witness statement from
         counsel, the appellant or a solicitor attending the hearing before
         the Judge.  This is a mandatory requirement where it is contended
         that a litigant was deprived of his right to a fair hearing by
         reasons of events which occurred at the hearing itself: BW (witness
         statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC).  Such
         failure means that this ground must be considered to be unarguable.
         5.   Grounds 2 and 3 of the grounds of appeal are arguable.  The
         Tribunal will expect the appellant to address the materiality of
         the asserted errors.
         6.   The grounds advance arguable errors on a point of law and so I
         find that it is in the interests of justice for time to be extended
         so as to permit the appellant to bring his appeal."


7. Subsequently, by way of a Note and Directions, UTJ Gill reached the
   provisional view that it would be appropriate to determine the error of
   law issue on the papers.  The parties' view on that proposal were
   invited.  By written submissions dated 14 May 2020, the Appellant
   objected to the determination of the error of law issue on the papers
   unless the Tribunal was minded to find that the Decision contained an
   error.  By those submissions, the Appellant also purported to renew the
   application for permission to appeal on ground one.


8. By directions dated 2 July 2020, UTJ Finch ordered that the error of law
   issue be determined at a remote hearing.  She also directed that the
   Tribunal should send to the parties Judge Swinnerton's record of
   proceedings.  I was informed that this was not done.  She also directed
   that the Respondent file her record of proceedings if one exists and that
   the Appellant's counsel should submit a witness statement "outlining the
   manner in which he believes that the way in which the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Swinnerton conducted the appeal hearing was unfair".  So far as I
   can see, there was no compliance with those directions by either party.
   I will come on to the impact of that failure below.

9.  So it was that the hearing came before me as a remote hearing.  The
   hearing was attended by representatives of the parties, by the Appellant
   and by several of his friends.   There were some minor technical
   difficulties but those were not such as to affect the course of the
   hearing.  I had before me a core bundle of documents relevant to the
   appeal, the Appellant's bundle of documents before the First-tier
   Tribunal, a supplementary bundle of documents and other loose documents
   which appear to have been filed piecemeal.  I also have the Judge's
   handwritten notes of the hearing which I have been able to decipher so
   far as it is necessary for me to do so.


10. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
   an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Terms of Grant of Permission


11. I begin with the basis on which permission was granted.  As I indicate
   at [6] above, UTJ O'Callaghan expressed the decision as a grant on
   grounds two and three only.  Mr Clarke submitted that the Appellant could
   not therefore argue ground one.


12. There is no provision within the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
   Rules 2008 ("the Procedure Rules") for a party to orally renew an
   application for permission to appeal once that is refused by this
   Tribunal.  The only course open to a party in those circumstances is to
   bring a so-called "Cart" challenge to the Tribunal's refusal of
   permission.


13. However, as I pointed out at the hearing, there is no express refusal
   of permission to appeal on ground one, even though the grant of
   permission is expressed as a limited one.  The reason for my conclusion
   is to be found in paragraph 22 of the Procedure Rules ("Rule 22") which
   reads as follows:


         "Decision in relation to permission to appeal
         22.- (1) Except where rule 22A (special procedure for providing
         notice of a refusal of permission to appeal in an asylum case)
         applies, if the Upper Tribunal refuses permission to appeal or
         refuses to admit a late application for permission, it must send
         written notice of the refusal and of the reasons for the refusal to
         the appellant.
         (2) If the Upper Tribunal gives permission to appeal-
         (a) the Upper Tribunal must send written notice of the permission,
         and of the reasons for any limitations or conditions on such
         permission, to each party;
         (b) subject to any direction by the Upper Tribunal, the application
         for permission to appeal stands as the notice of appeal and the
         Upper Tribunal must send to each respondent a copy of the
         application for permission to appeal and any documents provided
         with it by the appellant; and
         (c) the Upper Tribunal may, with the consent of the appellant and
         each respondent, determine the appeal without obtaining any further
         response."


14. There are two reasons why the wording of Rule 22 leads me to the
   conclusion that the Appellant should be permitted to pursue his first
   ground.  First, UTJ O'Callaghan did not, in the operative part of the
   decision granting permission actually refuse permission to appeal on the
   first ground.  Second, unless a direction is made by the Tribunal, the
   application for permission to appeal stands as the notice of appeal.
   That application therefore includes ground one and there is no direction
   removing that ground as part of the appeal.



Ground one


15. I therefore turn to consider ground one.  Before I come to the
   substance of that ground it is necessary to say something about the
   procedure adopted to consider it.  As UTJ O'Callaghan observed,
   ordinarily, if an appellant wishes to argue that he has not had a fair
   hearing relying on evidence put forward by his advocate, that advocate
   cannot continue to act as such in the appeal.  The advocate then becomes
   a witness.  It is trite law that an advocate cannot give evidence.


16. UTJ O'Callaghan relied in this regard on the case of BW (witness
   statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC).  The
   headnote guidance given in that case is as follows:


         "(i)  It  is  timely  to  recall  the  golden  rule  of  judicial
         adjudication that justice must not only be done but must manifestly
         be seen to be done.
         (ii)   In certain cases, likely to be rare, evidence presented  to
         the Upper Tribunal may include a witness statement  compiled  by  a
         representative  involved  in  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ("FtT").  In practice, this is most  likely  to  occur  in
         cases where such evidence is considered  necessary  to  demonstrate
         that the appellant was deprived of his right to a fair  hearing  at
         first instance.
         (iii)  Evidence  of  this  kind  will  not  be  required  if  the
         determination of the FtT speaks for itself on the relevant issue.
         (iv)  In applications for permission to  appeal,  the  distinction
         between legal submissions and  arguments  (on  the  one  hand)  and
         evidence about events  at  the  hearing  (on  the  other)  must  be
         carefully observed.
         (v)     Where  an  advocate  makes  a  witness  statement  in   the
         circumstances  outlined  above,  a  change  of  advocate   may   be
         necessary, since the roles of advocate and  witness  are  distinct,
         separated by a bright luminous line.  An advocate must never assume
         the role of witness.
         (vi)   The respondent's rule 24 response must engage  specifically
         with additional evidence of this kind."


17. In this case, Mr Briddock, who also represented the Appellant before
   Judge Swinnerton, included in the pleaded grounds extracts from his notes
   of the exchanges between the Judge and the witnesses to illustrate the
   points he sought to make about the inappropriateness of the questions
   asked.  If it had been necessary for him to rely on those notes, I would
   have had no hesitation in preventing him from doing so unless he provided
   a witness statement and withdrew from the case as advocate.  In
   particular, I reject the suggestions made in written submissions dated 1
   June 2020 that he should be permitted to remain as advocate if his notes
   of the hearing were not disputed and therefore stood unchallenged.
   Reliance on those notes amounts to the giving of evidence whether that
   evidence is challenged or not.  Such reliance is therefore contrary to
   the principle that an advocate cannot give evidence.


18. However, in this case, I formed the view that it was not necessary to
   rely on those notes for two reasons.  First, I have the Judge's record of
   proceedings on which I can rely.  I appreciate that this is not an ideal
   solution as neither representative had seen those and could not therefore
   check their accuracy.  However, second, and more importantly, the
   Decision itself reflects the point which Mr Briddock sought to make
   regarding the questions asked by the Judge.  Thus, in the section of the
   Decision dealing with the hearing, at [11] to [18], the Judge records
   that he has asked questions of the Appellant and his witnesses.  That
   record appears at [13], [14], [15] and [16] of the Decision. There are
   other references to questions having been asked of the witnesses
   elsewhere in the Decision.


19. In short summary, therefore, I permitted Mr Briddock to argue ground
   one.  Insofar as he referred to his own notes when making his points, I
   do not take those into account as evidence.  He is not entitled to give
   evidence as an advocate. I am however satisfied that those notes broadly
   follow the record of the proceedings which I have on file.  Accordingly,
   I accept that the Judge asked a number of questions, in particular
   regarding addresses at which the Appellant and his witnesses lived, their
   living arrangements and the circumstances in which the Appellant left his
   aunt's address in 2011. The record of proceedings on file supports the
   summary of the Judge's questions as set out in the Decision (see [18]
   above).


20. I turn then to the parties' submissions on this ground, Mr Briddock
   confirmed that his complaint was not about the tone of the Judge's
   interventions but that the nature of the questions asked coupled with the
   number of questions showed that the Judge had descended into the arena.
   The questions asked were not matters of clarification but amounted to the
   testing of the evidence and therefore cross-examination.  He submitted
   that the questions asked were not ones which required clarification.
   They largely concerned the place(s) at which the Appellant and his
   partner and friends were living at various times.  The Judge already had
   evidence from the Appellant about where he was living and did not need to
   ask the Appellant's witnesses about this.  The questions could only have
   been with a view to establishing some inconsistency between their
   testimony.  Mr Briddock submitted that this line of questioning amounting
   to cross-examination would lead an observer to conclude that the
   Appellant had not had a fair hearing.

21. As Mr Clarke reminded me, the test for whether an appellant has had a
   fair hearing in these circumstances is not what any observer would make
   of the hearing but what a fair-minded and informed observer would
   conclude (Magill v Porter [2001] UKHL 67 at [103]).


22. Mr Clarke also drew to my attention the decision of this Tribunal in PA
   (protection claim: respondent's enquiries; bias) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT
   337 (IAC) ("PA") and to the following part of the headnote:


         "(4) As a general matter, if Counsel  concludes  during  a  hearing
         that a judge is behaving in an inappropriate manner, Counsel has  a
         duty to raise this with the judge.
         (5) Although each case will turn on its  own  facts,  an  appellate
         court or tribunal may have regard to the fact that a  complaint  of
         this kind was not made at the hearing or, at least, before  receipt
         of the judge's decision."


   There is nothing to suggest that Mr Briddock intervened to prevent what
   he says he saw as inappropriate questioning in the course of the hearing.


23. I do not place weight on Mr Clarke's submissions regarding the
   preparation of the evidence on the part of the Appellant's solicitors.
   As Mr Briddock pointed out, the nature of the Respondent's challenge to
   the Appellant's credibility in the decision letter was focussed on his
   discovery of his sexuality in Malaysia and what is said to have happened
   there rather than events in the UK.  That may well be because the
   evidence before the Judge was different from that before the Respondent.
   As I will come to, though, the content of the evidence which was before
   the Judge is relevant to the nature and extent of the questions asked.


24. There was some discussion at the hearing about the nature of
   proceedings before the Tribunal and whether those are inquisitorial or
   adversarial.  Although that is a consideration when one is considering
   the appropriateness of questioning by the Judge, ultimately I do not
   consider that it advances matters.  Ultimately, the essential issue is
   whether there is an appearance of bias on the basis that the Judge has
   descended into an arena and whether the fairness of the proceedings is
   compromised by the conduct of the hearing.

25. I have however found it helpful to refer myself to what was said by a
   Presidential panel of this Tribunal in the case of K v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department [2004] UKIAT 000061 in the context of a not
   dissimilar challenge.  The relevant passage of the decision is at [41] to
   [45] as follows:


         "41. Although Mr Morgan puts his case on the basis that  the  issue
         is whether  or  not  the  hearing  had  been  fair,  we  have  also
         considered it appropriate to ask ourselves whether  there  was  any
         apparent bias in this case.  The  test  for  that  is  whether  the
         circumstances when ascertained would  lead  to  a  fair-minded  and
         informed observer concluding that there was a real  possibility  or
         real danger that the Adjudicator was biased; Porter v Magill [2002]
         2 WLR 37.
         42.  There is a danger that the comments relied on  in Oyono have
         been misunderstood. An  Adjudicator  or  any  judge  is  of  course
         entitled during  evidence-in-chief  to  seek  clarification  of  an
         answer,  whether  because  it  has  not  been  heard  properly   or
         understood or interpreted properly. He is entitled to check that he
         has recorded the answer correctly. But that is not the limit on his
         powers or indeed his obligations of intervention during the  giving
         of evidence. An Adjudicator also has obligations in relation to the
         general control of a case. It  is  proper  for  an  Adjudicator  to
         intervene during examination-in-chief and cross-examination for the
         purposes of moving the proceedings along, so long as that  is  done
         in a fair manner. It is necessary and proper for an Adjudicator  to
         point out that a line of questioning is irrelevant or valueless  or
         repetitious or is going nowhere. It will, of course,  be  necessary
         to consider any response  made  by  a  representative  to  such  an
         approach.   But   what   was   said   by   the   Deputy   President
         in Oyono assumes that the questions being put are relevant and are
         not being pursued at undue length. Even where the parties are  both
         represented, it is still relevant for questions to be  put  by  the
         Adjudicator to a witness if they raise matters  which  trouble  the
         Adjudicator if they have not been  raised  or  dealt  with  by  the
         opposing advocate. This is especially  so  if  the  Adjudicator  is
         concerned by the point and it is something  which  may  affect  the
         decision or indeed should affect the decision, but cannot fairly do
         so without the relevant witness being given the opportunity to deal
         with it. The comments made in this respect by  the  Adjudicator  in
         paragraph 60 are entirely right.
         43.  Of course, what is said in Oyono in relation to the timing at
         which an Adjudicator should  put  questions  for  that  purpose  is
         right. An Adjudicator ought not to  interrupt  examination-in-chief
         or cross-examination except in the circumstances to which  we  have
         referred or for other reasons associated with the  general  control
         of the case and  the  court  room.  If  there  are  inconsistencies
         between documents and oral evidence or between answers  which  have
         been given already, it is nearly always best to  wait  until  after
         cross-examination and re-examination to see what matters  are  put.
         However, it is wholly legitimate for the Adjudicator to ask his  or
         her own questions on issues of inconsistency, points raised in  the
         refusal letter or matters which trouble the Adjudicator whether  or
         not they are raised by the other party. What is important, however,
         in relation to those matters is that  the  Adjudicator  should  not
         develop a different case from that being  presented  by  the  other
         party or pursue his or her own theory of the case.
         44.  The manner in which any intervention  is  undertaken  is  also
         important. It should not be done in any  hostile  manner  or  in  a
         manner which suggests that the Adjudicator's mind has been made up.
         Questions should not be leading questions or ones which conceal the
         purpose for which they are asked, but instead should be direct  and
         open-ended questions. It is perfectly proper for the Adjudicator to
         ask, after questions have been put  in  cross-examination  and  re-
         examination has taken place, why a witness has said x when  earlier
         that or another witness has said  y,  or  how  document  x  can  be
         reconciled with document or oral  evidence  y.  An  Adjudicator  is
         entitled to follow the logical train of answers to see how they fit
         with the case if that is regarded as potentially significant for an
         issue  in  the  case.  It  is  also  important,  however,  that  an
         Adjudicator should keep a sense of proportion about  the  questions
         which he or she asks. It is not for the Adjudicator  to  take  over
         conduct of the case either by the number of questions asked or  the
         development of his or her own theories. The  interventions  may  or
         may not assist one or other  party.  They  are  not  unfair  merely
         because one or other party may derive assistance from them.
         45.  As to submissions, it is quite wrong to suppose that there  is
         an obligation on  an  Adjudicator  merely  to  keep  silent  during
         submissions, noting them down regardless of whether they are  words
         of wisdom or irrelevancies, failing to deal with the  points  which
         trouble  the  Adjudicator.  An  Adjudicator  is  entitled  also  to
         intervene to ensure  that  an  advocate  responds,  if  he  is  not
         otherwise doing so, to points which his opponent has made. There is
         no reason for the number of questions to be asked of  one  side  to
         equal the number of questions  asked  of  another.  The  degree  of
         intervention will depend entirely upon the focus and  relevance  of
         the submissions made; their helpfulness and their succinctness.  It
         is perfectly proper for an Adjudicator to move  submissions  on  by
         indicating that she has understood the  point  or  to  prevent  the
         irrelevant in order to try and obtain the relevant answers for  the
         purposes of writing the determination. Much will  depend  upon  the
         nature of the case and the style of the advocates and  Adjudicator.
         It is important, however, that the Adjudicator does  not  intervene
         to such an extent  that  relevant  submissions  are  disrupted  and
         relevant points are prevented from being made.  In  that  way,  the
         Adjudicator would fail to understand the case and potentially would
         miss important points being made to her."


26. Whilst that passage undermines the submission made by Mr Briddock that
   a Tribunal Judge should only intervene where a party is unrepresented or
   not present, it does make clear that each case turns on its own facts
   and, as I have already noted, the essential questions are whether there
   is apparent bias and/or unfairness created by the questioning.


27. Before considering those questions in the context of this appeal, it is
   however necessary to make one further remark.  As I pointed out to Mr
   Briddock, there is a difficult balance to be struck for a Tribunal Judge
   when considering whether to intervene.  If a Judge has noted an
   inconsistency or lack of evidence which potentially undermines a witness'
   evidence or a party's case and fails to raise it, that would quite
   rightly be criticised on the basis of lack of fairness for failure to
   give the aggrieved party or witness the opportunity to deal with the
   point.  Can it really be suggested that the Judge is, in such
   circumstances, obliged to simply ignore the point or inconsistency if the
   opposing party fails to challenge it?

28. Having considered the record of proceedings, the evidence and the
   parties' submissions, I am satisfied that the Judge's interventions would
   not lead a fair-minded and informed observer to conclude that the hearing
   was not a fair one.  The Judge gave the Appellant and his witnesses every
   opportunity to address issues which were concerning the Judge.  The
   Appellant's credibility and that of his witnesses were at the heart of
   this appeal.  The Judge did not act unfairly in asking the questions he
   did.  I have reached that conclusion for the following reasons.


29. First, I have regard to what is said in PA.  The Appellant was legally
   represented by Mr Briddock at the hearing before Judge Swinnerton.  Mr
   Briddock could have objected to the line of questioning at the time.
   There is no evidence that he did so.

30. Second, although I accept that the Respondent did not dispute the
   Appellant's credibility based on his relationships in the UK in the
   decision letter, that is largely because the nature of the evidence has
   changed over time.  The Judge was obliged to consider and determine the
   appeal based on the evidence before him.   That evidence gave rise to
   wider issues which the Judge clearly viewed as important.


31. Turning to the facts, in broad terms, the Appellant said that he was in
   a same-sex relationship with [K] in Bournemouth after he left his aunt's
   house in 2011 for a period of a couple of years.  [K] did not provide any
   evidence because the Appellant says that he is no longer in contact with
   him.  The Appellant's evidence about that relationship and what his
   friends did or did not know or say about that relationship was therefore
   important.

32. The Appellant says that he is now in a same-sex relationship with [N].
   [N] was called to give evidence as were friends with whom they said they
   both lived.  The existence of that relationship which included evidence
   about where they lived together and when was also therefore important.
   The credibility of not simply the Appellant but also of his witnesses was
   therefore a crucial matter for the Judge to determine.

33. Whilst I accept that the Appellant's witness statement contains some
   detail about his relationships and where he lived (in general terms),
   with whom and when, the same cannot be said of the statements of the
   other witnesses.  For example, the statement of [N] is that the Appellant
   moved in with [N] in September 2019.  It is not said where they lived
   together.  The statement of [J], said to be [N]'s ex-partner, says that
   he and his current partner visited [N] in Cardiff in "late September
   2018" when [N] was living in Cardiff.  He says this in an amended
   statement having failed in his first statement to mention that [N] lived
   in Cardiff at the time.  Yet, [N] does not mention in his statement ever
   living in Cardiff and [J] does not mention visiting [N] and the Appellant
   in London.  It is notable that the Appellant says that he met [N] in
   London in 2018.  The Appellant and other of the Appellant's witnesses
   mention attending [N]'s birthday party at a club in London in August
   2018.  Of course, that does not mean that [N] might not have been living
   in Cardiff at the time.  However, it is unclear who was living where and
   when because of the vague nature of some of the witness statements and
   failure to mention locations even in general terms when dealing with the
   development of the relationship between the Appellant and [N].  The Judge
   was entitled to clarify that evidence.


34. Third, as I pointed out to Mr Briddock, the Appellant would undoubtedly
   have complained and had cause to if the Judge had found against him in
   terms of credibility without giving him and his witnesses the opportunity
   to answer any apparent discrepancies in their evidence.  As I have
   already remarked, it cannot be right that a Judge is bound to ignore
   evidential inconsistencies simply because they are not raised by the
   opposing party.


35. As I have already noted, the essential question is whether the
   proceedings have been conducted fairly.   What fairness demands is fact
   sensitive.  For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the
   procedure adopted by Judge Swinnerton was a fair one.  Ground one does
   not disclose any error of law.

Ground two


36. The Judge's findings regarding the credibility of the Appellant's claim
   begin at [24] of the Decision with the words "[t]here are several aspects
   of the Appellant's account that concern me."  Ground two is particularly
   critical of three aspects of the findings which follow which I deal with
   in turn.


37. The first aspect concerns the Appellant's contact with his family in
   Malaysia.  The Judge's finding in this regard appears at [24] of the
   Decision as follows:


         "One of those aspects relates to the last contact that the
         Appellant had with his family in Malaysia.  The account of the
         Appellant is that he came to the UK with his aunt [K], the younger
         sister of his mother, in February 2011 and that he lived with her
         for a few months before running away.  In the asylum interview, the
         Appellant stated that he last had contact with his family in
         December 2011 when he spoke to his mother on the telephone.  That
         was about 10 months after he had been in the UK.  It was also about
         six or seven months after he had run away from his aunt [K].
         Indisputably, the Appellant has given completely contradictory
         evidence in this respect.  Regardless of the exact point in time
         when he last had contact with his parents, there is clearly a very
         significant difference between the Appellant stating that he has
         not had contact with his parents since leaving Malaysia (his
         evidence at the hearing), compared to having had contact with his
         parents up to almost one year after he had been in the UK when he
         spoke to his mother on the telephone.  I accept that the Appellant
         was aged 15 at the time of arriving in the UK but I fail to see why
         the Appellant has given such completely divergent accounts in this
         respect.  I refuse to accept that the age of the Appellant is a
         credible explanation.  I also fail to understand how a child aged
         15 travelling to a new country would not know with a reasonable
         amount of precision when he last had contact with his parents given
         that the end of contact with his parents is likely to be traumatic
         for any person of that age.  I also fail to see any credible
         explanation as to why the Appellant would, on the one hand,
         maintain that the last contact that he had with his parents was in
         the UK and yet, on the other hand, state that it was while he was
         in Malaysia.  If the evidence of the Appellant is to be believed,
         he travelled to the UK with his maternal aunt, lived with her for
         several months and during that time had no contact whatsoever with
         his family in Malaysia.  I do not believe that evidence and I
         reject it as totally lacking in credibility."


38. The Appellant's pleaded ground in this regard again relies upon Mr
   Briddock's notes of the hearing.  I cannot give those weight as such.
   However, I do not understand the point which is there made even if the
   notes are taken at face value.  The Appellant was apparently asked when
   he last had contact with his family and answered that it was "[b]efore
   [he] went away".  That followed a question whether he had any contact
   with his family since he had been in the UK to which he made clear that
   his answer was in the negative.  He went on to say that he had contact
   with his aunt in February 2011.  However, none of those answers differ
   from the account which the Judge records at [24] of the Decision.


39. Neither can the Judge's reliance on the asylum interview record be
   categorised as a failure to consider the evidence.  The questions put to
   the Appellant during the interview in this regard are as follows:


         "Q17: When were you last in contact with your family in [Malaysia]?
         A17:  2011
         Q18: And was that before or after you arrived in the UK?
         A18: Do you mean telephone contact?
         Q19: I mean any kind of contact that you have had with your family
         in [Malaysia], when was the last time?
         A19: December, I think it was in December.
         Q20: And what year was that?
         A20: 2011.
         Q21: And who did you speak to?
         A21: My mum.
         Q22: And is there any reason why you have not had any contact with
         your family since this time?
         A22: I left my aunty's and ever since I haven't contacted them.
         Q23: But why is that?
         A23: I lost her contact details.
         Q24: But why have you not had any contact with your family such as
         your parents in [Malaysia] since 2011?
         A24: I feel that my family don't really want to see me."


40. As the Judge observes at [24] of the Decision, there is a discrepancy
   even within that account.  Either the Appellant had no contact after he
   left his aunt's house in February 2011 or he had contact in December
   2011.  Both cannot be right.  Both accounts differ from his evidence at
   the hearing that he had no contact with his family in Malaysia after he
   left that country.


41. The pleaded challenge to [24] of the Decision reads as follows:


         "17. It is not suggested that the FtTJ was not entitled to find
         against the Appellant on this point, but he did so without actually
         taking into account the answers given in cross-examination and in
         response to the Judge.  It is far from as clear cut, as the FtTJ
         puts it, that Indisputably, the Appellant has given completely
         contradictory evidence in this respect."


42. I am afraid that the nature of this challenge did not become any
   clearer to me when developed orally.  Mr Briddock accepts that there is a
   discrepancy in the evidence but appeared to say that this was not as
   clear cut because the Appellant was in touch with his aunt.  If and
   insofar as the Appellant seeks to suggest that there was a
   misunderstanding about contact with family in Malaysia directly and via
   his aunt, that does not make any sense.  The Appellant's case was that he
   had not had contact with his aunt since he left her home in February
   2011.  He was clearly speaking at interview about direct contact with his
   mother in December 2011.  It is difficult to see how the discrepancy
   between that answer and his answer at the hearing that he had no contact
   since he left Malaysia is anything other than clear cut.  Even if he had
   contact after he left via his aunt that still does not explain the
   discrepancy between having had no contact with her since February 2011
   and having spoken with his mother in December 2011.  The Judge was
   entitled to describe the evidence as "completely contradictory" in this
   regard.  That is beyond dispute.  It cannot sensibly be said that the
   Judge had failed to take into account evidence before him.


43. The second factual matter is what happened after the Appellant left his
   aunt's home in February 2011.  The Judge deals with this aspect of the
   Appellant's case at [25] and [26] of the Decision as follows:


         "25. Another aspect of the Appellant's account that troubles me
         relates to his having run away from his aunt shortly after having
         arrived in the UK.  At this point in time, during the first half of
         2011, he would have been aged 15.  At the hearing, the Appellant
         gave evidence that he did not know where he stayed with his aunt.
         He provided no credible explanation as to why he was unable to
         state where he had stayed with his aunt for several months.  When I
         pressed him on this, he again stated that he did not know.  Despite
         not knowing where he had lived in the UK and only having been in
         the UK for a few months, he maintains that he was able with no
         assistance (financial or otherwise) from anybody at all to go to
         Bournemouth, find himself work and also find accommodation in
         Bournemouth immediately.  I do not find that credible.
         26.  Whilst working in Bournemouth, the Appellant claims to have
         entered into his first same-sex relationship with a male named [K].
          They worked in the same establishment and their relationship
         lasted a little over two years from mid-2014 until September 2016.
         Despite having lived in Bournemouth for a number of years by this
         time, the Appellant was unable to state where he lived with [K]
         despite being afforded a number of opportunities to do so at the
         hearing.  No credible reason was offered by the Appellant for his
         inability to state where he had lived with [K].  The Appellant was
         aged about 21 when his relationship with [K] ended and had been
         living in the UK for five and a half years by that point in time.
         I fail to see why he would not be able to recall where he lived for
         about one year with his first same-sex partner given the
         significance of this to him given his claimed sexuality.  I note
         also that no documentary evidence was made available to me of the
         Appellant's relationship with [K] despite the end of their
         relationship being only a little over three years ago.
         Additionally, in respect of this relationship, the Appellant stated
         that friends of his know that he was part of a loving couple with
         [K] and the Appellant referred to [F] as one of these friends who
         knew that he was in a loving relationship with [K].   [F] provided
         a witness statement dated 11.11.2019 for the purpose of the hearing
         (but could not attend the hearing) and makes no mention whatsoever
         of the Appellant's relationship with [K] in his witness statement.
         Had [F] been aware of the Appellant's relationship with [K], I fail
         to understand why he did not make any mention of this in his
         witness statement.  The statement of [F] refers to having gone on a
         trip to Cornwall with the Appellant and a number of other people
         and thereafter going to clubs after which the Appellant told [F]
         that he was gay.  Clearly, [F] would have already been aware of the
         Appellant's sexuality if he had, as claimed by the Appellant at the
         hearing, known of his relationship with [K].  Based on the
         available evidence and for the reasons stated above, I do not find
         that the Appellant was in a same-sex relationship with a male named
         [K]."


44. The pleaded challenge to these findings is that the Judge ignored that
   the Appellant said he could not speak English and therefore did not know
   his address.  I was unimpressed by Mr Briddock's submission that the
   Judge has erred by finding that the Appellant did not know where he lived
   because all he said was that he did not know the address.  The Appellant
   said that he lived in Bournemouth or Poole (although was not even
   specific in that regard).  The point made by the Judge though is that the
   Appellant must have known where he lived with [K].  That is clearly a
   reference to not knowing the precise address.  The Judge was entitled to
   find the Appellant's explanation to be implausible.


45. That finding also has to be read in context.  As the Judge noted, the
   Appellant had, by the end of this relationship, been in the UK for over
   five years.  The Judge did not consider it plausible that the Appellant
   would not know his address, particularly when that is put in the context
   of what is recorded at [25] of the Decision concerning the Appellant's
   claimed ability, less than a year following his arrival in the UK, to
   move to a different part of the country where he knew no-one and with no
   assistance or language ability.


46. Further and in any event the finding regarding the Appellant's
   relationship with [K] is disbelieved for other reasons as set out at [26]
   of the Decision.  For those reasons and that the Appellant could provide
   no detail as to where he lived with [K], the Judge was entitled to
   disbelieve this aspect of the Appellant's account.


47. The third factual matter concerns the Appellant's current relationship
   with [N] and their living arrangements.  They claim to be living with two
   other gay men.  This aspect of the Appellant's account is dealt with at
   [28] of the Decision as follows:


         "The Appellant moved from the property of Uncle [M] to living with
         his current partner, [N], and two friends, [A] and [F].  At the
         hearing, [N] as well as [A] and [F] all gave evidence that they
         have lived together in a three-bedroomed property since 1.9.2019.
         No tenancy agreement was provided for the property and no other
         documentary evidence was provided that the Appellant or the three
         other occupants live at that property.  No utility bills, bank
         statements or any documentation at all was provided to evidence
         that the Appellant or any of the other three occupants live at that
         property.  I questioned [F] as to his accommodation history and he,
         very clearly, stated to me that he lived with Uncle [M] and the
         Appellant before moving to the property at [P] Street with the
         Appellant and [N] and [A].  When I pointed out to him the address
         on his current driving licence (effective 25.7.2019) of [Pa]
         Street, he sought to change his evidence stating that the address
         of [Pa] Street was a temporary address where he had lived in
         between living with Uncle [M] and moving to the property at [P]
         Street.  I do not accept that explanation and I do not accept that
         [F] was telling the truth about where he lives.  Quite the
         opposite. I found him to be entirely lacking in credibility.  I do
         not accept that he lives with the Appellant at [P] Street and I do
         not accept his evidence that he, the Appellant and [N] and [A] all
         live at [P] Street.  I found that to be a fabrication.  I noted
         also that the driving licence of [A] likewise did not contain the
         [P] Street address.  I do not find that the Appellant, [N], [A] and
         [F] live together."


48. It is said that this passage ignores the evidence of the witnesses that
   the tenant of the property is [N] who does not have a tenancy agreement
   either.  The others in the house apparently said that they pay money to
   [N] who then pays the rent to the landlord.  That there is no tenancy
   agreement may be understandable, particularly if some of those living at
   the property do not have legal status.  However, as Mr Clarke pointed
   out, the Judge's finding is not based simply on an absence of a tenancy
   agreement but a lack of any documentary footprint of any kind in relation
   to those said to live at the property.  The only documentary evidence
   which the Judge had did not support the witness testimony.  The Judge was
   entitled to reach the conclusions he did based on a complete absence of
   documents showing that any of the four men live where they say they do.


Ground three


49. The third ground turns on a claimed absence of reasons.  Again, there
   are three component parts to this challenge.


50. I begin with the Judge's findings at [28] of the Decision as set out at
   [47] above. Mr Briddock submitted that the Judge has not given reasons
   for disbelieving [F]'s evidence.  I reject that submission.  The Judge
   noted the discrepancy between [F]'s oral evidence and the documentary
   evidence produced as to where he lives.  The Judge recorded [F]'s
   explanation why that discrepancy exists.  It is clear from the Judge's
   rejection of [F]'s evidence that he did not accept that explanation.  He
   did not have to give any further reasons why he rejected the evidence in
   light of the discrepancy which clearly existed and taking into account
   [F]'s explanation for the discrepancy which the Judge rejected.


51. In order to understand the next criticism made of the Judge's findings
   it is necessary to consider what the Judge says at [27] of the Decision.
   After the Appellant left Bournemouth/Poole and returned to London, he
   says that he lived with Uncle [M], an elderly gentleman who, although the
   Appellant refers to him as uncle is not related to the Appellant.  Uncle
   [M] did not attend to give evidence in the appeal nor did he provide a
   letter or statement to corroborate the Appellant's account as to his
   sexuality. The Judge dealt with this lack of evidence at [27] of the
   Decision as follows:


         "About one year or so after the end of the Appellant's relationship
         with [K], the Appellant's account is that he moved to London where
         he lived with a 75 years old male named Uncle [M] from about
         January 2018 until September 2019.  [F] also moved in with them.
         The evidence of the Appellant's current partner, [N], is that he
         visited the Appellant at Uncle [M]'s property.  The evidence of the
         Appellant is that Uncle [M] was aware of the Appellant's sexuality.
          Uncle [M] would, therefore, have been able to give evidence that
         the Appellant had lived with him prior to moving out in September
         2019 and as to the Appellant's relationship with [N].  That said,
         no mention at all was made of Uncle [M] during the asylum interview
         in November 2018 even though the Appellant was living with Uncle
         [M] at that very point in time.  Mr [M] was not called as a witness
         for this hearing (or the previous hearing of the Appellant in
         January 2019) and neither was any witness statement provided from
         Uncle [M] despite there being no indication at all given to me that
         the Appellant was on anything other than good terms with Uncle [M].
          No credible reason was provided as to the lack of any evidence
         from Uncle [M] or for the lack of any evidence that the Appellant
         had lived with Uncle [M]."


52. The Appellant's grounds suggest that the Judge was not entitled to
   place weight on this lack of evidence as the Appellant had put forward
   evidence from four gay men who knew the Appellant to be gay.  It is said
   that it is perverse for the Judge to have relied on the lack of evidence
   from this elderly gentleman.  I disagree.  Perversity is a high
   threshold.  As I have already noted, the Judge clearly considered the
   evidence about where the Appellant had lived, at what time and with who
   to be an important aspect of the case.  This gentleman could have
   provided evidence about the Appellant's address during a relevant period
   and also about [N]'s relationship with the Appellant.  It is not
   suggested by the Judge that the Appellant was bound to put this gentleman
   forward as a witness, but he ran the risk that if the Judge disbelieved
   the other witnesses who are all said to be the Appellant's gay friends,
   then the claim would be rejected.  Uncle [M] is not said to be a gay man.
    As such, he may be said to have less interest in the Appellant's case
   succeeding.  The absence of his evidence is a matter on which the Judge
   was entitled to rely.


53. It is asserted that the Judge's erroneous treatment of the evidence has
   then influenced the Judge's finding about the Appellant's relationship
   with [N] which appears at [29] of the Decision as follows:


         "In respect of the Appellant's claimed relationship with [N], I
         have stated already that I do not accept that they live together.
         Their relationship is said to have started about 17 months ago in
         August 2018.  They had not lived together since claiming to live
         together at the property at [P] Street.  It follows therefore that
         I find that they have never lived together.  I attach no weight to
         the evidence of [A] and [F] as to the relationship of [N] and the
         Appellant as I have not accepted their evidence that they share a
         property with [N] and the Appellant.  As mentioned above, Uncle [M]
         could have provided evidence as to the recent accommodation history
         of the Appellant and, importantly, as to the nature of the
         relationship of the Appellant and [N].  No such evidence was
         provided or any credible reason as to why it was not provided.
         Having taken account of all the available evidence, I do not find
         that the Appellant is in a same-sex relationship with [N]."


54. It is asserted that there is a "domino effect" in the Judge's findings
   - in other words, the Judge found because he did not believe some of the
   evidence that all should be disregarded.


55. Mr Clarke understood this submission to be premised on the Judge having
   failed to consider the approach laid down in the case of Mibanga v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367
   ("Mibanga").  The "Mibanga duty" has recently been considered by this
   Tribunal in the case of QC (verification of documents; Mibanga duty)
   China [2021] UKUT 00033 (IAC).   The guidance in that case reads as
   follows:


         "The Mibanga duty
         (2) Credibility is not necessarily  an  essential  component  of  a
         successful claim to be in need of international  protection.  Where
         credibility has a role  to  play,  its  relevance  to  the  overall
         outcome will vary, depending on the nature of the case.  What  that
         relevance is to a particular claim needs  to  be  established  with
         some care by the judicial fact-finder. It is only once this is done
         that the practical application of the "Mibanga duty"  to  consider
         credibility "in the round" can be understood  (Francois  Mibanga  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005] EWCA  Civ  367).
         The significance of a piece of evidence that emanates from a  third
         party source may well depend upon what is at stake in terms of  the
         individual's credibility.
         (3) What the case law reveals is that the judicial fact-finder  has
         a duty to make his or her decision by reference to all the relevant
         evidence and needs to show in their decision that  they  have  done
         so.  The actual way in which the fact-finder goes about  this  task
         is a matter for them.  As has been pointed out, one  has  to  start
         somewhere.  At the end of the day,  what  matters  is  whether  the
         decision contains legally adequate reasons for  the  outcome.   The
         greater the apparent cogency and relevance of a particular piece of
         evidence, the greater is the need for the judicial  fact-finder  to
         show that they have had due regard to that evidence;  and,  if  the
         fact-finder's overall conclusion is contrary to the apparent thrust
         of that evidence, the greater is  the  need  to  explain  why  that
         evidence has not brought about a different outcome."


   Mr Clarke relied on that guidance as supporting the approach which the
   Judge had taken.


56. Mr Briddock confirmed that his case was not that the Judge had erred by
   finding against the Appellant on one aspect of his case and then
   disbelieving the whole for that reason.   That was the error made in
   Mibanga.  However, if that is not his case then it is difficult to
   understand the criticism being made.


57. In any event, I consider the point to be without merit.  Central to the
   credibility of the Appellant's claimed relationship with [N] was the
   evidence of the Appellant and [N] himself.  The Appellant sought to
   corroborate that evidence by evidence from two other men who it was said
   lived with [N] and the Appellant and therefore could attest to the
   genuineness of their relationship.  The Appellant did not however rely on
   the evidence of another man who could also provide some evidence in that
   regard if the relationship were genuine as claimed.  The Judge did not
   make any errors when reaching the individual findings about the testimony
   of those who did give evidence.  He did not err in taking into account
   that Uncle [M] was not called as a witness.  It is not therefore any form
   of impermissible "domino effect" to draw those findings together when
   reaching the finding that the relationship with [N] was not credible.


58. That brings me on to the final criticism made in ground three regarding
   the Judge's conclusions.  Those appear at [30] and [31] of the Decision
   as follows:


         "30. I must now draw together the various points in this case in
         order to arrive at a decision.  I have considered all the evidence
         in the round and I have highlighted a number of areas where the
         account of the Appellant troubles me such as the marked discrepancy
         in the Appellant's evidence as to when and where he last had
         contact with his family in Malaysia, the lack of credibility as to
         his account of fleeing from his aunt [K] aged 15 and without any
         apparent difficulty establishing himself in work and accommodation
         almost immediately in another part of the UK, the lack of evidence
         as to the Appellant's claimed same-sex relationship with [K], the
         lack of any evidence from Uncle [M] and the failure of the
         Appellant to refer to him in his asylum interview, the lack of
         credibility (particularly in relation to [F]) that the Appellant
         now lives with [N] (as a partner) and [A] and [F] in the same
         accommodation, as well as my having found that the Appellant is not
         in a same-sex relationship with [N].
         31.  Considering all the evidence in the round, I do not accept the
         account of the Appellant and I do not find that he is gay or that
         he has encountered any problems with his family or anybody else in
         Malaysia due to his sexuality."


59. In the grounds, the Appellant repeats a similar point to that made
   about the "domino effect" of the Judge's findings with which I deal
   above.  It is said that the Judge here "merely repeats the points he has
   already made and uses them to reject the entirety of the Appellant's
   account".


60. The Judge's reasoning in these paragraphs has to be read in the context
   of the first words at [30] and the Decision read as a whole.  The Judge
   is here drawing together his earlier reasoning.  As such, it is scarcely
   surprising that he would record what has led him to reject the
   credibility of the Appellant's case.  He had reached those earlier
   findings on consideration of the evidence on each element of the case.
   He was not obliged to repeat the reasons why he had made those earlier
   findings.  His findings and reasoning for reaching those findings are
   explained in the earlier paragraphs.  As I have concluded, there is no
   error of law made by the Judge when reaching those findings.


61. For all of those reasons, I conclude that there is no error of law in
   the Decision, and I uphold it.




   DECISION
   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge K Swinnerton promulgated on 8
   January 2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I
   therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
   appeal remains dismissed.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 30 March 2021

