
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13491/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Microsoft Teams    |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|on 9 June 2021                       |On 23 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M A B
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S P Crabb, Advocate, instructed by Quinn, Martin
                    & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the SSHD,  but  the  rest  of  this  determination
    refers to parties as they were in the FtT.

 2. By a decision promulgated  on  6  February  2019,  FtT  Judge  Buchanan
    dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  "refugee"  and  "human  rights"
    grounds, but allowed it "on the humanitarian protection grounds".

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal challenge paragraph  9  of  the  decision,
    where the  FtT  was  not  persuaded  that  grounds  for  excluding  the
    appellant from a grant of humanitarian protection were  made  out,  and
    could not agree with a decision made by the SSHD  on  15  January  2014
    (which had not carried a right of appeal).

 4. The grounds say that the 2014 decision  was  not  the  subject  of  the
    appeal, but rather the decision dated 1 November  2018,  and  the  only
    available ground was under section 84 (1) (b)  of  the  2002  Act  that
    removal of the appellant "would breach the UK's obligations in relation
    to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection".   This  is
    linked to an alleged error of deciding the case  by  reference  to  the
    immigration rules as they stood in 2014 and not as they stood in 2018.

 5. The FtT granted permission on 6 March 2019, on the view that there  was
    an arguable error of "allowing the appeal on a premise not  allowed  in
    law".

 6. After multiple procedure, the SSHD's starting point on 9 June 2021  was
    the skeleton argument filed  on  4  March  2021  (prepared  by  another
    presenting officer).  Mr Clarke adopted this, apart from  the  passages
    about how to deal with evidence allegedly obtained by torture.  On that
    aspect, he accepted the analysis of Mr Crabb.

 7. Mr Clarke added that it was  a  "red  herring"  to  refer  to  evidence
    derived from torture, because the evidence  of  the  appellant's  crime
    came not from anything elicited by torture in Iran, but  from  what  he
    freely said in the UK.

 8. In my view, Mr  Clarke  was  correct  on  both  those  points.   It  is
    unnecessary to  deal  any  further  with  the  "evidence  derived  from
    torture" question.

 9. Mr Clarke submitted that the  judge  erred  by  making  no  finding  on
    whether the appellant committed a "serious crime", because he  thought,
    wrongly, by reference to changes in the rules, that he was not required
    to do so.  He said that was an omission which required a remit  to  the
    FtT.

10. Mr Crabb's starting point was his  written  submissions  dated  1  June
    2021.

11. Those submissions firstly renew his motion for the appeal to be  struck
    out.  Mr Crabb did not add anything on this aspect.

12. On the substantive challenge, Mr Crabb submitted that in  deciding  the
    case on humanitarian protection grounds, the FtT did  exactly  what  it
    was required to do.

13. Alternatively, he said that any omission was immaterial  because  there
    was no basis to  consider  that  on  the  balance  of  probability  the
    appellant had committed a  serious  crime,  based  on  his  version  of
    events, which was not disputed by the respondent.

14. Having heard submissions, I reserved my decision.

15. I am obliged to Mr Clarke and to Mr Crabb for their  assistance,  which
    has enabled this appeal at last to be resolved.

16. For the reasons given in my note dated 30 September  2020,  I  consider
    that striking out is not an available step, and, alternatively, is  not
    justified.

17. The alleged error at last crystallised in  final  oral  submissions  as
    absence of a finding on  whether  the  appellant  committed  a  serious
    crime, which would exclude him from humanitarian protection.

18. The SHD has at various stages suggested that application might be  made
    to amend the grounds, but has not done so.

19. The proposition now is that the judge misled himself, through  applying
    outdated rules, into failure to make a necessary finding.  The point is
    so obscure as to be beyond identification in the grounds.  It  did  not
    emerge in the final written submissions.  The  appellant  has  not  had
    fair specification of the case he had to meet.

20. Nevertheless, the appellant did tackle the point.  In the  alternative,
    I find force in his argument that there was not an  adequate  basis  to
    hold that he was excluded for commission of a serious crime.

21. The only account of events is the appellant's, and  it  is  undisputed.
    The outcome of the incident was  fatal  to  his  wife,  but  his  trial
    resulted in a finding of minimal  culpability.   It  was  only  through
    pressure from her family, and through unlawful influence being  brought
    to bear, that he was at risk of further proceedings - see the  decision
    at 9.15 - 16, under the heading "conclusions on the facts".

22. If I had set aside the decision, I would have found no reason to direct
    a rehearing in the FtT.  I would have remade the decision as above.

23. The decision of the FtT, allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds, stands.

24. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which remains in place.

25. There are other proceedings in the FtT, currently sisted, arising  from
    a decision made and an  appeal  filed  while  this  case  was  pending.
    Parties are directed to consider  their  positions  in  light  of  this
    outcome, and to advise the FtT accordingly, not less than 7 days  after
    this decision is issued.


        Hugh Macleman

      10 June 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

