
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13635/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2017                            |On  1 November 2017           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MRH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration & Asylum
                    Practitioners Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of St Kitts &  Nevis  who  was  born  on  17
    February 1992.

 3. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 May  2016  and  claimed  asylum.
    The basis of his claim was that he is gay  and  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to St Kitts.

 4. On 18 November 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant  was
    gay, that he had had gay relationships in St Kitts  and  had  been  the
    subject of a homophobic violent assault by a colleague in the workplace
    in 2010.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 23 January 2017,  Judge  L  Murray  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  The judge accepted that the appellant  is  gay.
    Further, she accepted that the appellant had been subject to a  violent
    attack in 2010 but not  that  it  had  been  motivated  by  homophobia.
    Finally, she concluded that she did not find that:  "the  treatment  he
    has suffered or would be likely to suffer on return as a gay man  would
    amount to persecution on the evidence before me".

 6. As a consequence, the judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  international
    protection claim.  She also rejected the appellant's claim under Art  8
    of the ECHR.  That latter decision has not been challenged and  I  need
    say no more about it.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Initially, permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on  11
    July 2017 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  McWilliam)  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

The Appellant's Case

 8. Mr McGarvey, who represented the appellant, relied upon the grounds  of
    appeal.  He raised, in essence, four points.

 9. First, he submitted that the judge had failed properly to consider, and
    take into account, the background evidence concerning the  position  of
    LGBT persons in St Kitts & Nevis in finding that the appellant had  not
    established a real risk of persecution on return.

10. Secondly, Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge had  failed  to  make  a
    finding on whether the appellant  would  live  "discreetly"  or  as  an
    openly gay man in St Kitts & Nevis and what risk, he would as a result,
    face on return.

11. Thirdly, Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  find
    that it was not established that the attack in 2010  was  motivated  by
    homophobia as she had done so, wrongly, on the  basis  that  supporting
    documentation had not been  provided.   This,  Mr  McGarvey  submitted,
    breached the 'rule against corroboration'.

12. Fourthly, Mr McGarvey submitted that the judge in reaching her  finding
    that it was not established that the attack was motivated by homophobia
    had, in para 23, inconsistently also concluded  that  the  police  were
    aware that the assault was perpetrated due  to  homophobia  and,  as  a
    result, had taken action against the perpetrator.

Discussion

13. It will be helpful to  take  Mr  McGarvey's  first  and  second  points
    together.

14. The judge's consideration of the background  evidence  leading  to  her
    finding that the appellant would not be at risk on return to St Kitts &
    Nevis as a gay man can be found at paras 24-27 of her determination  as
    follows:

         "24. I have considered the background  evidence  submitted  by  the
             Respondent and Appellant in relation to the treatment of LGBTs
             in  St  Kitts.   According  to  the  document  at  G1  of  the
             Respondent's bundle from the Human Dignity Trust in  2015  the
             maximum penalties for homosexuality are 10 years  imprisonment
             with  or  without  hard  labour  for  sodomy   and   4   years
             imprisonment without hard labour for an attempt to  commit  an
             infamous crime.  Despite the  offences  being  on  the  books,
             there has  been  no  known  prosecution  for  sexual  activity
             between consenting adults in recent years.   LGBT  sensitivity
             training took place in June 2015 for law enforcement officers.
              According to the US State Country  Report  in  2014  negative
             societal attitudes towards  the  LGBT  community  impeded  the
             operation of LGBT organizations and the  free  association  of
             LGBT persons.  The government asserted it received no  reports
             of violence or discrimination based on sexual orientation  but
             unofficial reports indicated that violence and  discrimination
             remained a problem and anecdotal evidence suggested that  LGBT
             individuals were reluctant to report incidents of violence out
             of fear of retribution or reprisal.

         25.  The Appellant's  supplemental  bundle  contains  a  number  of
             reports in relation to the treatment of LGBT in St Kitts.   P6
             states that unofficial  reports  indicate  that  violence  and
             discrimination remain a problem.  A report  entitled  'Can  St
             Kitts protect its gay citizens?' by 'Daily Xtra'  states  that
             St Kitts and Nevis appears to be moving in the right direction
             when it comes to LGT  rights  but  that  the  state  does  not
             enforce the laws.  It repeats that there is anecdotal evidence
             of rampant homophobia and there is  evidence  from  2005  that
             authorities in Nevis barred  a  gay  and  nudist  cruise  from
             entering the island.

         26.  I conclude on the evidence before me that there is no evidence
             of state-sponsored persecution of  LGBT  individuals.   Whilst
             there is evidence of  discrimination  the  Appellant  has  not
             produced evidence to show that the authorities  are  unwilling
             or unable to prosecute perpetrators of violent attacks and  on
             the Appellant's own evidence when he was attacked  in  2010  a
             prosecution and conviction ensued.  Whilst I accept  that  the
             Appellant may have been involved with other gay men  and  been
             the victim of homophobic taunts in St Kitts I do not find that
             the treatment he has suffered or would be likely to suffer  on
             return as a  gay  man  would  amount  to  persecution  on  the
             evidence before me.

         27.  I find therefore the he would not have a well-founded fear  of
             persecution on account of his sexuality".

15. The judge's finding in relation to the attack in 2010, and that it  was
    not established it was motivated by homophobia, is found in para 23  of
    the determination which I will return to shortly.

16. In his oral submissions, Mr McGarvey  referred  me  to  the  background
    material contained in the appellant's 'objective bundle' at pages  1-27
    and in his 'Supplementary Bundle' also at pages 1-27.   In  particular,
    he referred me to a "Joint Submission  from  the  United  Nations  Sub-
    Regional Team  for  Barbados  and  the  OECS"  (at  pages  1-9  of  the
    Supplementary Bundle) and an internet article "Can St Kitts protect its
    gay  citizens?"  dated  23  December  2015  (at  pages  12-15  of   the
    Supplementary Bundle).  I also invited Mr McGarvey to take  me  to  the
    "US State Department Report on Human Rights Practices for  St  Kitts  &
    Nevis 2015" at pages 1-13 of the appellant's 'objective bundle' and, in
    particular,  pages  10-11  under  the  heading   "Acts   of   Violence,
    Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender
    Identity".

17.  On  the  basis  of  this  material,   Mr   McGarvey   submitted   that
    discrimination and  homophobic  behaviour  in  St  Kitts  &  Nevis  was
    "rampant" and it was irrational for the judge to find  that  an  openly
    gay man would not be exposed to a well-founded fear of  persecution  on
    return.

18. Dealing with Mr McGarvey's second point first, it is clear to  me  that
    the judge, when considering the background evidence in relation to  the
    treatment of LGBT individuals at paras 24-27, was addressing  the  risk
    of persecution to an individual who openly expressed his  sexuality  in
    St Kitts & Nevis.  Her conclusion was that such a gay man would not  be
    exposed to a real risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment.   If
    that finding is sustainable, it was wholly immaterial how the appellant
    would  behave  on  return.   Whether  he   would   behave   openly   or
    'discreetly', his claim could not succeed.

19. It is perfectly plain that the judge had well in  mind  the  structured
    approach in cases where an applicant claims asylum on the  basis  of  a
    well-founded fear of persecution as a gay man set out in  the  judgment
    of Lord Rodger in HJ (Iran) and another v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 at  [82].
    She sets out the lengthy passage in Lord Rodger's judgment at  para  18
    of her determination.  As Lord Rodger points out, the first question is
    whether the particular individual has established on the evidence  that
    he is gay or would be treated as gay by potential  persecutors  in  his
    own country.  Here, of course, the judge made a finding  in  favour  of
    the appellant.

20. Then, Lord Rodger goes on to set out the next question which is whether
    the Tribunal:

         "is satisfied on the available evidence that gay people  who  lived
         openly would be liable to persecution in the applicant's country of
         nationality".

21. That is precisely the question which the judge considered in paras  24-
    27 of her decision and determined against the appellant.

22. The issues of how particular an individual  would  behave  in  his  own
    country and if he would behave 'discreetly' whether that  would  be  to
    avoid persecution, are, as Lord Rodger made plain at [83], only  issues
    which arise if an openly gay person would be at risk of persecution  in
    his own country.  Given the judge's  adverse  finding  on  that  latter
    issue at para 27 of her decision, the issues of how the appellant would
    behave on return, and if he would behave 'discreetly' why he  would  do
    so, did not arise.

23. That, then, raises Mr McGarvey's first point: was the judge entitled as
    a matter of law to find on the evidence that the appellant  had  failed
    to establish a real risk of persecution?

24. Mr McGarvey referred to the judge's finding in para 26 that  there  was
    "no evidence of state-sponsored persecution of LGBT individuals".  That
    was, clearly, a finding open to the judge and I did not  understand  Mr
    McGarvey to dispute that finding.  It is, of  course,  consistent  with
    the judge's finding that despite the criminal law, no prosecutions  for
    sexual activity between consenting adults has occurred in recent years.
     The focus, however, of the judge's assessment of the evidence and  her
    ultimate finding was, correctly, upon the risk  to  the  appellant  (if
    any) from non-state actors and the attitude towards such individuals of
    the authorities.

25. At paras 24-25, the judge  referred  to  the  background  material,  in
    particular the US State Country Report and other  documents,  including
    that relied  on  by  Mr  McGarvey  before  me,  referring  to  "rampant
    homophobia".

26. The US State Department Report [at page 11] states as follows:

         "The law criminalizes consensual  same-sex  activity  between  men,
         which carries a penalty up to 10 years in prison, but there were no
         reports of the law being  enforced.   The  law  does  not  prohibit
         sexual activity between women.   No  laws  prohibit  discrimination
         against a person on the  basis  of  sexual  orientation  or  gender
         identity.

         Negative societal attitudes towards the LGBTI community impeded the
         operation of LGBTI organizations and the free association of  LGBTI
         persons.   The  government  asserted  it  received  no  reports  of
         violence or discrimination based on  sexual  orientation;  however,
         unofficial reports indicated that violence and discrimination was a
         problem.  Anecdotal evidence  suggested  that  LGBTI  persons  were
         reluctant to report incidents of violence  or  abuse  for  fear  of
         retribution or reprisal due to their sexual orientation  or  gender
         identity".

27. It is well established law that the criminalisation of homosexual  acts
    does not per se constitute persecution (see Minister Voor Immigratie En
    Asiel v X and Y and Z (Joined Cases C-199/12 to C-201/12) [2014] Imm AR
    440).

28. As the judge noted in para 24, the US State Department Report concludes
    that there were "no reports of the law being enforced".  The judge went
    on to  note  that  there  were  no  official  reports  of  violence  or
    discrimination based upon sexual orientation but that, as  Mr  McGarvey
    submitted before me, the culture was  antithetical  to  reporting  such
    acts of violence or abuse.

29. There is, however, no doubt that the judge accepted that discrimination
    and homophobic behaviour occurred in St Kitts & Nevis.  She also  noted
    that no evidence had been produced to show that the authorities in  the
    appellant's country were unable or unwilling to prosecute  perpetrators
    of violent attacks.  In fact, in para 23 she noted that (as regards the
    attack in 2010 upon the appellant which he  claimed  was  motivated  by
    homophobia) the police had taken action.

30. Mr McGarvey also placed some reliance upon  the  material  that  showed
    homophobic remarks by  the  Prime  Minister  (at  pages  13-15  of  the
    Supplementary Bundle).

31. There is no doubt that the background material demonstrates a level  of
    discrimination and homophobic antagonism towards  LGBT  persons  in  St
    Kitts & Nevis.  The word "persecution" has been  judicially  recognised
    as being a "strong word" (see Sepet v SSHD [2003] UKHL 15  at  [7]  per
    Lord Bingham).  Discrimination, in itself, even if it were contrary  to
    the  standards  of  human  rights  in  the  UK,  would  not  amount  to
    persecution  or  serious  harm  (the  latter  relevant   to   establish
    humanitarian protection or an Art 3 claim).  The  level  of  violation,
    prospective  or  apprehended,  must  attain  a  "substantial  level  of
    seriousness" (see MI (Pakistan) and Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  826
    at [63]).

32. In my judgment, the judge's finding in para 27 was  not  irrational  in
    the  light  of  the  background   evidence   despite   the   level   of
    discrimination and antagonism towards LGBT  persons  (which  the  judge
    fully recognised) in St Kitts & Nevis.  It was  properly  open  to  the
    judge to find on the basis of the evidence that she summarised at paras
    24-25 of her determination that any impact upon the appellant on return
    would not be "sufficiently severe or serious" to  be  characterised  as
    persecution or serious harm contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

33. I now turn to  consider  Mr  McGarvey's  third  and  fourth  points  in
    relation to para 23 of the judge's determination  in  which  she  found
    that she was not satisfied that the attack in  2010  was  motivated  by
    homophobia.  In relation to that finding, Mr  McGarvey  submitted  that
    the judge had required corroboration and, further, the judge's  finding
    was inconsistent with her  conclusion  in  para  23  that  the  police,
    knowing the assault was perpetrated due to homophobia, had taken action
    against the perpetrator.

34. At para 23, the judge said this:

         "Despite the fact that the matter was raised by the  Respondent  in
         the RFRL, the Appellant has provided no  supporting  evidence  from
         his lawyers in respect of the court case  and  has  not  sought  to
         obtain it since the RFRL was issued.  The Appellant stated in  oral
         evidence that he did not have the contact details of his lawyer but
         it is clear  from  the  interview  that  he  knew  his  name.   The
         Appellant has, I find, provided no reasonable  explanation  why  he
         could not obtain this information.  In the light of this failure to
         obtain evidence which should have been  available  and  failing  to
         provide a reasonable explanation for not  obtaining  it  I  am  not
         satisfied to the lower standard that the attack  was  motivated  by
         homophobia.  Nevertheless, it is  clear  that  notwithstanding  the
         fact that the police  knew  the  assault  was  perpetrated  due  to
         homophobia they took action and secured a conviction".

35. It  is  axiomatic  that  an  individual  is  not  required  to  produce
    corroborative  evidence  in  order  to   establish   an   international
    protection  claim  (see  Kasolo  (TH/13190)).   However,  a  judge  may
    properly  have  regard  to  the  absence  of  supporting  evidence   in
    circumstances where it would be reasonable to expect that  evidence  to
    be produced (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at  [21]).   In
    my judgment,  the  judge  applied  the  approach  in  TK  (Burundi)  in
    assessing the evidence - and the absence of supporting  evidence  -  in
    para 23 of her determination.  The judge noted that the  appellant  had
    the contact details of his lawyer in St Kitts & Nevis  and,  therefore,
    had given no reasonable explanation why he could not  obtain  from  his
    lawyer evidence relating to his claimed legal action against the person
    who attacked him in St Kitts & Nevis.  The judge then went on to  find,
    on the basis of the evidence, that the appellant  had  not  established
    that the motivation  behind  the  attack  was  as  he  claimed,  namely
    homophobia.

36. As regards Mr McGarvey's fourth point in relation to  para  23,  it  is
    clear that the final sentence is  not  inconsistent  with  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant had not established a homophobic motive  for
    the attack.  All that the judge is stating in that  final  sentence  is
    that  if  it  were  an  attack  motivated  by  homophobia,  the  police
    nevertheless took action and secured a conviction.  That is  the  point
    which the judge considered,  correctly,  relevant  as  to  whether  the
    authorities in St Kitts & Nevis were (and would be) willing and able to
    provide protection against homophobic attacks by prosecuting offenders.

37. Consequently, I do not accept Mr McGarvey's submission that  the  judge
    erred in law in para 23 of her determination.

38. For these reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    properly open to her on the evidence, for the reasons  she  gave.   Her
    decision discloses no error of law.

Decision

39. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    all grounds did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision stands.

40.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is,   accordingly,
    dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             31 October 2017
