






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13228/2018


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th December 2019               |On 15th January 2020               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THe Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harris counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harald &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G J Ferguson promulgated on the 12th March 2019  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claim.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I make an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. This matter previously appeared before me on 16 July 2019 to  determine
    whether or not there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant's case at that stage be considered in 2  distinct  parts,
    the one relating to his  activities  prior  to  leaving  Iran  and  his
    activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  involving  posting  materials  on
    internet media sites namely Facebook.

 5. In respect of the first part of his claim I ruled that  the  judge  did
    not make any material error of law and that the judge was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had fabricated his account of having been a
    supporter of the KDPI. The conclusion being that the appellant had  not
    been involved in activities that brought him to the  attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran prior to his leaving Iran and  therefore  he  would
    not be at risk by reason of such on return to Iran.

 6. With regard to the 2nd issue in reliance upon the case  of  HB  (Kurds)
    Iran CG 2018 UKUT 430 I ruled that the judge had failed to consider the
    pinch point question, namely whether on return to Iran at  the  airport
    the appellant, a Kurd who had been out of the country for some time and
    who did not have a passport, would be questioned including  questioning
    whether he had a Facebook page and  posted  materials  adverse  to  the
    government. The issue being whether that Facebook activity if  it  came
    to light would expose the appellant to the risk of mistreatment for  an
    imputed political opinion.

 7. Consistent with the matters set out in paragraphs 99 to 114 of the case
    of HB individuals that are returned to Iran through the airport without
    a passport are likely to be stopped and questioned by the  authorities.
    The  questioning  would  include  an  examination  whether  or  not  an
    individual had a Facebook account and whether there were  any  postings
    on that account. At that point the present postings  may  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities and the question therefore  arose  whether
    at that stage the appellant would be at  risk  of  being  subjected  to
    mistreatment for a perceived political opinion.

 8.  As set out in paragraph 15 of the  previous  decision  the  judge  had
    examined the evidence and concluded that the postings by the  appellant
    of some 12 postings over a period of a  year  would  not  come  to  the
    attention of the Iranian authorities prior to the  appellant  returning
    to  Iran.  As  such  prior  to  the  appellant's  return  to  Iran  the
    authorities would not know the appellant's Facebook page. It  was  also
    noted that the appellant's Facebook settings were on a  public  setting
    and that the appellant only had 10 friends. None of the  posts  related
    to the appellant himself.

 9. I draw attention to the headnote in the case of HB:-

    (1)   SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum  seeker)  Iran  CG [2016]
    UKUT 308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of  the  country
    guidance offered in the headnote. For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  that
    decision is not authority for any proposition in relation to  the  risk
    on return for  refused  Kurdish  asylum-seekers  on  account  of  their
    Kurdish ethnicity alone.

    (2)  Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does not
        support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at
        such a level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.



    (3)   Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly
        suspicious of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those
        of Kurdish ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion
        than hitherto and are reasonably likely to be subjected to
        heightened scrutiny on return to Iran.

    (4)   However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity
        with or without a valid passport, and even if combined with illegal
        exit, does not create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
        treatment.

    (5)   Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when
        combined with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution
        or Article 3 ill-treatment. Being a risk factor it means that
        Kurdish ethnicity is a factor of particular significance when
        assessing risk. Those "other factors" will include the matters
        identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

    (6)   A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is
        reasonably likely to result in additional questioning by the
        authorities on return. However, this is a factor that will be highly
        fact-specific and the degree of interest that such residence will
        excite will depend, non-exhaustively, on matters such as the length
        of residence in the KRI, what the person concerned was doing there
        and why they left.

    (7)   Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at
        risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the
        Iranian authorities. Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who
        speak out about Kurdish rights also face a real risk of persecution
        or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (8)   Activities that can be perceived to be political by the Iranian
        authorities include social welfare and charitable activities on
        behalf of Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on
        behalf of or in support of Kurds can be perceived as political and
        thus involve a risk of adverse attention by the Iranian authorities
        with the consequent risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

    (9)   Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is
        perceived to be political, such as, by way of example only, mere
        possession of leaflets espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if
        discovered, involves the same risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
        treatment. Each case however, depends on its own facts and an
        assessment will need to be made as to the nature of the material
        possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed by the Iranian
        authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

        (10)   The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described
        as a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to
        be involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish
        rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion
        is low and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to
        be extreme.

10. In that respect I note the  nature  of  the  materials  posted  by  the
    individual appellant in the case of HB set out in paragraph 112. In the
    case of HB it was acknowledged that the materials on Facebook would, if
    they come to the attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities,  expose  the
    individual to risk of prosecution and thereafter risk of ill-treatment.

11. In  the  present  case  the  facebook  postings  are  set  out  in  the
    appellant's bundle at Section A pages 9 to  19  together  with  further
    posting served in the current proceedings. The postings are  supportive
    of Kurdish political groups and are critical of the government and  its
    treatment of the Kurds. Given the nature of the materials if they  were
    to come to the attention of the Iranian authorities I  find  that  they
    would expose the appellant to a risk of  serious  mistreatment  for  an
    imputed political opinion.

12. The issue being as set out in HB  paragraph  116  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's Facebook page would become  known  to  the  authorities  on
    return as part of the investigation process of his background.  Clearly
    in the case of HB it was considered that the materials  would  come  to
    the attention of  the  authorities  and  that  by  reason  thereof  the
    appellant would be at risk. HB is a country guidance case.

13.  The  respondent  seeks  to  rely  upon  the  case  of  LKIK   v   SSHD
    PA/03758/2016. Firstly it has to be  noted  that  the  case  is  not  a
    country guidance case. I did admit the case and at the previous hearing
    before  me  directed  that  the  appellant's  representative  and   the
    respondent's representative submit skeleton arguments dealing with  the
    issues raised.

14. In LKIK before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson there was expert evidence on
    the impact of social media  and  means  by  which  one  can  avoid  the
    contents social media page become known to others and  by  which  posts
    and even accounts can be deleted. A series of questions were posed  for
    the expert. Those questions were :-

        i) Can a Facebook  account  still  be  viewed  after  it  has  been
           deleted? If so, in what circumstances and for how long?

       ii) Can a Facebook post be viewed after it has been deleted? If  so,
           in what circumstances and for how long?

      iii) If the information on the Facebook account has  been  stored  at
           that point/s in the past as part of a filtering/data  collection
           process, what  happens  to  that  information  if  the  Facebook
           account/post is subsequently deleted?

       iv) If a person A comments  on/likes/shares  person  B's  post,  can
           person A be identified from person B's post , even if  person  A
           deletes their own facebook account?

        v) If person A's post is shared by person B, what  happens  to  the
           shared post the person A deletes it?

       vi) Can person A's Facebook posts be copied/screenprinted by  person
           B- does that mean person A can never  delete  the  screenprinted
           copy?

      vii) Can the Facebook friends of a person A see everything  person  A
           posts /comments on/likes? How are the Facebook friends of person
           A's  Facebook  friends  notified  that  person  A   has   posted
           something?

     viii) Can the Facebook friends of person A  see  everything  person  A
           posts/comments on/likes? How are the Facebook friends of  person
           A's  Facebook  friends  notified  that  person  a   has   posted
           something.

       ix) You can see public post? How can public post be search for?

15. The case identifies that accounts can deleted and that once the account
    has been deleted the whole of the content would not be accessible,  the
    records of posts would not be accessible. The  conclusion  is  that  it
    would not be possible to access such or reconstruct such.

16. The conclusion with regard to question 2 is that once a  Facebook  post
    or copy of it is deleted it cannot be viewed.

17. In respect of question 3 save and except where a particular  individual
    has been identified and monitored by  the  Iranian  authorities  it  is
    highly  unlikely  that  they  would  be  able  to  monitor  or   obtain
    comprehensive copies of all Facebook content that has been generated or
    access such globally or even in their own specific region access  such.
    The expert report acknowledged that the Iranian state has and  operates
    a  sophisticated  Internet   filtering,   inspection   and   monitoring
    capability. However even in the light of that, the conclusion  set  out
    was maintained.

18. Once identified by the Iranian authorities such specifically identified
    individuals or groups could have their Facebook pages accessed if  they
    are public and their online activities inspected in real-time  and  all
    such activity preserved.

19. Thereafter consideration was  given  as  to  whether  individuals  were
    entitled to a Facebook account and whether the  requirement  to  delete
    such infringed a fundamental right. It was concluded that there was  no
    right to a Facebook  account  least  of  all  an  account  created  and
    generated for the sole purpose of presenting a false picture  of  one's
    political views in order to fabricate a false asylum  claim.  Where  an
    individual was not a  genuine  political  activist  and  did  not  hold
    political views the individual could have no arguable  defence  to  the
    expectation that he should delete his account.  The  materials  on  the
    account did not reflect his genuinely held political views and as  such
    were not an integral part of a person's political freedom.

20. As identified in the case of LKIK once the account  is  deleted,  there
    would be no possibility of  recovering  the  posts  that  were  in  the
    account.

21. LKIK also concluded that it was highly  unlikely  that  any  government
    organisation could have comprehensive copies of  all  Facebook  content
    that had been generated or accessed globally given the sheer  scale  of
    the information and that would apply even to specific regions.  However
    it would be possible for state actor such  as  the  Iranian  system  to
    specifically target groups and trace friends of the  groups  or  anyone
    linked with the  group  who   posted  a  comment  and  to  retain  such
    information.

22. In the circumstances  where,  as  here,  an  appellant  does  not  have
    genuinely held political views, the appellant can be expected to delete
    his account and it would be inaccessible to the Iranian authorities.

23. Given the previous findings with regard to the appellant, the appellant
    would not in the past have been of  interest  to  the  authorities  and
    there would be no interest in the appellant on  return.  The  appellant
    would not have been targeted and  would  not  be  an  individual  whose
    account would have been accessed or of  interest  to  the  authorities.
    There would be no reason for him as such  or  his  name  to  have  been
    specifically sought by the Iranian authorities or for him to have  been
    identified as part of the group of interest to the Iranian authorities.
    In that respect I do not find that he would have come to the  attention
    of the Iranian authorities or that they would have  been  targeting  or
    seeking to trace or check his activity.

24. I do not find that the Iranian authorities would have become  aware  of
    the posts that he has made. I do not find that the Iranian  authorities
    would be aware of his activities involvement on the Internet. I do  not
    find that he would be of any interest to  the  Iranian  authorities  on
    return to Iran. Whilst therefore on return he may be  questioned  there
    would be no record of his posts and as such I  do  not  find  that  the
    Iranian authorities would have any interest in him.  I  therefore  find
    that the appellant would not be at risk of anything  other  than  being
    questioned. I do  not  find  that  we  he  would  be  at  risk  of  any
    mistreatment.

25. Whilst the original Tribunal Judge's decision failed  to  consider  the
    pinch point, I have considered that issue and find that  the  appellant
    will not be at risk. I do not find that the authorities would have  any
    interest in the appellant on return to Iran. I  therefore  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

26. The original decision failed to consider a material point. I  therefore
    remake the decision by substituting a decision to dismiss the appeal on
    all grounds.






Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 13th January 2020





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings






Signed      Date 13th January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

