
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13184/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision& Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 10 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     hg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born in 1956 and is a  Sikh.
    He has three daughters, born on 1 February 2010, 24 March 2001  and  15
    September 1999. The respondent accepts the appellant's nationality  and
    also that he is a Sikh.

 2. He arrived in the UK with his family, including his wife, illegally  on
    6 May 2016 and claimed asylum on 10  May  2016.  That  application  was
    refused in a decision (to refuse a protection claim) dated 17  November
    2016. The appellant appealed and  his  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A.J. Parker ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 22 November 2017
    following which the appeal was dismissed. Permission to appeal  against
    that decision having been granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal, the
    appeal came before me.

    The basis of claim

 3. The basis of the appellant's protection  claim  is  summarised  in  the
    respondent's decision. That is that about five or six months before  he
    left Afghanistan (thus in October or November 2015) he started to  have
    problems with members of the Taliban in relation  to  some  work  being
    done on the road outside his house. They said that he would have to  do
    the work because he is a Sikh. If he did not help them they  would  hit
    him.

 4. One day, one of those men came to his home, saw one  of  his  daughters
    and told him that he was going to take her or that he should  give  her
    to him because he was a Sikh and had to do so. The  appellant  refused.
    Two days later the man returned with two others  and  all  were  armed.
    They banged on the door and said that they were there to take  his  two
    daughters. They were able to leave the property through the back of the
    house and went to stay in a neighbour's house in the basement.

 5. The appellant contacted  an  agent  who  arranged  for  them  to  leave
    Afghanistan which they did in April 2016.

 6. The appellant's skeleton argument  that  was  before  the  FtJ  raises,
    amongst other things, the fact that the respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant owned a shop. It also asserts a general  risk  to  Sikhs  and
    specific risk to the appellant and his daughters.

    The FtJ's decision

 7. The FtJ referred to  the  adverse  credibility  issues  raised  in  the
    respondent's decision but also recorded and  considered  the  arguments
    advanced on behalf of the appellant in relation  to  those  credibility
    issues, as well as those advanced at  the  hearing  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent. He made a number of adverse credibility findings.

 8. He  found  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  account,  including  in
    relation to the asylum interview. He rejected the claim that there  had
    been threats against him or his family. He also  found  incredible  the
    claim that his shop, which had apparently been in the possession of the
    family for over 30 years, and his house, were given to an agent to fund
    their flight from Afghanistan. Thus, he rejected the credibility of the
    appellant's account and also found that the  appellant's  daughter  who
    gave evidence was similarly not credible in her account.

    The grounds and submissions

 9. In the grounds it is contended that the FtJ did not adequately consider
    the matters that he was required to in  the  light  of  TG  and  others
    (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC). It is
    argued that the FtJ  failed  to  make  findings  in  relation  to,  for
    example, whether the appellant would be able to secure  employment  and
    accommodation on return, that he had failed to take into  account  that
    Sikhs constitute less than 1% of  the  population  and  that  they  are
    harassed and discriminated against.

10. It is also argued that the FtJ had not considered the issue  of  access
    to education for the  appellant's  children,  as  required  by  TG  and
    others. Sufficiency of protection was similarly not considered,  it  is
    said.

11. In his opening submissions Mr Samra  relied  on  the  grounds.  It  was
    confirmed that there  was  no  challenge  to  the  adverse  credibility
    findings.

12. In his submissions, Mr Bates referred to various aspects of  the  FtJ's
    decision in support of the proposition that in fact the  FtJ  had  made
    findings on material matters and there was no error of law in terms  of
    the guidance in TG and others. It was submitted, for example,  that  at
    [37] the FtJ had found that the appellant would have a shop  and  house
    to return to. At [33] the FtJ had rejected the appellant's  account  of
    having given his shop and house to an agent for  their  departure  from
    Afghanistan.

13. As to education, the FtJ referred to the appellant having said  in  the
    asylum interview that a  teacher  came  to  their  home  to  teach  the
    children  and  that  when  the  appellant  was  confronted  with   this
    inconsistency with his evidence he retracted his earlier testimony that
    there was no home schooling.

14. Thus, the evidence  suggests  that  the  children  do  have  access  to
    education. Furthermore, when the children came to the  UK  and  entered
    the education system there was  no  suggestion  that  they  needed  any
    special assistance and  they  just  "slotted  in".  One  of  them  went
    straight on to study for A' levels. That all indicated that  they  were
    well educated before they came to the UK.  They  could  continue  their
    education on return. In addition, the eldest children are now 17 and 19
    years of age so they would be entering the realms of further  education
    and it would be up to the family if they wanted to pursue that  course.
    The children would be returning as part of the family unit.

15. In reply, Mr Samra  submitted  that  the  circumstances  of  the  third
    daughter, born in 2010, were not considered. There was evidence  before
    the FtJ that she was at primary school in the UK.

16. It was submitted that the FtJ had not made a clear finding in terms  of
    whether the shop was still there and whether there would  be  education
    available for the children.  Likewise in terms of  whether  their  home
    was handed over to the agent. The appellant and his family have been in
    the UK since May 2016 and the question arises as to  whether  the  shop
    would still be vacant after two and a half years.

17. I was referred to [94] of TG and others regarding the difficulties  for
    Sikh girls attending school because of harassment  and  discrimination.
    Having regard to the evidence of the older children their education  is
    fundamental to their identity.

18. A further matter that the FtJ did not consider is what was said by  the
    appellant in his asylum interview in answer to  question  1.  There  he
    said that his wife was diabetic and had high  blood  pressure.  It  was
    accepted however, that there was no medical evidence  in  that  respect
    before the FtJ and also accepted that Article 3 in terms of health  was
    not relied on. It was not argued that the  medical  evidence  that  was
    served post-hearing was capable of establishing an error of law on  the
    part of the FtJ.

19. Mr Samra argued that the FtJ had not addressed the question of  whether
    the appellant would have the funds to educate his children  on  return,
    whether there is a family to return to or whether they would be able to
    receive support from the Gurdwara.

20. Mr Bates objected that if it was being argued that the FtJ should  have
    considered an alternative position in terms  of  what  the  appellant's
    circumstances would be in the event that he  was  found  not  credible,
    that was not a matter that was raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to the FtJ's decision.

21. Mr Samra suggested that this was a Robinson obvious point  in  that  it
    concerned  the  need  for  the  FtJ  to  consider   all   the   factual
    circumstances, per TG and others.

    Assessment

22. I start with quoting the guidance given in TG and others since that  is
    the focus for the complaint about the FtJ's decision. That guidance  is
    as follows:


    "Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:


      i) Some members of the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in  Afghanistan
         continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.


     ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do  not
         face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle
         them to a grant of international protection on the basis  of  their
         ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said  that
         the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities in general reaches the threshold of persecution.


    iii) A consideration of whether an individual member  of  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon  return  to
         Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All the relevant circumstances must
         be  considered  but  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   the
         following:


          a.  women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in   the   absence   of
             appropriate protection from a male member of the family;


          b. likely financial circumstances and  ability  to  access  basic
             accommodation bearing in mind


                - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of  the
                  Sikh and Hindu communities


                - such individuals may face difficulties (including threats,
                  extortion, seizure  of  land  and  acts  of  violence)  in
                  retaining property  and  /  or  pursuing  their  remaining
                  traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader


                - the traditional source of support  for  such  individuals,
                  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide  adequate
                  support;


          c.  the  level  of   religious   devotion   and   the   practical
             accessibility to a suitable  place  of  religious  worship  in
             light of declining numbers and the  evidence  that  some  have
             been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst  accessing
             the Gurdwara;


          d. access to appropriate  education  for  children  in  light  of
             discrimination  against  Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and   the
             shortage of adequate education facilities for them.


     iv) Although it appears there is a willingness at governmental level to
         provide protection, it is not established on the evidence that at a
         local level the police are willing, even if able,  to  provide  the
         necessary    level    of    protection    required    in    Refugee
         Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
         Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
         harassment amounting to persecution.


      v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the  Sikh  or  Hindu
         communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive  assessment.  The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above.  Given their particular circumstances and declining  number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.


     vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases of K  (Risk
         - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and SL and Others
         (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT 00137."


23. The FtJ referred to TG and others at [39]  stating  that  the  decision
    established that there would be no general risk of persecution for  the
    appellant on return. At [40] he quoted  paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii).  He
    neither quoted nor referred to paragraph (iii).


24. At [41] he referred to the guidance in AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan
    CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) and K (Risk - Sikh - Women)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2003] UKIAT 00057 in terms of the risk of harm  for  female  returnees
    and single Sikh women with children, respectively.


25. The fundamental difficulty with the appellant's complaint  in  relation
    to  the  FtJ's  decision  is  the  fact  of  the  unchallenged  adverse
    credibility findings. It is not necessary for me to spell them  out  in
    detail. Selected aspects of the FtJ's  decision  in  this  respect  are
    sufficient to illustrate the point.


26.  At  [32]  the  FtJ  expressed  doubt  about  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim that he did not take seriously  the  threats  to  his
    daughter from the man who forced him to work in circumstances where the
    appellant said that he regularly carried guns. At [33] he said that the
    appellant's and his daughter's evidence  was  vague  in  terms  of  the
    apparent lack of knowledge of  basic  facts  about  the  neighbour  who
    helped them despite the appellant saying in his witness statement  that
    he knew the neighbour well and that they were close. He said  that  the
    account in this respect "simply does not ring true".


27. The FtJ then said this at [33]:


         "He hands over the shop which has been in his  family's  possession
         for over 30 years and his house without even enquiring  as  to  the
         cost of the agent services which is not credible. He has no savings
         and these were his only assets and yet he hands them over without a
         second thought. [Counsel] argues the inconsistencies alleged  above
         are in any event minor. I disagree."


28. At [37] he said as follows:


         "Mrs Millward [Presenting Officer] argues that he will have a  shop
         and house to return to and given the lack  of  credibility  in  the
         appellant story this is true (sic)".


29. It is plain therefore, that the FtJ roundly rejected the credibility of
    the appellant's claim,  in  terms  of  threats  from  the  Taliban  (in
    relation to him or his daughter(s), and in relation to the disposal  of
    his shop and home. At [37] he expressly  agreed  with  the  proposition
    advanced on behalf of the respondent that the appellant  would  have  a
    shop and house to return to.


30. In terms of the prospects for education for the  appellant's  children,
    the evidence before the FtJ was that a teacher came to  the  school  to
    teach them. It appears that at  the  hearing  the  appellant  initially
    sought to advance a case that there was no home schooling but retracted
    that evidence when confronted with what he said in the asylum interview
    in answer to question 17, where he said that a teacher  would  come  to
    the house and teach the children.


31. I note that he also said in that answer that it was not  safe  for  the
    children to go out because they would be harassed in  the  street.  But
    the point is that they did have access  to  education,  privately.  The
    evidence before the FtJ did not reveal that there  was  any  reason  to
    think that his youngest daughter did not, or  would  not  be  able  to,
    receive the same education on a private basis as the elder daughters.


32. Furthermore, it seems to me that there is  merit  in  the  respondent's
    argument that the indications are that the older children at least were
    well educated before they came to the UK.


33. I do not consider that there is any merit in the argument  in  relation
    to what the appellant said in the asylum interview about the health  of
    his  wife.  In  the  first  place,  this  is  not  a  matter  that  was
    specifically raised in the grounds of appeal in relation to  the  FtJ's
    decision. It does not appear to have been a matter that was  relied  on
    before the FtJ and there was in any event no  medical  evidence  before
    the FtJ to consider in  this  respect.  It  does  not  appear  to  have
    featured as an issue in terms of any reasons for the family having left
    Afghanistan.


34. In terms of the appellant's specific contention that the  FtJ  did  not
    consider the factors set out at (iii) of the guidance in TG and others,
    it is important to bear in mind that the appellant has been found to be
    someone who did not suffer persecution in Afghanistan before  he  left.
    That is part of the context in which those factors  would  need  to  be
    considered. On the FtJ's findings there was no reason to  believe  that
    the appellant would be at real risk of harm amounting to persecution on
    return, just as he had not been at such risk before he left.


35. I do consider that it would have been better for the FtJ to  have  made
    explicit his consideration of the factors set out at (iii)  of  TG  and
    others with reference  to  that  decision,  but  his  findings  do  not
    represent a failure  to  apply  that  country  guidance  decision.  The
    essential elements of the guidance were considered.


36. I am not satisfied therefore, that there is any error  of  law  in  the
    FtJ's decision in any of the respects suggested.


    Decision


37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a  point  of  law.  Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this is  a  protection  claim  and  there  are  minors  involved  an
anonymity direction is appropriate. Therefore, unless and until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to
the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            5/12/18


