
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13524/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 14 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Moffatt of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in June 1992.   He  entered
    the UK with an entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave
    to remain to 4 August 2013, later extended until 14 December 2014.   An
    application to remain outside the Rules  was  refused  on  11  February
    2015.  An appeal against the decision was dismissed on 6 May 2015  and
    his appeal rights were exhausted on 9 September 2015.

2.    He  was  arrested  while  working  illegally  on  5  April  2016   and
    subsequently claimed asylum.  Although the  application  was  initially
    refused  and  certified,  further  representations  were  made.   There
    followed a decision on 15 November 2018 which gives rise to the  appeal
    proceedings herein.  The appeal came before First-tier  Judge  Lawrence
    on 3 January 2019.  The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant.

3.   The appellant's case involved a land dispute.  The  appellant's  father
    had two wives and  having  divorced  the  first  wife  he  married  the
    appellant's mother (GB).  Since the divorce the  first  wife  has  been
    seeking ownership of the appellant's father's properties and subjecting
    him to violence.  All the appellant's father's assets were  transferred
    to the appellant.   The  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  kidnapped,
    detained and tortured during detention.  On one  occasion  his  captors
    had taken too much alcohol and had forgotten to lock the door  and  the
    appellant escaped.

4.   In the UK the appellant married but the appellant's first  wife  caused
    him to divorce his wife and it was the appellant's case that she wished
    the appellant to return to Pakistan and sign over  properties  to  her.
    She came from an influential family.

5.   The judge considered at some length if the  appellant  had  shown  that
    the land dispute "the catalyst of the alleged persecution" had actually
    taken  place  and  at  paragraph  44  stated  "I  have  considered  the
    appellant's case in the round.  In my view,  the  appellant's  case  is
    lacking in credibility.  I am unable  to  attach  much  weight  to  the
    documents he has submitted in support of his case."

6.   The principal complaint made in this case on behalf  of  the  appellant
    in  relation  to  the  judge's  findings  is  that  having  found   the
    appellant's case to be lacking in credibility he went on  to  make  the
    following findings in paragraph 45 of the decision:

         "The appellant has provided a 'scarring  report',  prepared  by  Mr
         Mason (see: "Resp 1" P; duplicated at C1-C16 "Consolidated Bundle).
         In preparing this report he interviewed the appellant. He also  had
         sight of s/c, witness statement (dated  26th  of  April  2016)  and
         Grounds for Judicial Review. Mr Mason was directed to 7 scars (see:
         P3-P4). He describes alternate causes. In the 'Opinion' section  of
         the report (P7-P8)  he  particularises  his  findings  and  in  the
         'Conclusions' section he concludes his "overall opinion  that  they
         are typical of the scars that would result from injuries caused  in
         the manner he (the  appellant)  describes".  Given  the  limitation
         within which to work, namely, and principally, the account given by
         the appellant Mr Mason could not have come to a different view.  Mr
         Mason  had  no  opportunity,  or  the  need,  to   scrutinise   the
         appellant's claim, in the light of other  'evidence'  submitted.  I
         have been provided with the AIR, the DECISION,  Affidavit  and  FIR
         from GB, the appellant's  Divorce  Certificate,  land  registration
         documents and  a  variety  of  other  documents.  These,  on  close
         scrutiny,  to  the  lower  standard,  demonstrate  the  appellant's
         account of persecution is a fiction. I find, to the lower standard,
         the appellant has given a fictitious account to the Tribunal. I  am
         not satisfied, to the lower standard,  he  told  the  truth  to  Mr
         Mason. Accordingly, Mr Mason's report, considered in the round,  to
         the lower  standard,  does  not  warrant  as  much  weight  as  the
         appellant intends."

7.   The judge went on to consider the other medical evidence  and  did  not
    find that he had made out a claim to be depressed or requiring therapy.
     The claim had  only  been  made  after  he  had  been  caught  working
    illegally.  In the light  of  his  findings  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's claim under the Rules and on Article 8 grounds outside  the
    Rules.  There was an application for permission to appeal.   Permission
    to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  but  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on the argument that the judge had  taken  an  incorrect
    approach when considering the medical evidence and in relation  to  the
    assessment of the chronology.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

8.   Miss Moffatt took me through the medical report, pointing out that  the
    judge in reaching his conclusions had not relied on any  uncorroborated
    assertion by the appellant (paragraph 7.3 of his report) and that there
    were a number of scars that could not have  occurred  accidentally  and
    the doctor concluded in paragraph 6.5

         "It is in my opinion extremely unlikely by virtue of  their  number
         and widespread distribution that the wounds that  resulted  in  the
         scars described above were self-inflicted or were inflicted on  the
         appellant with his consent (self-inflicted wounds by proxy -  SIBP)
         although it  is  recognised  that  these  possibilities  cannot  be
         eliminated on the basis of the scars' characteristics alone."

    Counsel referred to KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State [2019] UKSC 10.
     This decision supported the submission that  the  medical  report  was
    strongly corroborative  of  the  appellant's  account,  in  that  self-
    infliction was to be regarded as inherently extremely  unlikely.   Such
    evidence should be given considerable weight.  This was so  even  where
    there was a serious lack of credibility in relation to other aspects of
    the evidence.  The judge's approach had put the cart before  the  horse
    and reference was made to Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA  Civ
    367.

9.   In making his factual assessment at paragraph 36 of  his  decision  the
    judge had erred in paragraph 36 of the determination as follows:

         "In the AIR the appellant claims that due to the harassment he  had
         to divorce his wife  (Q11).   In  support  of  his  claim  that  he
         divorced his wife the appellant has submitted what purports  to  be
         the 'divorce certificate' (see: 'Resp 1'; U1).   This  is  dated  9
         October 2015.  However the affidavit  states  that  the  harassment
         took place on '16 August 2016'  (see:  'consolidated  bundle'  page
         B42).   On  the  evidence  before  me  the  divorce  preceded   the
         harassment by some ten months."

    Counsel makes the point that the judge had  misconstrued  the  evidence
    and the page referred to was not an affidavit but an FIR Report and  it
    was not claimed that this was the incident that  had  precipitated  the
    divorce - it was his mother's arrest and detention  in  2015.   He  had
    been consistent throughout on this matter.

10.  In ground 2 it was  argued  that  had  the  evidence  of  torture  been
    accepted, the judge would have needed to consider the impact of  trauma
    on the appellant's mental health in  assessing  credibility  and  might
    have needed to apply  the  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance.  The appellant's account of dates and times might  have  been
    affected by the impact of trauma.   A  number  of  documents  had  been
    submitted which the judge had not acknowledged as asserted in ground  4
    - reference was made to  court  documents,  witness  evidence,  missing
    person's report and the FIR and bail application.   The  judge  had  in
    particular not paid sufficient attention  to  corroborative  statements
    from family members.

11.  In ground 5 it was  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  rejecting
    evidence about the appellant's movements around  the  country  although
    their authenticity had never been questioned by the respondent who  had
    had possession of the documents for some two years.  No complaints were
    raised in cross-examination.  The reference to the criticism attributed
    to the respondent that  the  appellant  had  been  in  hotels  in  both
    Rawalpindi and Islamabad, rather than just Islamabad had been abandoned
    and was not contained in the decision of the respondent subject to  the
    appeal.

12.  Mr Whitwell in response to the fifth  ground  referred  to  Maheshwaran
    [2002] EWCA Civ 173 at paragraph 3.  In relation to the Mibanga  point,
    Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had stated that he had taken  into
    account the report in the round and he had attributed weight to it.  In
    paragraph 16 of the grounds it had been submitted that the findings  of
    Mr Mason were  all  but  "diagnostic"  of  the  torture  the  appellant
    described.  Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  judge  had  described  the
    injuries as either typical or consistent with the  appellant's  account
    but not diagnostic.

13.  The judge had taken into account the timing of  the  appellant's  claim
    and other matters when reaching his findings.

14.  In relation to  ground  2  there  had  never  been  a  claim  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable  witness.   The  judge  had  considered  the
    medical evidence in relation to PTSD in paragraph 47 of the decision.

15.  In relation to ground 5 the point had not been expressly challenged  by
    the respondent.  However the decision in Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  Imm  AR
    318 applied.  The judge had referred to Tanveer Ahmed in  paragraph  43
    of his decision.  It was also appropriate to  consider  what  had  been
    said in Maheshwaran.  Mr Whitwell referred to paragraphs 3 to 5 of  the
    decision.

16.  In reply, Miss Moffatt  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  directed
    himself properly on the approach to the medical evidence  and  had  not
    considered matters holistically.  Although the grounds had contained  a
    reference to "diagnostic" the appellant's injuries had been  identified
    as non-accidental and it is very unlikely that they were self-inflicted
    or inflicted by consent.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    I can only interfere with the decision if it was materially  flawed  in
    law.  The principal argument in this case centres on the Mibanga point.
     This is really a classic Mibanga case.  In Mibanga   Ward L  J  stated
    as follows at paragraph 24:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal  if  alliterative  example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing  its  truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of pieces of evidence. Mr
         Tam, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argues that decisions  as
         to the credibility of an account are to be taken  by  the  judicial
         fact-finder  and  that,  in  their  reports,  experts,  whether  in
         relation  to  medical  matters  or  in   relation   to   in-country
         circumstances, cannot usurp the fact-finder's function in assessing
         credibility. I agree. What, however, they can offer, is  a  factual
         context in which it may be necessary for the fact-finder to  survey
         the allegations placed before him; and such  context  may  prove  a
         crucial aid to the decision whether or not to accept the  truth  of
         them. What the  fact-finder  does  at  his  peril  is  to  reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and  then,
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's attention to a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely  HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321  in  which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:


         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come."

18.  Having given an exhaustive analysis of  the  land  dispute  and  having
    found at paragraph 44 that the appellant's case lacked credibility then
    and only then does the judge refer to Mr Mason's report.  He approaches
    this report on the basis of the findings that he had made.  However  as
    Counsel points out Mr Mason had said in paragraph  7.3  of  his  report
    that in reaching his conclusions "I do not rely on  any  uncorroborated
    assertion by RK." This sits uneasily with the  judge's  observation  in
    paragraph 45 "Given the limitation within which to  work,  namely,  and
    principally, the account given by the appellant Mr Mason could not have
    come to a different view."

19    Counsel refers to the decision in KV (Sri  Lanka)  where  the  Supreme
    Court endorsed at paragraph 35 what was said by Elias LJ  about  giving
    very considerable weight to the fact that "injuries which are SIBP  are
    likely to be extremely rare."  It is clear that the  judge  was  unduly
    dismissive of the report.

20.  Although  I  have  carefully  considered  the  points  advanced  by  Mr
    Whitwell, in the light of the treatment of the medical evidence and the
    other factual errors that Counsel identified it does appear to me  that
    the determination is flawed in a central aspect and  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the facts cannot stand.

21.  In the light of  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding  required  and  the
    Presidential Direction it is clear that this case should be reheard  by
    a judge other than Judge Lawrence in the First-tier  Tribunal  de  novo
    with no factual findings preserved.

22.  The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I consider it would be premature to make a fee award  in  the  circumstances
of this case. I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 12 June 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

