
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13798/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th June 2019                    |On 05th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  Sisay [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Majid, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was born  on  29th  February
    1992, and who arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on  7th  June
    2018.  The appellant claimed asylum the same day but on  29th  November
    2018, the respondent refused to recognise the appellant as a refuge  or
    to  grant  humanitarian  protection.   He  gave  directions   for   the
    appellant's removal to Ethiopia and it was against that  decision  that
    the appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lange  on  12th  March  2019,  in
    Manchester.

2.   The basis for the appellant's claim  was  that  having  been  born  and
    lived in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia he married in October  2014  and  had  a
    child.  He lived with his  grandparents,  father,  wife  and  son.   He
    claims that on 9 June 2015, after he and a friend had  been  discussing
    politics at a coffee shop, he was detained by the police for some three
    months.  Following that detention,  he  started  to  support  Patriotic
    Ginbot 7 (PG7).

3.   He attended meetings, made financial contributions and claims  to  have
    handed out leaflets for it.  He says that he was arrested  following  a
    meeting he attended when it was raided  by  police  on  30th  September
    2016, and claims that on that occasion he was detained for some five or
    six months.  He says that he was tortured and interrogated, but managed
    to escape after an uncle bribed the police and  he  was  helped  by  an
    agent to leave Ethiopia.

4.   He claims that his wife has told him that  police  have  twice  visited
    looking for him, although she knew nothing of his political activities.
     He left Ethiopia on 2nd March 2017 and spent six  days  in  Sudan  and
    then travelled to Libya.  He was there for some five  months  where  he
    was forced to work by agents.  He then travelled to Italy,  which  took
    four days and he remained in Italy for a month and  then  travelled  to
    France where he remained for nine months before coming  to  June.   The
    appellant claimed that since he had been in the United Kingdom  he  had
    been involved in activities on behalf of PG7 in the United Kingdom  and
    claimed in all oral evidence that he had attended two meetings  in  the
    United Kingdom.

5.   The judge had dealt with the  appellant's  asylum  claim  but  did  not
    consider the risk to this appellant  as  a  result  of  his  sur  place
    activities.   At   the   hearing   before   me   this   morning,   both
    representatives agreed that  the  determination  could  not  stand  and
    should be set aside.  I set aside the determination given the  material
    error of law in it.   The  appellant  has  effectively  been  denied  a
    hearing and I therefore remit this matter to be  heard  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lange.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 02 July 2019
