
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13767/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ceallaigh, Luqmani Thompson & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant stated that he was a citizen of Syria born on  16  August
    1999.

 2. Judge O'Malley (the judge) allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated
    on 2 July 2018.  She found him to be  a  Syrian  national  at  risk  on
    return.

 3. The grounds claim the judge failed to  give  reasons  or  any  adequate
    reasons for finding on material matters and made perverse or irrational
    findings on matters that were material to the  outcome.   At  [55]  she
    said that whilst she was unable to find an explanation for his  absence
    of clear knowledge regarding his local environs, she  accepted  he  had
    some familiarity with aspects of life and Government in Syria.  She was
    satisfied that he was from a small village in the south east  of  Syria
    and that he and his family were Bahdini Kurdish speakers, as opposed to
    the majority, Kurmangji speakers in the area.

 4. The grounds claim that the judge failed to provide any adequate reasons
    for why the appellant's complete lack of knowledge about his home  area
    did not completely undermine his claim to be a  Syrian  national.   The
    respondent relied upon Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC) at [14]:

         "We are not for a moment suggesting that judgments have to set  out
         the entire interstices of the evidence presented or  analyse  every
         nuance between the parties.  Far from it.  Indeed, we  should  make
         it clear that it is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and  unhealthy
         for First-tier Tribunal judgments to seek to rehearse every  detail
         or issue raised in the case.   This  leads  to  judgments  becoming
         overly long and confused.   Further,  it  is  not  a  proportionate
         approach to deciding cases.  It is however,  necessary  for  First-
         tier Tribunal Judges to identify and resolve the key  conflicts  in
         the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for
         preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand
         why they have won or lost".

 5. The grounds claim that the judge's findings were  perverse  given  what
    she found to be his vagueness with his local area, local landmarks  and
    street  marks  and  street  names  which  the  respondent  claims   was
    inconsistent with the appellant's claim to have lived in the  area  his
    entire life.  There was nothing  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  was
    unable for any reason to provide consistent and  credible  evidence  in
    relation to that aspect of his claim.

 6. The grounds claim that the judge's findings affected the core  elements
    of the appellant's claim, that is, his nationality and accordingly, the
    judge materially erred in law.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds.  I need not set them out again here.
     Mr O'Ceallaigh relied upon his Rule 24 response.  The grounds  claimed
    a complete lack of knowledge about his home area on  the  part  of  the
    appellant, whereas the  judge's  findings  in  that  regard  were  more
    nuanced.  The judge did not err.





Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. Judge O'Malley carried out a careful and comprehensive analysis of  the
    appellant's claim.  The  respondent  chose  not  to  cross-examine  the
    appellant such that the judge was left  with  the  burden  of  analysis
    without the benefit of the Presenting Officer testing  the  appellant's
    claim.  The judge took into  account  the  expert  evidence  which  was
    inconclusive as to the appellant's linguistic origins.  See  [36]-[45].
    The judge correctly set out her concerns.  She said at  [55]  that  she
    was unable to find an explanation for the appellant's absence of  clear
    knowledge about  his  local  environs.   The  judge  did  not  say  the
    appellant had a complete lack of knowledge about his home  area.   What
    she said was that he had some familiarity  with  aspects  of  life  and
    government in Syria and  that  he  had  provided  further  evidence  to
    support his claim although she reminded herself that  no  corroboration
    was necessary.  Although she did not say so, it is  apparent  that  she
    had in mind the lower standard of proof in terms of Kaja [1995] Imm  AR
    1.  The judge was not obliged to be satisfied regarding every issue  of
    the appellant's claim.

Notice of Decision

 9. The grounds disclose no error  of  law.   The  judge's  decision  shall
    stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 14 September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


