
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13044/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 2nd March 2020                    |On: 12th March 2020                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     RMF
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Abdulla, Hazelhurst Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He appeals with permission against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Povey)  to  dismiss  his
    protection appeal.


    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2008.  His  original
    asylum claim was based on his fear of terrorism. He had been  a  member
    of the Iraqi army but  claimed  to  have  fled  because  he  was  being
    targeted by Islamists  who  perceived  him  as  a  'collaborator'.  The
    Appellant's claim was rejected for want of credibility. Although it was
    accepted that he may have been  in  the  army,  his  account  of  being
    targeted for that reason was not believed.

 3. The Appellant did not leave the United Kingdom after his appeal failed.
    He made three further sets of submissions, the latter of which took the
    Respondent over five years to consider.   During much of that time  the
    Appellant was homeless.

 4. The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal in  September  2019
    turned on an application of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544.
     The Appellant contended that he was from a 'contested  area'  (Kirkuk)
    and that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  relocate  somewhere
    else, for instance somewhere in the IKR.

 5. Although no express finding  is  made  on  the  point,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeared to proceed on the basis that the Appellant was from a
    contested area and that as such  Article  15(c)  applied.  I  say  this
    because the decision is taken  up  with  the  determination  of  issues
    relevant to internal flight, such as where the Appellant's family lives
    and whether he can access documentation. On those matters the  Tribunal
    accepted the Appellant's evidence that his family were last known to be
    living in Kirkuk, but rejected his claim  to  have  lost  contact  with
    them.  As to whether the Appellant could obtain  a  CSID  the  Tribunal
    found that he could do so via the embassy in London, or upon return  to
    Iraq with the assistance of a proxy, presumably in Kirkuk.  The  appeal
    was thereby dismissed, the Tribunal having reached the conclusion  that
    it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  relocate
    internally.

 6. The Appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that in its assessment of  internal  flight  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to apply the guidance in a second  country  guidance  case,  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212.   That case had
    held inter alia that an undocumented Iraqi was unlikely to be  able  to
    secure a new CSID from the embassy in London. Whether he was able to do
    so upon return to Iraq depended on a number of factors, none  of  which
    had been considered by the Tribunal.  The Appellant  further  submitted
    that the findings on the Appellant's contact with his  family  were  of
    limited significance in the absence of evidentially-based findings that
    those family members would themselves be in a position to assist him.

 7. Before me Mr Tan for the Secretary of State accepted that the  Tribunal
    had not conducted a global assessment of all of the factors relevant to
    internal flight. It had not for instance  assessed  how  the  Appellant
    could get from Baghdad to Kirkuk, whether the civil status office there
    was operational and if it was whether the Appellant had the information
    necessary to obtain a new card.    The Secretary of State also  pointed
    out that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to deal  with  her  central
    submission before the First-tier Tribunal, that Kirkuk  was  no  longer
    'contested' to the extent that Article 15(c) applied.    The  Secretary
    of State therefore invited me to set the whole decision aside.  In view
    of the consensus between the parties I do so.

 8. At the date that the decision in this appeal falls to be remade,  there
    is a third operative country guidance to be  applied:  SMO,  KSP  &  IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]  UKUT  00400  (IAC).
    Importantly that decision covers two material aspects of this case: the
    safety of the Appellant's return to Kirkuk, and the likelihood  of  him
    being able to acquire, in good time, documents which would  enable  him
    to work, rent accommodation etc.

 9. On the first matter the findings in SMO are that Kirkuk  is  no  longer
    contested and that Article 15(c) no longer, in general, applies.    The
    Tribunal set out a number of factors that might enhance the risk to  an
    individual per the Elgafaji 'sliding scale'. It is not  contended  that
    any of those apply here.  Accordingly I find that there is no  risk  of
    indiscriminate harm to the Appellant arising  from  an  internal  armed
    conflict in Iraq.

10. On the second matter the position  is  less  clear.  The  relevance  of
    documents in Iraqi cases is, for the Secretary of State,  that  without
    them  an  individual  may  face  conditions  of   such   socio-economic
    deprivation so as to engage  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    Article 3 ECHR/ Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.   To that
    end the concession made in AA, AAH and repeated  in  SMO  remains  Home
    Office policy:


         "it remains the position that a person returning to Iraq without
         either family connections able to assist him, or the means to
         obtain a CSID, may be at risk of enduring conditions contrary to
         Article 3 ECHR".


11. The parties before me agreed that in light of this concession the  task
    for this Tribunal was to make findings on the following matters. Is  it
    reasonably likely that:


              i) The Appellant is currently not in possession of a CSID;


             ii) The Appellant would not be able to  obtain  a  CSID  before
                 departure from the United Kingdom;

            iii) That the Appellant would therefore find himself at  Baghdad
                 airport without the means to move on to other places in the
                 country, ie by being unable to  board  a  domestic  flight/
                 pass through checkpoints

             iv) The  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  receive  material
                 assistance from family members in Kirkuk

12. I find as fact that the Appellant is not currently in possession  of  a
    CSID. He is in possession of photocopies of his old INC card,  and  his
    Iraqi national army identification.

13. Mr Tan submitted that the Appellant would be able  to  acquire  a  CSID
    before he leaves the United Kingdom,  by  approaching  the  embassy  in
    London. He referred me to paragraph 383 of the decision in SMO (Iraq):

         We have not been asked to revisit the extant  country  guidance  on
         the way in which an individual might obtain a replacement CSID from
         within the UK, for which see [173]-[177] of AA (Iraq) and  [26]  of
         AAH (Iraq).  We add only this: whilst the INID is clearly replacing
         the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not have the  electronic  terminals
         necessary to issue the INID and continue to issue the CSID instead,
         as confirmed in a Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  report
         which is quoted at 5.6.9 of the respondent's CPIN entitled Internal
         Relocation, civil documentation and returns, dated  February  2019.
         An Iraqi national in the UK would be able to apply for  a  CSID  in
         the way explained  in  AA  (Iraq)  and,  if  one  was  successfully
         obtained, we find that it  would  be  acceptable  evidence  of  the
         individual's identity throughout Iraq.  Notwithstanding the plan to
         replace the old CSID system with the INID by the end  of  2019,  we
         accept what was said by EASO (in  February  2019)  and  the  Danish
         Immigration  Service  and  Landinfo  (in   November   2018),   that
         implementation was delayed and that the CSID was still  being  used
         in Iraq, and that it continues to be issued in those parts  of  the
         country in which the INID  terminals  have  not  been  rolled  out.
         Given this evidence, and the fact that the CSID has been a  feature
         of Iraqi society for so long, we do not accept that there will come
         a time at the end of this year when the CSID suddenly ceases to  be
         acceptable as proof of identity.

14. Mr Tan relied on this passage to submit that the Upper Tribunal in  SMO
    clearly envisaged that it remained possible to obtain  a  new  CSID  in
    London. The passages in AA to which the Tribunal refer are these:

         173. As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi passport
         but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report that  a  CSID
         may be obtained through the "Consular section of the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London", which will send a request for a replacement or  renewed
         CSID to the  General  Directorate  for  Travel  and  Nationality  -
         Directorate of Civil Status. A request for a replacement CSID  must
         be accompanied, inter alia, by "any form of  official  document  in
         support of the applicant's identity" and the application form  must
         be signed by "the head of the family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
         representative to verify the truth of its contents." He also  added
         that an applicant must also authorise a person in Iraq  to  act  as
         his representative in order for that person to "follow  up  on  the
         progress of the application".


         174.  However,  Dr  Fatah  continued  by  explaining  that  if   an
         individual has lost his CSID and does not know  the  relevant  page
         and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy in London will not be
         able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead, he or she will  have  to
         attend the appropriate local office of family registration in  Iraq
         or give a relative, friend or lawyer power of  attorney  to  obtain
         his or her CSID. The process of a giving power  of  attorney  to  a
         lawyer in Iraq to act "as a proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah  had
         done this himself. He also explained that  the  power  of  attorney
         could be obtained through the Iraq Embassy.


         175. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the  effect  that  having  a
         marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain  data  found
         in the family records. It  is,  however,  not  possible  to  use  a
         "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is no primary
         health care or GP system in Iraq,  but  instead  patients  attended
         hospital when they needed to do so and no central records are held.




         176. There is a consensus  between  Dr  Fatah's  evidence  and  the
         following more general evidence provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in  April
         2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad. "In principle, a
         failed asylum seeker, or  indeed  any  Iraqi  citizen  abroad,  can
         acquire Iraqi documents through  Iraqi  embassies  and  consulates.
         There is a special authorization granted to these bodies to provide
         documents for Iraqi abroad on the condition that the  beneficiaries
         should have  any  available  documents  in  order  to  prove  their
         nationality."


         177. In summary, we conclude that  it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details. For  persons  without
         such a passport, or who are unable to produce the  relevant  family
         registration details, a  power  of  attorney  can  be  provided  to
         someone in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter  undertake  the  process  of
         obtaining the CSID for such person from the  Civil  Status  Affairs
         Office in their home governorate. For  reasons  identified  in  the
         section that follows below, at the  present  time  the  process  of
         obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the
         person wishing to obtain the CSID is from  an  area  where  Article
         15(c) serious harm is occurring".


15. And the supplementary evidence given by Dr Fatah in AAH was as follows:


         26. If applying through a consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour photographs. Crucially  the
         applicant must be able to produce something which can establish the
         location of his family's details in the civil register. This should
         be a CSID, an INC or  birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity.


         27. If you are in Iraq, and have all of the required documents,  in
         normal circumstances the process is straightforward and  quick  and
         should take no more than three days. Dr Fatah's  own  daughter  was
         born in the United Kingdom and he managed to obtain her a  CSID  in
         one day from the office in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment  of  a  small
         fee. Dr Fatah was less  optimistic  about  the  efficiency  of  the
         process if in the United Kingdom. He has regular dealings with  the
         consulate in London and he is not impressed.  He  said  that  staff
         there are generally very unhelpful.


         ....


16. Applying that guidance, and in particular the evidence of Dr  Fatah,  I
    find as follows.   There is no obstacle  to  the  Appellant  signing  a
    statement explaining why he does not currently have a CSID. Whether  he
    could get  that  countersigned  by  the  head  of  his  family  remains
    debatable. The First-tier Tribunal found that he will still  have  some
    contact with his family in Kirkuk but it is far from  clear  that  this
    includes his father.  The Appellant's father  was  certainly  alive  in
    2008 when he assisted the Appellant in leaving  Iraq,  but  I  have  no
    information about what might have happened to him in the 12 intervening
    years. Assuming that the Appellant's  father  is  alive  and  well  and
    living in Kirkuk, and  that  there  is  no  reason  why  he  could  not
    countersign the application form,  there  remains  the  matter  of  the
    colour photocopy of the INC. As  far  as  I  am  aware  the  only  copy
    available is in monochrome, and it  is  less  than  clear  whether  the
    embassy would accept this in lieu of the colour facsimiles required  by
    the rules. I note Dr Fatah's overall conclusion that embassy  staff  in
    London are "generally very unhelpful". Having considered all  of  those
    matters in the round I am satisfied that there  must  be  a  reasonable
    likelihood that the Appellant would not be able to acquire a  new  CSID
    in London. The strict evidential requirements for the application  must
    be viewed in the context of the very great number  of  Iraqi  nationals
    who are undocumented, and Dr Fatah's evidence that the problems  of  an
    individual returnee are regarded as "trivial".


17. This means that there is at least  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant will find himself at Baghdad airport with no means of  onward
    travel. He cannot board a domestic flight to Kirkuk,  and  cannot  pass
    through the many checkpoints on the road north.  In order to do  so  he
    would need a CSID, or one of the new generation of identity cards - the
    INIC - being progressively rolled out across the country.

18. The next question is whether the Appellant would be able to secure such
    identity documents within a reasonable time frame.  Assuming  that  his
    family in Kirkuk would be able to assist him by approaching  the  civil
    status office in that city on his behalf,  and  that  one  male  family
    member would be able and willing to make the journey to Baghdad airport
    to greet the Appellant and bring to him  a  replacement  card,  I  must
    nevertheless consider the likelihood of such a card being issued  to  a
    proxy. It was the clear evidence of Dr Fatah that the new generation of
    cards are not being issued to proxies.   Although the Tribunal was  not
    told whether the Kirkuk civil status office is issuing INICs or  CSIDs,
    it appears safe to assume that it is the former, given the evidence  in
    SMO that it is is  'rural  areas'  that  have  been  left  behind:  see
    paragraph 389 SMO.   That being so it does not  appear  to  be  at  all
    likely that the Appellant will be able to obtain a INIC from  his  home
    city Kirkuk, given that he cannot get there and any family  member  who
    might be willing to help will  not  be  assisted  by  the  authorities.
    Applying the guidance in AAH and SMO  it  follows  that  the  Appellant
    would, on arrival, be exposed to conditions amounting to a violation of
    Article 15(b) and his appeal must be allowed on that basis.




    Anonymity Order

19. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Decisions


20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


21. There is an order for anonymity.

22. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows: the appeal is  allowed
    on human rights grounds.
                                                              [pic]
      Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                          2nd March 2020








