
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13369/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2018                         |On 23rd November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Hemin [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A B Faryl (instructed by VAS UK)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to a decision  of  Judge  Evans  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9th February 2018.  For the sake  of
    continuity and clarity I will continue  to  refer  to  Mr  [M]  as  the
    Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  in  this
    judgment.

 2. Judge Evans was hearing the appeal of an  Iraqi  citizen  born  on  1st
    September 1984 against the Secretary of State's decision, taken on  1st
    December 2017, to refuse his protection claim.

 3. It is clear that at the hearing before Judge Evans, when the  Appellant
    was represented by Counsel, he pursued only his Article 8 claim.

 4. The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  March  2009  and  his
    asylum claim was refused that same  month.   His  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on 11th May 2009 and  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted in June 2009.

 5. He made further submissions on 7th May 2015 which led to  the  decision
    appealed against.

 6. The Appellant relied on his relationship with Ms [P], a British citizen
    with whom he had been in a  relationship  since  2013.  They  had  only
    cohabited from October 2014 and the application was made in May 2015.

 7. The issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the  Appellant
    could satisfy the  requirements  of  Ex.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. The matter first came before me on 30th July  when  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had fallen into error in finding that the Appellant
    met the requirements of Ex.1(b).  In an error of law decision    signed
    on 30th July 2018 but for some reason sent out only on 5th October 2018
    I said this:-

      a) "In his Decision and Reasons the judge did not find  the  Appellant
         to be a credible witness for several reasons. He also did not  find
         Ms [P] a credible witness for several reasons. With regard  to  the
         Appellant the Judge noted that his answers were evasive when  asked
         about the contact he had with his family since leaving Iraq in 2009
         and that he appeared unwilling to give a  straight  answer  to  the
         questions asked. She found his evidence that they had lost  contact
         implausible and that he had given a wholly  unsatisfactory  account
         of how he had spent the four years between 2009  and  2013  in  the
         United Kingdom.

      b) With regard to Ms [P] the Judge found she had  given  contradictory
         evidence about  her  working,  her  provision  of  daily  care  and
         assistance to her mother and regarding her own medical issues.

      c) Notwithstanding those adverse credibility findings,  together  with
         his finding that Ms [P]'s medical conditions had been  exaggerated,
         he noted that there was in any event no evidence suggesting medical
         treatment for her conditions would not be available in the IKR. The
         Judge found that although Ms [P] may wish  to  remain  in  the  UK,
         there were no very significant  difficulties  which  could  not  be
         overcome or which would entail very serious hardship if she were to
         live in the IKR.  He found that she would be able to  overcome  any
         linguistic or cultural difficulties there.

      d) At paragraph 59  the  Judge  turned  to  the  article  8  balancing
         exercise noting that he was required to  take  into  account  those
         matters referred to in section 117B of the Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002. In particular he found  the  Appellant  could  not  speak
         English with any fluency, that he was not  financially  independent
         and that  the  family  life  he  had  built  up  with  Ms  [P]  was
         established while he was in the UK unlawfully.

      e) However, at paragraph 60 the Judge stated: - "on the other side  of
         the balance, there is the fact that the Appellant can  comply  with
         the requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner contained
         in Appendix FM because he meets the requirement of  section  Ex  .1
         set out above.

      f) He said: - "because the Appellant can comply with the  requirements
         of Appendix FM,  I  conclude,  notwithstanding  the  importance  of
         immigration control and the other factors set out above which count
         against him, the decision was a disproportionate interference  with
         his article 8 rights and so the appeal must succeed.

      g) Unfortunately, the judge erred in finding that  the  Appellant  met
         requirements of Ex.1. That is because the definition  of  "partner"
         contained in Gen 1.2 of Appendix FM  requires  them  to  have  been
         living together in a relationship  akin  to  a  marriage  or  civil
         partnership for at least two years prior to the date of application
         (my emphasis). They had not been  living  together  for  two  years
         prior to the date of application and therefore the Appellant  could
         not meet the requirements of Ex.1 and thus the Judge was  wrong  to
         say that the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM.

      h) Mr Ell argued that the Judge was looking at the date of hearing, as
         he was obliged to do when considering article 8. The  judge  is  of
         course required to look at the situation as at the date of hearing.
         However, that still does  not  mean  the  Appellant  can  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM.  Given  that  the  Judge  has  clearly
         placed great reliance on his finding that  the  Appellant  met  the
         requirements of Appendix FM, his conclusions are tainted  by  error
         of law and  that  finding  being  determinative  of  the  balancing
         exercise in this case the error is clearly material. On that basis,
         the Decision and Reasons must be set aside.

      i) As Mr Ell wished to call further evidence,  particularly  regarding
         Ms [P] going to live in Iraq, the case was adjourned to  a  resumed
         hearing at Manchester to deal with article 8."

 9. Although this decision was not  sent  out  until  5th  October,  I  had
    announced the result at the hearing in July.   It  was  because  of  Mr
    Ell's intention to adduce  further  evidence  that  the  case  was  not
    redecided on that day.

10. Notwithstanding that no further evidence has in fact been lodged and no
    up-to date witness statements from either the Appellant or his partner,
    Ms [P],  Ms Faryl did not seek an adjournment.  She did  indicate  that
    she would call the Appellant and  his  partner  to  give  evidence.   I
    declined to  accept  oral  evidence  in  the  absence  of  any  witness
    statements.

11. I heard Ms Faryl's submissions.

12. The findings regarding credibility were  not  challenged  and  not  set
    aside by me.

13. Ms Faryl argued that Ms [P] could not reasonably be expected to live in
    Iraq with the Appellant.  She had two adult children in the UK who live
    with her and she has elderly parents who she cares for.  She is not  an
    Iraqi national.  She argued that the Appellant and Ms [P] have been  in
    a relationship and living together for 4 years and  to  interfere  with
    their family life would be disproportionate.  Also, she argued that the
    Appellant has been in the UK for 9 years and has an established private
    life here.

14. She did acknowledge that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and she submitted that he  should  succeed  on
    the basis of Article 8 outside the Rules.

15. The first issue for me to decide, is the 5 questions  posed  by  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  Given that the threshold for engaging Article 8  is  a
    low one and that the Appellant and Ms [P] have  lived  together  for  4
    years, they clearly have a family life together and the  Appellant  has
    inevitably built a private life in the UK.   In  truth,  without  going
    through  each  of  the   Razgar   questions,   this   case   is   about
    proportionality.

16. In assessing proportionality, I am required to consider the matter  set
    out in s.117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Which provides as
    follows: -

         117B Article8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
             established by a person at a time when the person is in the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

17. As found by the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant cannot speak  English
    with any fluency; so much was demonstrated at the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.

18. The Appellant is supported by his wife but it was accepted did not meet
    the financial requirements of Appendix FM.

19. The Appellant has built his private life while unlawfully  in  the  UK.
    He was appeal rights exhausted in 2009.  Thus,  little  weight  can  be
    given to his private life.

20. The Appellant started his relationship while unlawfully in the  UK  and
    thus little weight can be attached to it.

21. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant and Sponsor  had  been
    less than honest in their claims about the abilities of Ms [P] and  her
    need for care.

22. There is simply no basis  on  which  to  allow  this  appeal  when  the
    Appellant has at all relevant times  been  unlawfully  in  the  UK  and
    cannot meet the  Immigration  Rules.   There  is  nothing  about  their
    situation to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.

23. Whether Ms [P] chooses to accompany the Appellant to Iraq or remain  in
    the UK without him is a matter for her.  If at some point in the future
    he can meet the Immigration Rules he can make an application.  Ms Faryl
    acknowledged that at the present time he did not.

Notice of Decision

24. The First-tier Tribunal having made an error of law in its Decision and
    Reasons and having set it aside for the reasons  given,  in  redeciding
    the appeal it is  dismissed.  Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

25. There having been no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal not having made one, I  see  no  justification  for
    directing anonymity and do not do so.

Signed   [pic]                  Date 16th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
