
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13980/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 15th May 2019  On 28 June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   M H O H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr. Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by CB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. It is the Secretary of State who is appealing in these proceedings.
      However, for convenience I will continue to refer to the parties
      hereinafter as in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson. In a decision
      promulgated on 30 January 2019 the judge allowed the appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's   refusal to grant him asylum and
      dismissed his humanitarian protection claim.

   3. The judge found that the appellant was a Kurdish national of Iraq. He
      was born in February 1987.The judge found he was from the town of
      TuzKhurmato in the Saladin Province.

   4. His claim was that whilst at Sulaimaniyah University he began a
      relationship with a girl called Robar. She agreed to marry him and the
      appellant arranged to meet her family. After the meeting her father
      objected to the relationship. He was threatened with harm if he
      continued the relationship. However, he and Robar went to a village
      and stayed at his friend's house for almost 3 weeks. He claims the
      girl's family found them. Following this the appellant said he decided
      to leave the country fearful of her family. He said that her father
      was someone of influence and belonged to the PDK party.

   5. He also claimed that his home area had been destroyed by the PMF. The
      country information indicated that there had been no attacks in his
      area since the referendum and Iraqi forces were relieving the PMF.
      Consequently the judge did not find the appellant to be at risk in his
      home area.

   6. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible and rejected his
      claim of being in a relationship. The judge also referred to the
      refusal letter which indicated there had been no attacks in his home
      area since the referendum and the Iraqi forces were relieving the PMF.
      The judge concluded by finding the appellant would not be at risk in
      his home area.

   7. The judge then considered the question of documentation. The appellant
      had claimed he had no documentation with him in the United Kingdom. He
      claimed not to know is ID number or his family page register. He said
      apart from his grandmother he had no other family to assist them with
      documentation. The judge accepted his claim saying he had been
      consistent about his family situation. The judge concluded without a
      CSID or passport he could not board a flight in Baghdad for the
      IKR.The journey overland to the IKR was not feasible given the danger
      at checkpoints.

   8. The judge went on to find that even if the appellant could reach the
      IKR he would end up living in a critical shelter. He would not gain
      access to the refugee camps and could not afford to rent the property.
      The judge concluded it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant
      to live in those conditions.



The Upper Tribunal

   9. The application for permission pointed out that the judge had found
      his account to be a fabrication and that he would not be at risk in
      his home area. Therefore, no reason why advance as to why he would
      succeed under the Refugee Convention. Given that the judge had found
      he would not be at risk in his home area it was suggested the judge
      erred in focusing on the question of travelling to the IKR.If he were
      not at risk in his home area there was no need to consider travel to
      the IKR.

  10. As an alternative ground it was argued judge gave no reasons for
      accepting the appellant was from TuzKhurmato, a claim not accepted by
      the respondent. The judge had referred to the appellant's substantive
      interview and found he had given accurate information about the
      surrounding town and the attacks it suffered. The judge failed to give
      reasons for accepting the appellant's evidence as accurate.

  11. The grant of permission rejected the challenge in relation to the
      finding as to where the appellant was from. The judge had not dealt
      with how he would get there from Baghdad. It was also felt there was a
      lack of clarity on the part of the judge in relation to internal
      relocation without going to the IKR.The grant pointed out that the
      judge has failed to explain how the Refugee Convention was engaged.

  12. At hearing, Ms Jones said that TuzKhurmato was not in a contested
      area. He had referred to having a grandmother who could help him
      obtain documentation.

  13.  In response, Mr. Mustafa said the territory was a disputed area
      between the Kurdish authorities and the Iraqi authorities. He referred
      me to the decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG
      UKUT 00212 (IAC)in relation to returns and documentation.

Conclusions

  14. I find the decision is unsustainable because of the lack of reasoning.
      Where reasons are given thy are exceedingly brief and generalised with
      little reference to matters beyond the refusal letter.

  15. The judge rejected the underlying claim and this is not been
      challenged on behalf of the appellant. Following from this the judge
      did not make it clear how the claim can be allowed under the Refugee
      Convention.

  16. The judge found the appellant was from TuzKhurmato. The judge found
      that the appellant would not be at risk in his home area. There has
      been no challenge to this on his behalf, albeit the analysis is
      minimal. The judge does not refer to background information but refers
      to paragraph 53 of the refusal letter. However paragraph 53 does not
      refer to what the judge states.

  17. At paragraph 42 the judge accepts the appellant does not have
      documentation. This is based on the generalised view that those
      seeking asylum are unlikely to bring documentation and would have been
      so advised by an agent. At hearing the appellant had asked if he had
      approached the Embassy about obtaining replacement documents. His
      claim was that he was unaware he could have done that. He then went on
      to claim he knew nothing about his personal details or the documents.
      The judge at par 44 simply states she does not find this implausible.
      She states he had been consistent in his account about having no male
      family members. The judge does not explain why she willingly accepts
      his claims given she found he was not credible elsewhere.

  18. In his substantive interview he said he had Iraqi identity card and
      citizenship document. He said they were with his grandmother in
      Sulaimaniyah. He claimed not to have any other family. At question 35
      he said he had a brother but claimed he had been missing since 2014.
      He claimed his parents were deceased. He claimed not to understand the
      tribal system.

  19.  He had been born he said in Sulaimaniyah but since 1997 had been
      living in TuzKhurmato. The ability to obtain documentation will depend
      on the individual circumstances. A laissez-passer can be issued
      without any other form of ID being available but these are confiscated
      upon arrival at Baghdad. There is a possibility his grandmother could
      forward the documentation. The appellant claimed he had lost contact
      with her and searches with the Red Cross have been unsuccessful. If he
      needed to obtain a replacement CSID then the location of the relevant
      civil registry office would be relevant and it would be necessary to
      consider if there were any male family members able and willing to
      attend the civil registry. Because the registration system was
      patrilineal it would be relevant to consider whether the relative is
      from the mother or father's side.

  20. The decision does not deal with the question of the appellant
      returning to his home area or internally relocating within Iraq.
      Paragraph 45 judge refers to the possibility of relocation to the IKR.
      She refers to him having to fly to Baghdad and then onwards. In order
      to board a domestic flight she states he would require a CSI D or a
      passport. She then refers the humanitarian situation and concludes it
      would not be reasonable for him to live there. However the judge does
      not explain why he is not entitled to humanitarian protection if this
      is so.




Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson materially errs
in law and is set aside. The matter is remitted for a fresh hearing in the
First-tier Tribunal.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.




Directions

   1. Relisted for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Newport,
      excluding First-tier Tribunal judge Suffield-Thompson.

   2. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required.

   3. The rejection of his underlying claim is maintained.

   4. The finding that he is an Iraqi Kurd from TuzKhurmato is maintained.

   5. The resumed hearing should consider whether he can return to his home
      area. This will involve consideration of whether the necessary travel
      documentation can be obtained and whether he can safely travel from
      Baghdad airport to his home area. It will be necessary to consider if
      he could live safely there.

   6. If this is not feasible it would be necessary to consider if he can
      relocate within Iraq.

   7. It will also be necessary to consider the possibility of him
      relocating to the IKR. This will involve consideration of his ability
      to gain entry and to sustain himself. Although the case law indicates
      that someone who did not originate in the IKR would be returned
      initially to Baghdad for a transit flight the parties should check to
      see if it is now possible to be returned directly to the IKR.The
      caselaw indicate that overland travel from Baghdad to the IKR is too
      dangerous.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Dated 26 June 2019

