
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13769/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                   K.S.Y.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock of Counsel instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hamilton promulgated on 4  February  2019  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    protection appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  27
    November 2018.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia.  His  personal  details  are  a
    matter of record on file and I do not repeat them here in keeping  with
    the anonymity direction that has already been made in these proceedings
    and which I continue.


3.   The Appellant's protection claim  was  based  on  his  sexuality.   The
    Respondent in the  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  27
    November 2018 did not accept the Appellant's claim in this regard,  and
    in the alternative concluded that there would not be a risk to him as a
    gay man in Malaysia.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.


5.   The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the decision  of  Judge
    Hamilton.


6.   I am grateful to the helpful discussion that it has  been  possible  to
    have with the representatives before me today in respect of aspects  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


7.   In a generally carefully considered and  nuanced  decision  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge reached  a  conclusion  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    claim in all material respects: "I regret to say that I cannot rely  on
    anything the Appellant has said  about  his  sexuality  or  about  what
    happened to him and his circumstances in Malaysia" (paragraph 74).


8.    I  make  the  observation  that  the  Judge  has  essayed  a   nuanced
    consideration of the appeal because almost every step of  the  analysis
    in the Decision involves  consideration  from  two  perspectives.   For
    example, at paragraph 46:

     "This implausible aspect of the Appellant's account is consistent  with
         an attempt to concoct a scenario that would explain why he took the
         risk of writing a letter declaring his love for his  classmate.   I
         acknowledge an alternative explanation could be that  he  was  just
         foolish.  I  take  all  this  into  account  when  considering  the
         evidence as a whole".

     Similarly, at paragraph 53:

         "I acknowledge  that  although  highly  implausible,  it  could  be
         possible that he did this  because  he  was  frightened  and  in  a
         panic".


    Such 'dual perspectives' are a significant feature in the Decision.


9.   I note that this characteristic of the Decision is  challenged  in  the
    grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal.  In
    particular it is pleaded, "The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  found
    inconsistent evidence to be consistent with  a  false  claim  and  also
    consistent evidence to be consistent with a false claim".


10.  In my judgement, in the abstract this does not  identify  an  offensive
    approach. Indeed, on an overall consideration of the Decision, it seems
    to me that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  legitimately  edging
    towards  answering  the  'single  composite  question'  identified   in
    Karanakaran, in effect weighing up each aspect of the evidence in turn.




11.  However, upon closer scrutiny it is now acknowledged  by  Ms  Jones  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that there were some clear ambiguities
    in respect of the analysis of  the  Judge  at  paragraphs  50  and  58.
    Paragraph 50 is in the following terms:

         "In his statement the Appellant claimed that his aunt  brought  him
         to the UK but once here he only stayed with her "for a short period
         and thereafter I left".  However in his oral evidence he said  that
         he left after weeks, then he said months and then he said  that  it
         was near the time  when  his  visa  expired.   I  acknowledge  this
         inconsistency could be due to faulty recollection.  It  is  however
         also consistent with an inability to maintain a fabricated account.
          I take this all into account when considering the  evidence  as  a
         whole".


12.  Upon consideration both of Counsel's note of evidence and  the  Judge's
    own record of proceedings - which are broadly consistent and similar  -
    it does appear that there is an element of confusion as to whether  the
    Appellant in his oral evidence was referring to the period of time with
    which he stayed with his aunt, the period of time with which he  stayed
    with a friend of his aunt, or the period of time in which he stayed  in
    Bournemouth.  In the circumstances the  suggestion  that  there  is  an
    inconsistency in the  evidence  is  not  sustainable;  accordingly  the
    Judge's analysis of this as  a  potentially  damaging  feature  of  the
    overall evidence was in error.


13.  Similarly, at paragraph 58 the Judge refers  to  an  exchange  in  oral
    evidence regarding the level of contact that the Appellant had had with
    former acquaintances.  It again seems to me that there is an  ambiguity
    as to whether the Appellant was consistently referring to contact  with
    people in Bournemouth, or contact with gay friends that  he  had  known
    for  some  time  -  which  was  not  necessarily  an  identical  group.
    Accordingly, again, it seems to me  that  there  is  substance  to  the
    challenge that the Judge's analysis of this aspect of the oral evidence
    was to find fault with, and accord adverse weight  to,  something  that
    was at worst ambiguous.  To take such analysis forward  as  an  adverse
    factor to the overall evaluation of the Appellant's case was  to  place
    adverse reliance on a factor that was essentially neutral.


14.  It seems to me that similar observations may  be  made  in  respect  of
    paragraph 62: it is not adequately clear that the Appellant's  evidence
    at interview as to working to cover his rent necessarily reflected  the
    (then) current situation rather than being a reference  to  an  earlier
    time.   In  this  context  it  also  seems  to  me  that  the   Judge's
    consideration at paragraph 63 overlooks the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    gave his residential address at the screening interview.


15.  Ms Jones  accepts  that  the  matters  identified  above  informed  the
    Judge's overall consideration  of  credibility.  This  is  manifest  at
    paragraph 74:

         "Looking at the evidence overall, applying the  lower  standard  of
         proof in these  cases  I  find  the  implausible  and  inconsistent
         aspects of the Appellant's evidence set out above, go to  the  core
         of his account".

    Ms Jones frankly and realistically acknowledges that the  reference  to
    'implausible  and  inconsistent  aspects'  necessarily  included  those
    matters at paragraphs 50 and 58.




16.  Notwithstanding such acknowledgement, the Respondent has  resisted  the
    challenge on the basis of 'materiality'. However, in my judgement  such
    a  position  encounters  the  difficulty  that  the  particular  errors
    identified  cannot  readily  be  uncoupled  from  the  'in  the  round'
    evaluation undertaken.  In the circumstances I find the errors  require
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.


17.  In such circumstances it is common ground before me -  and  I  agree  -
    that the decision in the appeal now requires to be  remade  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large.


Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


19.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hamilton
    with all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

