
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13129/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th August 2017                          |On 28th September 2017        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                      mm
                            (anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Frazyk instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This  order
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian national born in 1987.  He arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant  on  13th  May  2016  and  claimed
    asylum when he was stopped on arrival.   On  11th  November  2016,  his
    international protection claim was refused.  He appealed that  decision
    and  his  appeal  was  heard  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Trevaskis) and was dismissed in the determination promulgated  on  10th
    February 2017.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted
    on the basis that the judge had failed to make a clear and  unambiguous
    finding as to the Appellant's credibility.

 3. At the hearing before me the representatives  were  in  agreement  that
    when Judge Trevaskis set out under a heading "Findings"  at  paragraphs
    24, 25 and 26 of his decision he recites the Appellant's  claim  as  he
    understood it, both  in  the  context  of  his  historical  account  of
    political activity in Iran and the assertion that those activities  had
    resulted in an  arrest  warrant  being  issued.   The  judge  does  not
    expressly make a finding  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had
    established his claimed political activities or that an arrest  warrant
    had been issued.  The judge goes on in paragraph 26 to comment that  he
    had been provided with no evidence from Iran to verify the  Appellant's
    claim of  his  activities  in  Iran.   The  judge  also  sets  out  the
    Appellant's  sur  place  claim  and  again  refers  to  the   lack   of
    corroboration.  However, the judge does not  make  any  finding  as  to
    whether or not the Appellant in fact engaged in the political  activity
    whether in Iran or in the United Kingdom.  The judge does not make  any
    finding as to whether or not  the  Appellant  has  established  that  a
    warrant has been issued in Iran or whether his factual findings  as  to
    sur place activity would result in the Appellant having otherwise  come
    to the attention of the Iranian authorities.

 4. The absence of expressed findings on those points  render  the  judge's
    commencement of paragraph 27 with the words:

         "taken at its highest, the Appellant's  claimed  activity  both  in
         Iran and in the United Kingdom is at the very lowest level,  and  I
         am not satisfied to the required standard that his activities  will
         have attracted the attention of the  authorities  in  Iran,  either
         based upon what he claimed to have done there, or what he has  done
         since coming to the United Kingdom"

    incomprehensible because the Appellant's claim "at its highest" is that
    an arrest warrant has been issued.

 5. Mr Harrison for the Respondent acknowledged if  the  judge  was  indeed
    taking the Appellant's claim "at its highest" in  the  context  of  the
    existence of an outstanding warrant for his arrest his claim would have
    been bound to succeed.  Mr Harrison conceded  Mr  Frazyk's  point  that
    whilst one can infer from the  outcome  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's factual account including the existence of the warrant  the
    judge was required to make findings to  resolve  the  factual  disputes
    between the parties and had singularly failed to  do  so.  Mr  Harrison
    agreed with Mr Frazyk's submission that it was a material error of  law
    and it was  agreed  by  all  parties  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    unsustainable and I was invited to set it aside to  be  remade  in  its
    entirety.

Decision

 6. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    with no findings preserved, pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    Tribunal's Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Trevaskis.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


