
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Numbers: PA/13332/2018    |
|                                 |PA/01175/2019                    |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 September 2019             |On 26 September 2019             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                   AB & HB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wood, instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are brothers.  The first appellant is a Turkish  national
   who was born on the 31st of August 1993. The second appellant is also  a
   Turkish national who was born on  the  5th  of  May  1995.  They  appeal
   against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Monson
   on 21 June 2019,  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the  respondents'
   refusal of their claims for international protection.

Background

2. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 16  October  1996  and  claimed
   asylum on arrival.  He gave a detailed account of the reasons why he was
   seeking international protection.  For present purposes, it suffices  to
   state that he claimed to be an Alevi Kurd who had been targeted  by  the
   authorities due to his actual or imputed  political  opinion.   He  said
   that he had been detained on four occasions in Turkey.  These detentions
   had occurred in 2012, 2013 and two in 2016.  During the final detention,
   he stated that he had been tortured on suspicion of links  to  the  PKK.
   It was his treatment  during  this  detention  which  had  prompted  his
   departure from Turkey.

3. The second appellant arrived in the UK  on  20  June  2018  and  claimed
   asylum on arrival.  He also stated that he was an  Alevi  Kurd  who  had
   been targeted by the authorities due to his actual or imputed  political
   opinion.  He said that his brother had fled to the UK  in  2016,  having
   been arrested and tortured by the authorities.  He had been arrested  in
   June 2018 after attending the HDP building.  He had been ill-treated  in
   detention and had been taken to hospital by the  authorities  before  he
   was released.  It seemed that the authorities suspected his  brother  of
   being in Syria, and they did not believe the second  appellant  when  he
   stated that his brother was in the UK.  He was released on condition  of
   becoming an informant.

4. Both claims were refused by the respondent because she  did  not  accept
   that the accounts I have summarised above were reasonably likely  to  be
   true.  In support of that conclusion, she  pointed  to  aspects  of  the
   accounts which she considered to be implausible and inconsistent.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5. The appeals were heard by Judge Monson on 15 May 2019.   The  appellants
   were  represented  by  Mr  Bonavero  of  counsel.   The  respondent  was
   represented by Mr Coffey of  counsel.   The  judge  was  presented  with
   evidence of the appellants' activities in support of the  Kurdish  cause
   in the UK and medical evidence in respect of both  appellants.   In  the
   case of the first appellant, that took the form of an expert report from
   a Consultant Psychiatrist named Dr Cutting.  In the case of  the  second
   appellant, the medical evidence was from his  General  Practitioner  and
   recorded, inter alia, that he had been seen by the GP in September 2018.
    He had stated at that appointment that he had been tortured in  Turkey.



6. Judge Monson heard oral evidence from both appellants, who were examined
   by Mr Bonaveroa and cross-examined by  Mr  Coffey.   He  heard  detailed
   submissions from both counsel.

7. At [63]-[87], the judge gave his reasons for concluding that he was only
   able to accept part of the accounts given by each appellant.  In respect
   of the first appellant, he accepted on the lower standard  he  had  been
   arrested on three occasions and that he had been a low-level  member  of
   HDP who had taken part in small scale  activities:  [75].   He  did  not
   consider that the first  appellant  had  an  adverse  profile  with  the
   Turkish authorities as someone who was engaged in  separatist  activity.
   That was reflected,  the  judge  found,  in  the  fact  that  the  first
   appellant was able to leave Turkey using his own passport in 2016.   The
   judge was unable to  accept  on  the  lower  standard  that  the  fourth
   detention took place: [76]-[79].

8. In respect of the second appellant, the  judge  accepted  on  the  lower
   standard that he had become a member of the HDP in May 2016 and that  he
   had also undertaken some low-level activities for the party.  He did not
   consider, however, that he had  fallen  under  suspicion  of  separatist
   activities, or that he had been detained by  the  authorities  in  2018:
   [87].  On the basis of the findings of fact he had  reached,  the  judge
   did not consider there to be any risk to the  appellants  on  return  to
   Turkey: [88]-[90].

Discussion

9. In the grounds of appeal, five separate complaints are  made  about  the
   reasoning process which led Judge  Monson  to  the  conclusions  I  have
   summarised above.  Ms Everett, who appeared before me on behalf  of  the
   Secretary of State, accepted that at least two of those complaints  were
   well-founded.   She  accepted  that  the  judge's  assessment   of   the
   appellants' credibility was vitiated by legal error and could not stand.
    In order to understand the reasons that she made those entirely  proper
   concessions, it is  necessary  to  set  out  [70]-[73]  of  the  judge's
   decision:

         "[70]    Secondly, in the case of AB, he  only  complained  of  the
         signs and symptoms of mental health in  September  2018,  which  is
         over 2 years after he had arrived in the UK. There is also no clear
         causal connection between the symptoms of depression  diagnosed  by
         the GP -  and  also  by  the  consultant  psychiatrist  -  and  the
         traumatic experience of being tortured in detention;  and,  indeed,
         the consultant psychiatrist does not in terms of pine but there  is
         any causal connection.

         [71] Thirdly, it is not credible  that  AB  did  not  seek  medical
         treatment following his release from detention if it is  true  that
         he  was  tortured.  He  did  not  have  to  report  to  the  police
         immediately. There was a time for him to obtain  medical  treatment
         in Turkey. It is not credible that doctors in Turkey do  not  abide
         by the Hippocratic Oath, or some equivalent ethical standard,  such
         that patients cannot seek medical treatment from them in confidence
         where their injuries have been deliberately inflicted by agents  of
         the state.  Moreover,  no  background  evidence  has  been  brought
         forward which lends credence to such a proposition. It is also  not
         credible that AB would have genuinely believed that  he  could  not
         trust a Turkish doctor.  Failing that he  had  plenty  of  time  to
         obtain medical treatment in  the  UK,  particularly  if  he  had  a
         genuine belief that the torture inflicted  on  his  genitals  might
         mean that he would be unable to procreate.

         [72] With regards to  HB,  he  was  not  asked  during  his  asylum
         interview about his treatment in detention. But he  was  given  the
         opportunity to volunteer further information  at  the  end  of  the
         interview. Since he claims that he began to  volunteer  information
         about torture during the interview, but was stopped from  doing  so
         as he had not been asked about it, his credibility is undermined by
         the fact that he did not seize the  opportunity  to  volunteer  the
         information at the end of the interview.

         [73] It is not credible that he would not  have  been  examined  by
         doctors at a hospital if he had been  taken  there  by  the  police
         following two days of torture. The  implication  that  the  doctors
         gave him a clean  bill  of  health  on  the  police's  instructions
         without  examining  him  is  preposterous,  for  the  same  reasons
         discussed in [71] above."

10. Ms Everett accepted  that  the  judge  had  failed,  in  coming  to  the
   conclusions at [71]-[73], to consider  the  appellant's  claims  in  the
   context of the background evidence on Turkey. As Keene LJ put it in Y  v
   SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, he erred in failing to consider their  claims
   through  the  spectacles  provided  by  the  country  information.   The
   material cited in the grounds of appeal settled  by  Mr  Bonavero  shows
   that, far from being 'preposterous', it is well known  that  doctors  in
   Turkey are sadly compelled to act on the instructions of the police  and
   other security agencies who are seeking to  ensure  that  detainees  are
   unable to produce medical evidence of ill-treatment.   The  most  recent
   report from the US Department of State contains two sections,  as  cited
   in the grounds, in which doctors were noted to have acted  in  precisely
   that manner.  In  her  brief  submissions  before  me,  Ms  Everett  was
   constrained to accept that  the  judge's  decision  disclosed  a  'clear
   problem' as a result, and that the first of the grounds  of  appeal  was
   made out.

11. Ms Everett also accepted that the fifth of the  grounds  of  appeal  was
   made out.  This ground relates to the conclusions in [72].  It is  clear
   that the judge attached some significance to the point that  the  second
   appellant had not put forward an account of torture  in  interview.   In
   the grounds of appeal, this conclusion is said to be undermined  in  two
   ways.  Firstly, it was said to  be  improper  to  criticise  the  second
   appellant for not volunteering this evidence, when the onus was  clearly
   on the respondent to explore his treatment in detention (page 34 of  the
   respondent's policy on Asylum Interviews, version 7, refers).  Secondly,
   the point was said in any event to be unsound in circumstances in  which
   the second appellant's GP records  showed  quite  clearly  that  he  had
   reported or alleged torture to his doctor before  the  asylum  interview
   took place.  Ms Everett accepted that  at  least  the  second  of  these
   complaints was borne out.  That must be right; it could scarcely be said
   that the complaint of torture was  a  late  invention  when  the  second
   appellant is known to have raised it with his doctor before  the  asylum
   interview took place.

12. Whilst nothing turns on it, I accept that the first complaint in  ground
   five is also made out.  In accordance with her published policy, it  was
   for the respondent to probe the second appellant's  account  during  the
   interview.  It was for the respondent to ascertain, when  faced  with  a
   man who said that he had been held in Turkey on suspicion of  separatist
   activity, whether that detention was accompanied (as is sadly  so  often
   the case  in  Turkey)  by  torture  or  ill-treatment.   If  the  second
   appellant was not asked directly about his treatment  in  detention,  it
   was improper to draw an adverse inference from the fact that he did  not
   volunteer this information at the conclusion of the interview.

13. As I  have  already  recorded,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the  errors
   established by grounds one and five sufficed to  undermine  the  judge's
   assessment as a whole.  She submitted that the proper course was for the
   decision to be set aside and reheard de novo.  This was the  result  for
   which Ms Wood also contended.  I  informed  the  advocates  that  I  was
   minded to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  given  that  an
   entirely de novo assessment was required.  Both were content  with  that
   course and I shall so order.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT (IAC) was vitiated by material legal  error  and  is
set aside.  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo at Taylor House by  a
judge other than Judge Monson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
                              24 September 2019
