
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13026/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th June 2019                    |On 08th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                   M R I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Allam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 13th April 1996, is  a  citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Allam of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Jarvis a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application  for  asylum.   The  Respondent  had
    refused that application on 25th  November  2017.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sangha sitting at Birmingham on  20th  March  2019.   The
    judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was made and granted by the First-
    tier Tribunal on 14th May 2018.  It was said that it was  arguable  the
    judge had erred in law by not addressing the procedure for obtaining  a
    replacement Civil Status Identity Document and was not assisted by  the
    failure of either party to refer to the country  guidance  decision  of
    AAH or the Respondent's own Policy and Information  Notes.   Directions
    were issued for the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether  an  error
    of law had been made in this case and the matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was noted the judge had made no reference to the appropriate country
    guidance case of AAH [2018] in this case in which the head  notes  were
    relevant to the Appellant's case.  It was  submitted  that  credibility
    findings  were  not  sustainable.   It  was  noted  that   there   were
    inconsistencies referred to in paragraph 36 but that they  did  not  in
    terms amount to inconsistency.  It was further said  that  findings  in
    paragraphs 37 and 39 were not sustainable.  It was noted that the  CPIN
    February 2009 was before the First-tier Tribunal and had been put in by
    the Appellant's representatives.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Jarvis referred me to the case of MA (Somalia).   It  was  submitted
    that  the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  on  matters  and   had
    demonstrated inconsistencies within the Appellant's  account.   It  was
    said that the judge had made  two  core  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's circumstances in  Iraq  that  were  entirely  relevant  and
    central to the issue of obtaining a CSID card and  that  there  was  no
    error made by the judge in this case.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and the evidence in this case.

Decision and Reasons

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.   However,  the  judge
    had essentially found no arguable error of law in respect of  what  may
    be described as the  "KDP  element"  and  the  "ISIS  element"  of  the
    Appellant's case.  He had found an arguable error in stating  that  the
    judge had not on the face of it taken account of either AAH  [2017]  or
    the Respondent's latest CPIN of February 2019.

 8. Mr Allam submitted that the judge's credibility findings in respect  of
    the Appellant's claimed fear of the KDP and  ISIS  were  unsustainable.
    That is not the case as found by the judge granting permission.

 9. The judge's decision was detailed and he had set out and  had  in  mind
    the account provided by the Appellant and the supporting evidence.   In
    respect of the Appellant's claimed fear of the KDP the judge's findings
    were in large part at paragraphs 36 to 38.  He had provided an adequacy
    of reasoning as to why he did not accept that  claim  to  be  credible.
    Leaving aside the findings of inconsistency noted by the judge  he  had
    noted at paragraph 37 a salient feature.  The Appellant's claimed  fear
    of the KDP arose out of his father's alleged involvement with  the  PUK
    in the 1990s and the supply of names of five people  belonging  to  the
    KDP to the rival PUK by his father; resulting it was said in the deaths
    of those five people.  The judge noted that the Appellant had lived  in
    the same village from his birth in 1996 until  leaving  Iraq  in  2015.
    The Appellant had suffered no  adversity  or  problems  throughout  the
    entirety of that time from the families of the  alleged  five  victims.
    Further, there was no evidence that even the Appellant's father or  any
    other family member had been targeted or  suffered  adversity.   It  is
    clear that the judge had provided an adequacy of reasoning to reach his
    conclusion upon the "KDP element" of the claimed risk.

10. The second limb of the Appellant' claimed fear of return was from ISIS.
     At paragraph 39 the judge had provided an adequacy of reasons  why  he
    did not  accept  as  credible  the  Appellant's  account  of  how  that
    specified difficulty arose.  In  any  event,  as  noted  by  the  judge
    granting permission, ISIS is now a militarily spent force in the Kirkuk
    region and the KAR.  There was no arguable error of law in  respect  of
    this second limb of the Appellant's claim.

11. Dealing with the matter upon which it was said there  was  an  arguable
    error of law, there is a slight inaccuracy in the  statement  that  the
    judge was not  referred  by  either  party  to  the  Respondent's  CPIN
    February 2019.  It is clear from paragraph 6 of  the  judge's  decision
    that in the Appellant's bundle he noted that CPIN.  He had stated  that
    he had taken into account all the documents  placed  before  him  which
    included that document.  There is nothing to suggest that not to be the
    case.

12. The judge had found for adequate reasons provided  that  there  was  no
    credibility attaching to the two core features of the Appellant's  case
    (fear of the KDP and fear of ISIS).  He had as an ancillary finding  on
    credibility found the Appellant had not told the truth about an earlier
    claim for asylum he made in Hungary in 2015 (paragraph 44).

13. He had also made clear findings regarding the Appellant's documentation
    and family; wholly or partly based on the Appellant's own evidence.  He
    noted the Appellant's evidence that he had had an  ID  card  which  had
    been left with his uncle with whom he had  lived  for  a  short  period
    (paragraph 41).  He also noted at paragraphs 41 to 42  reasons  why  he
    did not accept that the ID card had been destroyed as suggested  or  at
    all.  He had further found for reasons given in paragraphs  40  and  45
    that the Appellant's uncle and his own  family  continued  to  live  in
    Kirkuk and the Appellant's CSID card was there  and  available  to  the
    Appellant.  He had  also  noted  the  ability  of  the  uncle  to  send
    documents from Kirkuk to the Appellant in the UK.

14. In MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49 the  Supreme  Court  had  endorsed  that
    which had been said by Laws LJ in the Court of Appeal:

         "The lie may have a heavy bearing on the issue in question, or  the
         Tribunal may consider that it  is  of  little  moment.   Everything
         depends upon the facts".

    The Supreme Court had further explained matters at paragraph  30  where
    they said:

         "We think that what Laws LJ had in mind was a case  where  (i)  the
         claimant's account is rejected as wholly incredible (it is  riddled
         with contradictions and the Tribunal is left in a  state  of  being
         unable to believe anything that the claimant  has  said)  but  (ii)
         there is undisputed objective  evidence  about  conditions  in  the
         relevant  country  which  goes  a  long  way  to  making  good  the
         shortcomings in the claimant's own evidence.  In GM (Eritrea),  for
         example, the AIT did not believe the account given to them by MY as
         to how she had left the country.  They could not,  therefore,  rely
         on her account as a basis for concluding  that  she  had  left  the
         country illegally.  But if there had been objective  evidence  that
         no 17 year old girl was allowed to leave its  country,  her  appeal
         would surely have succeeded despite  her  dishonest  evidence.   In
         fact, the objective evidence did not go nearly that far".

15. In this case the judge had rejected entirely the  two  central  reasons
    why the Appellant claimed to have left Iraq and feared a return.  There
    was no credible subjective fear preventing the Appellant returning.  In
    terms of the situation in Iraq when considering risk  or  otherwise  on
    return the judge had for adequate reasons provided made  two  important
    findings:

      1) The Appellant had had a CSID card and it was likely that card still
         existed and was held by his uncle who had demonstrated  an  ability
         to forward documents to the Appellant.

      2) The Appellant's uncle and his own family now more than likely still
         remain living in Kirkuk.

16. He had concluded therefore that in terms of return the Appellant had  a
    CSID  or  alternatively  had  the  mechanism  in  place  to  obtain   a
    replacement with relative ease.  Additionally, he  had  also  concluded
    that there was nothing stopping him approaching the embassy in  the  UK
    to obtain a passport.

17. As indicated above, the judge had before him the  CPIN  February  2019.
    He did not refer to  AAH  [2017]  which  is  a  country  guidance  case
    (although it may be overdue for revision).  However,  that  failure  to
    refer to AAH was not material.  When one looks  at  the  relevant  head
    notes in AAH the judge's findings indicate that there were no risks  or
    difficulties attendant upon the Appellant that would have entitled  him
    to any form of international protection.  Accordingly,  although  there
    was a failure to refer to a country guidance case, it was not material.



Notice of Decision

18. No material error of law was made by the  judge  in  this  case  and  I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever














