

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13813/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                  |On 23 April 2019                       |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                          Raja Muhammad Mumtaz Khan

                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)










                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal brought  with  the
permission of a judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 21 November 2018, following  a
hearing of 18 October 2018, and which it sent to the parties on 27  November
2018. The tribunal decided to dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 14 December 2017,  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection.

2.    The claimant is a national of Pakistan. He was born on  2  June  1977.
The  account  underpinning  his  claim  to  be  entitled  to   international
protection may, shorn of everything but essential details, be summarised  as
follows: He became a member of the United Kashmir  People's  National  Party
(UKPNP) in 2009.  In April of that year  he  was  arrested  at  a  political
demonstration and was beaten  by  members  of  the  Pakistani  police  force
before being released on the same day. On 1 May 2009  he  was  kidnapped  by
persons unknown and was,  once  again,  beaten.  His  injuries  necessitated
hospital treatment. He was appointed as the  deputy  General  Secretary  for
the UKPNP in the Muzzassarabad district. His uncle wanted him to  marry  his
cousin. But the claimant did not want to do that and could not do so  anyway
because he had secretly  married  another  in  2003.  In  May  of  2011  the
claimant left Pakistan and came to the UK having kept  his  marriage  secret
from his family for all of that time. He was granted leave  to  enter  as  a
student and obtained an extension of his original grant  of  leave  but  his
leave was subsequently curtailed and so expired on 3 May 2013. A  subsequent
application for further leave as a student was refused. In 2015  there  were
threats of violence involving his family and his uncle's family  which  were
linked to his reluctance  and  inability  to  marry  the  person  his  uncle
believed he should marry. On 2 January  2016  the  authorities  in  Pakistan
issued an arrest warrant with respect to him. On 5  May  2017  a  fatwa  was
issued in respect of him because of involvement he had had with a branch  of
the UKPNP in the UK. As a result of all of the above the  claimant  asserted
that if he were to be  returned  to  Pakistan  he  would  be  persecuted  or
subjected to serious harm by the authorities in Pakistan and  by  his  uncle
and his uncle's associates.

3.    The tribunal  accepted  certain  aspects  of  the  claimant's  account
whilst rejecting others. It was accepted that he had been assaulted in  2009
and had sustained injuries. It was not accepted that he  had  been  secretly
married  as  claimed.  It  was  not  accepted  that  there  was  an  ongoing
significant family dispute in consequence of which his uncle had  a  genuine
intention to harm him. It was not accepted that a fatwa had been  issued  in
respect of him or that he would face any difficulties as  a  result  of  his
previous or current political activities at the hands of the authorities  in
Pakistan.

4.    The claimant's appeal having been dismissed, permission to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal was sought. The grounds, in summary, contended  that  the
tribunal had failed to adequately consider risk the claimant would  face  as
a consequence of his political  activities  if  returned  to  Pakistan;  had
improperly relied upon its perception of  a  lack  of  plausibility  in  the
account when rejecting his credibility (or perhaps more  correctly  in  part
rejecting it); had not properly enquired into the circumstances  surrounding
the issue of the arrest warrant before concluding it was not  indicative  of
intended persecution; and had wrongly concluded that if he was  at  risk  he
would be able to take advantage of an internal  flight  alternative  bearing
in mind that no such contention had been raised by the Secretary of State.

5.    The granting judge thought it arguable that  the  tribunal  had  erred
through failing to be clear as to what it made of the issuing of  two  FIR's
with respect to the alleged family disagreement. But that judge, whilst  not
limiting the grant of  permission,  did  not  think  anything  else  in  the
grounds was seriously arguable.

6.    Permission to appeal having been granted the matter was listed  for  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so  that  consideration  could
be given as to whether or not the tribunal had erred in law, and if it  had,
what should flow from that. Representation was as indicated above and  I  am
grateful to each representative. Mr Hussain, whilst not  conceding  anything
with respect to the other grounds, focussed  primarily  on  the  basis  upon
which permission had been granted and the way  in  which  the  tribunal  had
addressed the question of the FIR's at paragraph 37 of its written  reasons.
The tribunal had failed to grapple with the existence of the FIR's and  what
they might tell it about risk the claimant  might  face  if  he  was  to  be
returned. Mrs Pettersen contended that the  tribunal  had  made  appropriate
findings on all matters.

7.    I have decided that the tribunal did not err in law. It  follows  that
its decision must stand. I shall now explain my reasoning.

8.    Although Mr Hussain (entirely  realistically  in  my  view)  primarily
focussed upon the specific basis in respect of  which  permission  had  been
granted, it is right that I should address all of  the  written  grounds  of
appeal.

9.    As to ground 1, the tribunal was  perfectly  entitled  not  to  attach
weight to the assertion that a fatwa had  been  issued  in  respect  of  the
claimant. Whilst certain other documents had been assessed and  verified  by
an expert witness, there had been  no  such  attempt  at  verification  with
respect to the fatwa. In considering the genuineness of  that  document  and
the weight to be attached to it, it was open to the tribunal, as it did,  to
remind itself of the aspects of the claim which it had found  to  be  false.
Given the damage to the credibility of the person producing the  fatwa  (the
claimant) and given the lack of any verification as to its  authenticity  in
circumstances where such could have been attempted, it was  open  to  it  to
conclude that weight should not be attached to it. Its reasoning as  to  all
of that as set out from paragraph 34  to  37  of  the  written  reasons,  is
cogent  and  persuasive.  Further,  given  the  lack  of  evidence  of   the
claimant's political activity in the UK prior to 2017, it  was  entitled  to
conclude that such, when it did take  place  in  2017,  did  not  amount  to
serious or genuine political involvement. As to the risk on  return  because
of political activities more generally, it was entitled to take  account  of
the fact that there had been no relevant  incidents  since  2009  and  that,
since the claimant had left Pakistan in 2011, that meant there  had  been  a
period of some two years during which he had  been  active  without  further
adverse consequences to him. Putting all of that together  it  was  properly
open  to  the  tribunal  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  had  failed   to
demonstrate that he would be at risk in consequence of political  activities
undertaken either in Pakistan or the UK upon return. In truth, it  seems  to
me that this ground, in large  measure,  if  not  wholly,  amounts  to  mere
disagreement with the tribunal's findings and conclusions.

10.   As to ground 2,  the  attack  here  is  focused  upon  the  tribunal's
rejection of the aspect of the account relating to  the  claimant's  claimed
secret marriage. The tribunal did not accept the account because it did  not
find it plausible that the claimant would keep and would  be  able  to  keep
his marriage secret from his entire family  for  a  period  of  eight  years
until he left Pakistan (the tribunal said twelve years but it meant  to  say
eight). In this context the  tribunal  noted  that  on  the  claimant's  own
account his village and the village his secret wife was said to be  residing
in were not very distant from each other. The  tribunal  also  found  itself
unable to accept the claim that  the  uncle  was  adamant  that  a  marriage
should take place with his cousin because it thought, if that  was  so,  the
uncle would have pushed for that marriage at an  earlier  stage  bearing  in
mind that the claimant had been of  a  marriageable  age  for  a  number  of
years.

11.   The criticism of the tribunal's reasoning is to  the  effect  that  it
impermissibly relied upon matters of plausibility.  It  is  suggested,  with
reference to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in HK v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA
Civ  1037  that  tribunals  should  not  overly   rely   upon   plausibility
considerations. But there is nothing in  that  judgement  which  prevents  a
tribunal exercising straightforward common sense. There have been  a  number
of other judgments which have commented upon plausibility but  as  was  made
clear in MM  (DRC  -  plausibility)  [2005]  UKIAT  00019  it  is  perfectly
permissible for an assessment as to credibility to involve an assessment  of
the plausibility or  apparent  truthfulness  of  what  has  been  said.  The
tribunal's reasons for being concerned about  this  aspect  of  the  account
were, in my judgment, substantial and it was entitled to so treat  them.  Mr
Hussain did not make any serious attempt  to  persuade  me  that  there  was
merit in this ground and, in any event, I conclude that there is not.

12.   As to ground 3, it is said here that the tribunal, if  it  had  doubts
about the significance of the  arrest  warrant,  should  have  raised  those
doubts at the hearing. As to that, the tribunal had noted  that  the  arrest
warrant did not show what offence it  was  alleged  that  the  claimant  had
committed. The tribunal reasoned from that, that it could not  be  satisfied
that the arrest warrant related to  any  matter  linked  to  the  claimant's
political activity or his claimed fear of  his  uncle.  That  was  obviously
open to it. As to whether the tribunal had a duty to enquire, it has  to  be
borne in mind that the claimant was represented before  it.  It  has  to  be
borne in mind that it was the claimant  who  had  sought  to  introduce  the
warrant (despite its not indicating the offence or alleged offence to  which
it was said to relate) and it was for him  to  demonstrate  that  it  was  a
document which furthered his case. Against  that  background  there  was  no
need for the tribunal to enquire further. The tribunal's task was to  assess
the evidence before it, including the warrant, and to draw conclusions  from
that evidence and from any submissions which had been made to it  about  the
evidence. That is what it did. If the claimant did not take  steps  to  fill
the gaps in information being presented to the tribunal the fault  for  that
does not lie with the tribunal.

13.   As to ground 4, it seems to me that the tribunal was  only  making  an
alternative finding with  respect  to  internal  flight  and  then  only  in
relation to any claimed fear from the uncle. Clearly internal  flight  would
not have been relevant if the tribunal had concluded that the  claimant  was
at risk at the hands of the authorities. I  accept  that  the  Secretary  of
State did not, in its written decision, assert that the  claimant  might  be
able to benefit from internal flight. But  I  think  it  was,  nevertheless,
open to the tribunal to have regard to this as a possibility in the  limited
context of the claimed risk from the uncle because any such risk was on  the
face of it a localised matter. However, since I have  found  the  tribunal's
reasoning as to risk on return to be sound for the  reasons  set  out  above
and for the reasons I am about to set  out  below,  this  ground  is  simply
incapable of availing the claimant.

14.   All of that now leaves me with the concerns regarding the FIRs. As  to
those, which were verified as being genuine by an agent acting on behalf  of
the expert relied upon by the claimant, the tribunal noted their  existence.
It said that one FIR evidenced a complaint  by  the  claimant's  uncle  that
members of the claimant's family  had  attended  upon  the  uncles  home  in
January 2015 and had attacked the uncle and had shouted words to the  effect
that the claimant could marry whoever he wanted to.  The  tribunal  noted  a
second FIR which had related to an incident said to  have  occurred  on  the
following day when it was claimed  the  uncle  and  his  sons  beat  up  the
claimant's father. It is right  to  say  that,  on  the  face  of  it,  that
evidence was capable of affording some corroborative support  for  the  part
of the claimant's account relating to his unwillingness to marry the  person
his uncle wished him to. But the tribunal went on  to  point  out  that  the
FIRs simply reflected complaints having been made to  the  police  and  that
there was no evidence that  such  complaints  had  been  taken  sufficiently
seriously to merit even investigation. Further, there  was  no  evidence  of
any further such incidents since early 2015. It was against that  background
that the tribunal, at paragraph 37 of its written reasons, said this:

           "I do not accept the Appellant married in 2003 and  without  the
           knowledge of his family. I don't  find  this  credible  for  the
           reasons I have already given above. I find it lacks  credibility
           his family and his uncle have had such  a  serious  dispute  and
           note the content of the FIRs are no more than  allegations  made
           by the family members. The lack of evidence these  matters  were
           taken beyond an initial investigation by the police and the lack
           of any suggestion the family members have been involved  in  any
           further incident since 2015 does not support  his  claimed  fear
           from a continuing family feud. In fact it is  inconsistent  with
           the evidence the uncle has not taken any further action  against
           his family members who remain in Pakistan. I am unable to accept
           the Appellant faces a well-founded fear from his uncle  or  that
           the uncle is willing to take this matter  any  further.  He  has
           also failed to show his uncle has  the  ability  to  locate  the
           Appellant if he re-located to another area of Pakistan.  He  has
           failed to adduce any evidence to show even on the lower standard
           of proof the uncle has the ability to find the Appellant  if  he
           did relocate. Once again he failed to make any asylum  claim  in
           2015 and it took another two years before he made  such  another
           claim. I find this damages his credibility regarding his claimed
           fear and undermines his claim he faces a real  risk  of  serious
           harm if returned".

15.   Now it might be said, as indeed was said in the grant  of  permission,
that that passage did not make it clear whether  the  tribunal  was  finding
the FIRs had been fabricated or whether it was finding  that  they  had  not
but that there was no longer a risk from what had been a  genuine  feud.  It
may be that the tribunal might have addressed that matter and that,  had  it
done so, it's written reasons might have been a little  more  complete.  But
in my judgment, it was unnecessary for it to do  so  because  what  it  said
made it clear that, even if it was  finding  that  the  FIRs  had  not  been
fabricated, it was also finding  that  the  evidence  did  not  support  the
existence of an ongoing feud which would result in a threat to the  claimant
upon return. As to that,  it  had  noted  that  there  had  been  no  police
investigations and it had noted that the most recent incident  had  been  as
long ago as 2015. So, its  conclusion  that  there  was  no  threat  to  the
claimant linked to any family dispute regarding proposed marriage or  indeed
anything else, was legally sustainable.

16.   It is in light of the above that I have concluded that the  making  of
the decision in this case did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law.
Accordingly, the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.

17.   Finally, as to anonymity, I note  that  the  tribunal  did  not  grant
anonymity and it does not appear that it had been invited to do  so.  I  was
not invited to do so either. So, I make no such grant or direction.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in  law  when  making  its  decision.
Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

I make no anonymity direction.




Signed:                                 Dated: 18 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

