
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13629/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 23 January 2019                   |On 13 February 2019                  |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                   M L W s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pountney, GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Foudy who dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 6 December 2017  refusing  her  protection
    claim.  The Appellant's immigration history is protracted.  She herself
    asserted that she entered the United Kingdom in  the  year  2000.   She
    made a claim for asylum at that time.  That application was refused and
    the Appellant has made numerous sets of further representations to  the
    Respondent in the intervening time.  The latest set of  representations
    resulted in the decision of the Respondent dated 6 December 2017.   The
    Respondent disputes the identity of the  Appellant.   The  Respondent's
    view is that the true identity of the Appellant is LNK, and that she is
    a citizen of Kenya.  The Appellant has also claimed to be a citizen  of
    Somalia and Sudan.  The Appellant  claimed  to  fear  serious  harm  on
    return to Kenya for a number of  reasons,  including  that  she  feared
    serious harm from persons who trafficked her to the United Kingdom, and
    for reason of her  sexuality,  asserting  that  she  was  lesbian.  The
    Appellant has also historically claimed to fear serious harm  in  Kenya
    because of her past alleged political activity in that country.

2.   The judge disbelieved the entirety of  the  Appellant's  account.   Her
    reasons are given at paragraph 10 onwards.  The judge's reasons may  be
    summarised as follows:


         (i)  The Appellant's evidence as to whether she  was  sentenced  to
         imprisonment in Kenya for  eighteen  years  was  inconsistent  with
         other evidence that she had never been charged or  tried  with  any
         offence.


         (ii) The Appellant had referred to a woman in Kenya named [MM] (and
         had alleged that  this  person  had  informed  the  Appellant  that
         threats had been made against her in Kenya) but the  Appellant  had
         given inconsistent evidence about the identity of that person.


         (iii)     The  Appellant  gave  inconsistent  evidence  about   the
         identity the person said to  have  trafficked  her  to  the  United
         Kingdom, being a policeman, two strangers, or a gang.


         (iv) The Appellant had consistently refused to participate  in  the
         National Referral Mechanism for victims of trafficking.


         (v)  The Appellant had given significantly differing answers  about
         the identity of a person named L K (paragraph 12, first four bullet
         points).


         (vi) The Appellant had previously, in August 2011,  been  convicted
         of being in possession of a false identity  document  with  intent,
         being a forged French passport in the  name  of  [KD];  His  Honour
         Judge Foster had found the Appellant had forged identity  documents
         in the name of [KD] going back  to  2007  and  that  she  had  been
         working since at least that time in the UK under that identity.


         (vi) The Appellant had asserted three  different  nationalities  in
         the past.


         (vii)    The Appellant had given inconsistent evidence  about  what
         siblings she had.


         (viii)   In relation to a claimed detention in Kenya in relation to
         her political activity, she had been inconsistent as to the  period
         in detention.


         (ix) She had been inconsistent about the duration of her  education
         in Kenya.


         (x)  Her claim to have had FGM inflicted upon her whilst in  prison
         in Kenya whilst being detained in dirty conditions was inconsistent
         with her not having complained to have suffered any illness  whilst
         in prison, the  judge  finding  that  it  was  implausible  that  a
         surgical procedure in such rudimentary conditions  would  not  have
         resulted in the Appellant suffering a serious infection.


         (xi) The Appellant had, as late as in cross-examination in evidence
         before the judge, stated for the  first  time  that  she  had  been
         attracted to women whilst still living in Kenya and that the Kenyan
         authorities knew that she was lesbian; whereas during the whole  of
         her claims for asylum in the UK prior to that point this had  never
         been mentioned.


         (xii)    The Appellant also gave evidence in cross-examination that
         the political pressure group which she claimed to be a part  of  in
         Kenya knew that she was a lesbian, that she had  told  them,  which
         resulted in her house in Kenya being burned down with  her  lesbian
         partner inside, killing her; the lateness of the disclosure of that
         matter was not credible.


         (xiii)   Little weight was given to a country expert report  of  Ms
         Young on the basis that she was an attorney rather than an academic
         or a scholar in any relevant field.


         (xiv) The medical report of Dr Leslie Lord lacked objectivity.


3.   The judge concluded at paragraph 13 that she  could  not  be  satisfied
    even to the lower standard who the Appellant really  was,  although  it
    was likely that the Appellant had entered the UK in April 1999 as L  K.
    The judge found the Appellant to be a wholly dishonest witness, and the
    extent of her inconsistency  and  implausible  evidence  could  not  be
    explained by depression, anxiety or simple lapse  of  memory.   In  the
    absence  of  clear  medical  evidence  to  explain  the   extraordinary
    contradictions in the Appellant's claim the judge attributed it to  her
    persistent dishonesty.

4.   The judge then held as follows:


         "14. The remaining issue is one of the Appellant's sexuality.  Even
             if I found that her account of political  activities,  arrest,
             torture and trafficking to be incredible (which I do), she may
             still require international protection on  the  basis  of  her
             sexuality.


         15.  At this stage I wish to  address  the  evidence  of  the  four
             witnesses and the  several  other  friends  who  came  to  the
             Tribunal to support the Appellant.   I  find  that  they  gave
             honest evidence,  that  they  are  kind  and  well-intentioned
             people and that they have taken the Appellant into their lives
             as a friend.   However,  I  also  find  that  they  have  been
             deceived by her, just as she has deceived  employers,  medical
             professionals, legal representatives, Immigration Officers,  a
             Crown Court and the Tribunal.   Yes,  she  has  attended  LGBT
             meetings and events.  Yes, I can accept that she has made  her
             profile 'fit' with theirs.  Perhaps they have seen her kissing
             a woman or women; that too is  quite  believable.   However  I
             find that it was merely an act; a callous  attempt  to  garner
             support for her fraudulent attempts to stay in the UK.  It  is
             a pity that these witnesses are unaware of the true extent  of
             the Appellant's dishonesty, some of which I have  referred  to
             in this decision."


5.    At  paragraph  16  onwards  within  the  judge's  decision  the  judge
    considers the Appellant's private life under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on  Human  Rights.   The  judge  directs  herself  that  the
    relevant Rule is paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge noted that the Appellant had been in the  UK  for  a  long  time,
    albeit that for a significant part of that time she was  "underground".
    The judge was also of the view that the main part of her  private  life
    had been built upon deception: the deception that she is  a  trafficked
    lesbian woman.  "I find that the quality of her private  life  must  be
    considered against that backdrop because it is unlikely that  her  LGBT
    friends will wish to continue the friendship when it is  revealed  that
    they have been duped by the Appellant".

6.   The judge also noted at [17]:


         "Not only has she used multiple identities in the UK, but  she  has
         claimed three different nationalities.  She knows exactly what  her
         true identity and nationality are.  It cannot  be  correct  that  a
         person can benefit from uncertainties over their  nationality  that
         are born  of  their  own  dishonesty.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Respondent will now,  with  the  benefit  of  this  decision,  make
         further  enquiries  to  ascertain  the  true  nationality  of   the
         Appellant and to remove her to her country of origin."


7.   At paragraphs 18 to 23 the judge considers an argument advanced on  the
    Appellant's behalf that the Respondent had delayed the consideration of
    the Appellant's protection claim, and that such delay was relevant  for
    the purposes of determining whether any interference with  her  private
    life was proportionate.  However, the judge sets out in detail in those
    paragraphs how the Appellant had spent  the  various  periods  of  time
    since her arrival in the UK  and  held  that  the  Respondent  had  not
    significantly contributed to any delay in decision making.

8.   At paragraph 24 the  judge  had  regard  to  a  medical  report  by  Dr
    Farrington which suggested that the Appellant had  complex  PTSD.   The
    report  suggested  that  the  Appellant  endured  self-imposed   social
    isolation, inability to develop relationships and needing encouragement
    to participate in activities.  The judge opined that it  appeared  that
    Dr Farrington knew nothing of the Appellant's  history  of  dishonesty.
    The judge then set out  at  paragraph  25  of  her  decision  that  the
    description of the Appellant in Dr Farrington's evidence stood in stark
    contrast with the description of  the  Appellant  from  her  supporting
    witnesses, who had described the Appellant  as  vibrant,  friendly  and
    relaxed, and who attended every social  event  she  could,  being  very
    comfortable gossiping about who was seeing who, going out for meals and
    having a laugh together.  The  judge  found  at  paragraph  26  it  was
    difficult to reconcile Dr Farrington's picture of  the  Appellant  with
    that given to the judge by the Appellant's friends.   The  judge  found
    that there must be a significant possibility  that  the  Appellant  had
    chosen to present herself to her medical team in a different  way,  and
    that given her propensity for deception the judge could not accept that
    the Appellant has been honest about her symptoms with Dr Farrington.

9.   At paragraph 27 the judge holds as follows:


         "27. Looking at all the paragraph 276ADE factors, I find  that  the
             decision to remove is correct, proportionate and necessary.  I
             am not satisfied that the Appellant has established a  genuine
             private life in the UK because her private life is a tissue of
             lies."


10.  The judge then made various directions in law at paragraphs 28  to  30,
    and held at paragraph 31 that she was not  satisfied  that  there  were
    substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  the  Appellant  would  face
    depravation of life, torture, inhuman or degrading treatment if removed
    to Kenya; at paragraph 32 that she was  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules;  and  at
    paragraph 33 that the removal of  the  Appellant  to  Kenya  would  not
    amount to breach of the UK's obligations to her under Articles 2 and or
    3 of ECHR, and there was no merit in any other argument relating to the
    ECHR.

11.  The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision  in  grounds  dated  24
    October 2018 which asserted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law,  in
    summary, as follows:

    (i)  in failing to set out the nature and import of evidence  given  by
         four supporting witnesses  [JW],  [SW],  [RB]  and  [KS]  (grounds,
         paragraph 6); and that the judge had failed to give  reasons  which
         were adequate in law for  not  accepting  the  witnesses'  evidence
         (grounds,  paragraph  9);  further,  the  Appellant   referred   to
         paragraph 8 of the decision in R  (on  the  application  of  NK)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00431
         (IAC) which reads as follows:


              "8. The further submissions made included correspondence from
                  [KM] who  wrote  on  behalf  of  the  Lesbian  Immigration
                  Support Group (LISG).  In a letter dated 20 December  2013
                  she had stated that it was the procedure of  LISG  not  to
                  write support letters until  the  person  they  wished  to
                  support had been to three meetings so that members of  the
                  group could be sure that the applicant was  a  lesbian  or
                  bisexual.  She  detailed  those  meetings.   Ms  Lean  has
                  argued that in fact the decision of LISG  to  support  the
                  applicant was merely based on what the applicant had  told
                  them.  I do not consider that that  is  entirely  correct.
                  It is true that members  and  supporters  of  LISG  placed
                  weight on what the applicant had told them but it is clear
                  from the various letters that the writers of the  letters,
                  including Ms  [M],  accepted  the  Appellant  as  being  a
                  lesbian because, as she says, 'we could  clearly  see  she
                  was  a  lesbian  from  both  our  experience  as  lesbians
                  ourselves and of meeting lesbian women from other parts of
                  the world.' So it was not just a decision made on what the
                  applicant  had  told  them  but  because  of   their   own
                  experiences and their own sexuality";


    (ii) in misdirecting herself in law by failing,  when  considering  the
         Appellant's private life under Article  8  ECHR,  to  appropriately
         direct  herself  in  law  as  to  the  requirements  of   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi); the judge's finding that the Appellant's removal was
         "correct,  proportionate  and  necessary"  it  did  not   represent
         findings on the relevant consideration as to  whether  or  not  the
         Appellant had ties to Kenya  and/or  whether  there  will  be  very
         significant obstacles to her integration into Kenya; the grounds of
         appeal also asserted that the Respondent in the  decision  appealed
         against  had  not  suggested  the  Appellant  fell  foul   of   the
         suitability requirements referred to in paragraph 276ADE(1)(i).

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andrew in a decision dated 7 November 2018 on the grounds that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in law in not  considering  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  Judge Andrew had stated that he was satisfied that  the
    judge had considered the aspects of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    lesbian, including the evidence before her of the witnesses  called  on
    the Appellant's behalf, and made sustainable findings, and  that  those
    findings do not amount to an arguable  error  of  law.   Permission  to
    appeal was in fact granted at the top of that document generally.

13.   However,  those  representing  her  made  a  renewed  application  for
    permission to appeal on the protection element of her claim,  resulting
    in a decision of Upper Tribunal Kebede dated 5 December 2018 making  it
    clear that permission was granted on all  grounds;  she  expressed  the
    view that the ground of appeal relating to  the  protection  claim  had
    little arguable merit, but she did not exclude it from consideration in
    the onward appeal.

14.  The appeal came before me today.  I heard  from  Mr  Pountney  for  the
    Appellant, and from Mr Tan for the Respondent.  Mr  Pountney  addressed
    me on the protection claim first, at my request.  I asked  Mr  Pountney
    to clarify what the nature  of  the  legal  challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding was.  He clarified that  the  error  of  law  advanced  by  the
    Appellant was that the judge had  failed  to  give  reasons  which  are
    adequate in law for rejecting  the  Appellant's  sexuality,  given  the
    nature of the evidence that had been given by the supporting  witnesses
    on that issue.  Mr Pountney drew to my attention a series  of  passages
    within the documentary evidence from the witnesses.

15.  At page 190 of the Appellant's bundle is a  letter  from  [KS]  of  the
    Lesbian Immigration Support Group (LISG) dated 21 August 2018  relating
    to the Appellant.  The letter includes the following:


         "We first met L in March 2013 at an LISG  fundraising  event  which
         she attended with one of the LISG members.  It  was  a  women  only
         event featuring talks, music and poetry.  L seemed very  happy  and
         excited to meet volunteers and members from LISG.  She told us that
         she had intended to join the group for a  while.   We  subsequently
         arranged for one volunteer and one member of the group to meet with
         L.  This took place the following month, just  before  the  monthly
         LISG meeting.  We always arrange an introductory meeting with women
         who are interested in joining the group in order to tell them about
         LISG and its constitution, and make an  initial  assessment  as  to
         whether she would be a genuine member of the group, i.e.  that  she
         is lesbian  or  bisexual.   After  this  initial  meeting  she  was
         subsequently invited to our next monthly meeting.


         From  her  first  LISG  monthly  meeting  L  came  across  as  very
         comfortable and confident with the  other  women,  joining  in  the
         banter and flirting.  She told us that she had craved "somewhere to
         socialise with my people" and seemed very happy to have  found  our
         group."


16.  Further within Ms [S]'s letter from the LISG, she provides as follows:


         "In the UK L lives an open lesbian lifestyle.  She positively beams
         while socialising at lesbian events.   She  comes  across  as  very
         comfortable in her lesbian identity and we get the impression  that
         she has, in LISG and the wider lesbian community, found a sense  of
         belonging and 'home'."


17.  There was also a letter from  [KS]  given  personally,  not  under  the
    auspices of LISG, dated 21 August 2018 at page 194 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  Ms [S] describes that the Appellant had attended  LISG  events
    and activities.  Ms [S] then says:


         "When I have seen L at such events I have  found  her  to  be  very
         confidant and comfortable with her sexuality ...  I am in no  doubt
         that L is a lesbian.  She is  entirely  comfortable  with  physical
         affection with members and volunteers at LISG and within the  wider
         lesbian community.  Whilst lesbians are not a homogenous group, her
         body language, the way she carries herself,  everything  about  her
         manner indicated to me that she is genuine and feels able in the UK
         to be open about her sexuality."


18.  There is a letter from [JW] dated 22 August 2014 at page 201  in  which
    Ms [W] states:


         "In mid-August a friend and I volunteered  to  assist  the  Lesbian
         Asylum  and  Refugee  Support  Group  to  make  a  banner  for  the
         Manchester Pride Parade.  We led the women only art session.  L was
         very comfortable in a lesbian only environment where there was lots
         of banter about our previous and current relationships with  women,
         what type of women we are attracted to and so-on."


19.  In a further letter from Ms [W] dated 21 August 2018  at  page  197  of
    the Appellant's bundle, Ms [W] states that the Appellant has been:


         "... out with me and my lesbian social circle on occasions in  bars
         in the Chorlton area of Manchester.  I have also attended  numerous
         LGBT festivals and events in Manchester's gay village  with  L.   I
         feel that L seems to enjoy being in my company  and  being  with  a
         friend who is lesbian who she can be open and socialise with. ... I
         can see how happy and at ease L feels socialising with  other  LGBT
         people."


20.  There is a letter at page 205 of the Appellant's bundle  from  Ms  [SW]
    dated 22 August 2018 in which Ms [W] states that:


         "(relating to an occasion in March 2017) L stayed overnight  at  my
         house that particular evening along with other LISG members.  As  a
         lesbian myself I am in no doubt that L is a lesbian.  It was lovely
         to see L visibly relaxing every evening.  I could see that she  was
         very at ease and  comfortable  around  lesbians  through  her  body
         language,  facial  expression,  she  is  always  smiling  on  these
         occasions.  ... since that evening  I  have  seen  L  at  the  LISG
         members' meeting held once a month  which  L  attends.   Again  her
         whole way of being confirms that L is a lesbian.  She is supportive
         of other women in the group and puts  energy  to  bring  the  group
         together.  For example at the end of year  party  this  December  L
         worked hard in the kitchen to cook lovely food for us all."


21.  Finally, amongst the evidence drawn to my attention by Mr Pountney,  is
    a handwritten letter from [RB] dated 17 August 2018 in the  Appellant's
    bundle at pages 207 to 209 in which Ms [B] asserts that:


         "I have to say there was something about her that really  impressed
         me.  It is not only her warmth and sense of humour but I  sensed  a
         depth to her and a keen intelligence.


         Subsequently as I have got to know her better I began  to  see  her
         deep commitment to and love (for) women."


22.  In relation to that evidence, the  judge  found,  as  I  have  set  out
    above, that those witnesses gave honest evidence, were kind  and  well-
    intentioned people and they had taken the Appellant into their lives as
    a friend.  However, the judge specifically found that she could  accept
    that the Appellant has made her profile "fit"  with  theirs,  and  that
    they might have even seen her kissing a woman or women - that was quite
    believable.

23.  The difficulty with Mr Pountney's  argument  is  that  the  judge  does
    appear to have taken the witnesses' evidence at face  value,  accepting
    that they  are  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  is  a  lesbian  woman.
    However, given the litany of reasons  set  out  previously  within  the
    judge's decision as to why the Appellant was a dishonest  witness,  and
    given that the judge has specifically considered that the Appellant had
    purposely adopted a mode of behaviour such that her profile fitted with
    the other members of the LISG, I find that  the  judge  has  taken  the
    evidence of those  witnesses  properly  into  account,  and  has  given
    reasons which are sustainable in law for finding, notwithstanding  such
    evidence, that the Appellant is not lesbian.  The judge  has  not  left
    out any relevant evidence.  The judge  was  entitled  to  approach  the
    evidence of the supporting witnesses alongside  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence before the judge, which had resulted in the judge finding that
    the  Appellant  had  adopted  different  identities  and  had  asserted
    different nationalities, and had, according to the Crown Court  judge's
    findings made in the  narrative  to  the  sentencing  of  August  2011,
    successfully lived and worked for  a  number  of  years  in  a  totally
    different identity to her own.  I find that  the  judge  was  entitled,
    taking these other facets of the Appellant's  character  into  account,
    that the Appellant had indeed deceived her "friends".

24.  I find that the Appellant's challenge against the judge's dismissal  of
    the protection claim does not disclose any material error of law.

25.  In relation to the Appellant's ground challenging the judge's  decision
    under Article 8 ECHR, I find that the judge does direct herself in  law
    as to the relevant paragraph of the Immigration  Rules  is  276ADE  (at
    paragraph 16 of  the  decision).  However,  it  is  incorrect  for  the
    Appellant to assert that the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    sought to invoke the suitability clauses of Appendix FM, which are also
    applicable under paragraph 276ADE.  For example, at paragraph 82 of the
    Respondent's decision of 6 December 2017, the Respondent expressed  the
    view that the Appellant had failed to attend the asylum interview on  5
    August 2013,  and  therefore  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  S-
    LTR.1.7(a).  Further, the Respondent had observed  that  the  Appellant
    had attempted to conceal her true identity and therefore did  not  meet
    the  requirements  of  S-LTR.2.2  (relating  to  the  giving  of  false
    information).

26.  It is to be noted that the judge  herself  does  not  make  a  specific
    finding as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements.  However, such oversight was not material  in
    my view; it is manifestly clear that if the judge had turned  her  mind
    to the question of whether or not the  Appellant  met  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM, also applicable under  276ADE,  the  judge
    would have found that she did not, due to her extensive dishonesty,  as
    found by the judge.

27.  It is right to note that at paragraph 27, the judge appears to  dismiss
    the appeal under Article 8 ECHR on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
    decision to remove was 'correct,  proportionate,  and  necessary',  and
    that this did not  include  specific  findings  as  to  what  ties  the
    Appellant had to Kenya, or whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into Kenya.

28.  However, the judge  had  previously  stated  at  paragraph  17  of  her
    decision that it cannot be correct  that  a  person  can  benefit  from
    uncertainties over her  nationality  which  were  borne  of  their  own
    dishonesty.  The judge was in reality unable to make any findings which
    were any more detailed than those which she gave, about what  ties  the
    Appellant  might  have  to  Kenya,  or  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into that country, given  that
    the judge had found that the entirety of the Appellant's account of her
    past life in that country was false.  In the  light  of  the  dishonest
    evidence given by the Appellant, the Appellant had failed to  establish
    that she had been involved in political activity in Kenya, or had  been
    trafficked from Kenya to the United Kingdom. It is  the  Appellant  who
    has failed to meet the burden on her  to  demonstrate  that  there  she
    lacked ties to Kenya, or that there would be very significant obstacles
    to  her  integration  into  Kenya.   The  Appellant's  own   dishonesty
    prevented any real clarity in findings  on  those  issues.   The  judge
    could not have done anything more than she did.

29.  For those reasons the  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  any  material
    error of law in the judge's decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The judge's decision did not involve the making of any  material  error
    of law.


    I do not set aside the judge's decision.


    I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Signed                     Date 10.2.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The Appellant has advanced a protection claim. Unless and until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  This  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date 10.2.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



