

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13485/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                             Decision and Reasons
promulgated
on 24 July 2017
      on 31 August 2017


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SB
                         (anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Muquit instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Callender-Smith promulgated on 24 January 2017 in which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  both  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh born on  [  ]  1966
        who entered the United Kingdom as a visitor with leave valid from 9
        April 2001 until 9 October 2001. The appellant was  encountered  by
        the police on 29 June  2015  at  which  point  she  claimed  asylum
        asserting she had come to the UK because her husband in  Bangladesh
        had left her and she could not return to Bangladesh as relatives of
        her husband were all terrorists.  The  Judge  noted  the  appellant
        withdrew that asylum claim  on  10  March  2016  and  made  further
        submissions dated 14  November  2016  which  were  refused  in  the
        decision under appeal.
     3. The Judge noted the appellant's claim from all sources at  [16]  of
        the decision under challenge.
     4. The Judge sets  out  findings  of  fact  from  [28]  which  may  be
        summarised in the following terms:


                  a. There are significant credibility issues in relation to
                     all aspects of the claim [29].
                  b. The level of support  provided  by  the  appellants  UK
                     based family demonstrates determination to maintain the
                     appellant's unlawful presence in the UK for  around  14
                     years [30].
                  c. The lack of original documentation in  terms  of  death
                     certificates for both of  the  appellant's  mother  and
                     father, despite the fact the appellant was on notice of
                     this  particular  challenge  is  "unsatisfactory"   and
                     severely damages not only the  appellant's  credibility
                     but also that of her brother, Abdul [31]. The fact  the
                     documents are said to exist  at  somebody  else's  home
                     address was not found to be sufficient as they had  not
                     been provided.  The Judge concluded  he  had  not  been
                     told the truth about their absence [33].
                  d. It is apparently the appellant's eldest sister  who  it
                     is claimed was old and frail with no assets and who has
                     a son to look after her while she lives  with  her  in-
                     laws as a widow, was  able  to  get  herself  out  only
                     locate but also send to the appellant's brother a  copy
                     of the mother's death certificate. The  Judge  did  not
                     accept  the  evidence  presented  in   the   translated
                     certificate but noted the appellant's eldest sister was
                     sufficiently active to be able to do such tasks [34].
                  e. The Judge concluded the appellant does have family  and
                     practical  support  that  could  assist  when  she   is
                     returned to Bangladesh [35].
                  f. Having seen the level of support given to the appellant
                     by family in the United Kingdom the Judge did  not  see
                     why the siblings  cannot,  between  them,  provide  the
                     appellant with additional financial aid to  assist  her
                     relocation in Bangladesh [36].
                  g. The Judge found that whilst the  appellant  would  face
                     the difficulties of a 50-year-old woman having  to  re-
                     locate to Bangladesh she would not be doing so  without
                     significant family and practical support  in  terms  of
                     both  what  her  elder  sister  could  do  for  her  in
                     Bangladesh and the support  provided  by  the  UK-based
                     siblings [37].
                  h. At [38] the Judge finds  "She  has,  in  effect,  lived
                     hidden and unlawfully within Bangladeshi society in the
                     UK. There is no reason in my view  why  she  could  not
                     live a more fulfilled and less stressful life  lawfully
                     in her own country".
                  i. The Judge did not find any risk on return to Bangladesh
                     from either the appellant's former husband's family  or
                     generally [39].
                  j. The Judge finds Bangladesh is a large country in which,
                     if necessary, the applicant  could  relocate  with  the
                     assistance of siblings [40].
                  k. The Judge considered the country  information  material
                     provided [41].
                  l. The Judge found the evidence did not persuade him  that
                     the appellant's situation on return would  be  anything
                     other than an adjustment rather than creating any  real
                     risk of harm [42].


     5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application by a Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
        following terms:


             1. The grounds are not helpful. They are overly  long  and  in
                the main seek to reargue the case as it was put before  the
                First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am  however  prepared  to   grant
                permission as I consider it arguable that the Tribunal  has
                erred in its approach to the protection claim. At the heart
                of this appeal was an assertion that the Appellant  was  at
                risk from her ex-husband and his family. This is dealt with
                at paragraph 39 where the determination simply reads: "I do
                not think she is at any risk on return to Bangladesh".  The
                reasoning on internal flight was similarly scant.


     6. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State in the Rule 24
        response of 26 June 2017.




Error of law


     7. On the appellant's behalf  Mr  Muquit  referred  to  the  fact  the
        appellant is a divorced woman who faced animosity between her first
        husband and second husband's family. He also adopted the grounds on
        which permission was granted.
     8. It is not disputed the appellant has remained in the United Kingdom
        unlawfully but it is alleged the Judge erred when referring to  the
        lack of original documentation in terms of  the  death  certificate
        for the appellant's mother and father. This Tribunal notes there is
        reference to the photo copy  death  certificates  provided  in  the
        reasons for refusal letter at [26] which  were  not  found  by  the
        decision maker to  support  the  appellants  claim  [29].   It  was
        submitted on the appellant's behalf that her brother gave  evidence
        regarding the original documents being in Bangladesh and that there
        was no assertion in the evidence that the  appellant's  sister  was
        old  and  frail.   The  evidence  was  that  the  sister  lived  in
        Bangladesh with her mother and own  child.  It  was  submitted  the
        country information did not mean  the  fact  the  appellant  had  a
        female sibling meant she had a male guardian which is  referred  to
        as an important element  to  enable  a  woman  to  live  safely  in
        Bangladeshi society. It was submitted that whilst the appellant has
        family in Bangladesh the only relatives  are  a  widow  sister  and
        mother and son with the possibility of some practical support  from
        other relatives in the UK.
     9. Mr Muquit accepted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  this  is  a
        'protection only' case but asserted the Judge did not deal with the
        core  issue  or  give  adequate  reasons  to  support  the  overall
        conclusion that the appeal must fail.
    10. In relation to the materiality of the error, it was  submitted  the
        Judge did not make out an adequate foundation  for  the  claim  the
        appellant could relocate as the test is that of reasonableness.  It
        was argued the appellant is  a  housewife  and  that  her  economic
        capacity  was  not  considered.  It  is  argued  that  the  country
        information refers to landlords outside a  home  area  not  wanting
        single women as tenants for their properties.  It  is  asserted  no
        findings were made on the evidence regarding the strength of the ex-
        husbands network, on which there was arguably no  evidence.   There
        was also the need to consider that the appellant's family only live
        in the home area and not outside the home area and so the issue  of
        the reasonableness of relocation must arise.
    11. It is also asserted no findings were made on the documents  and  no
        findings with regard to the problems the appellant would  encounter
        in relation to accommodation as a person without  male  support  in
        Bangladesh.
    12. Mr Muquit submitted on the appellant's  behalf  that  although  the
        respondent asserts  in  the  decision  letter  that  there  was  no
        evidence regarding a risk on  return  created  in  the  appellant's
        case, the  fact  the  Judge  was  considering  internal  relocation
        supports a finding there must be a risk  in  the  appellant's  home
        area. It is therefore  necessary  for  the  Judge  to  undertake  a
        holistic assessment. It was asserted internal relocation is  not  a
        reasonable prospect as it is argued such relocation would be unduly
        harsh on the basis of the evidence before the Judge.
    13. It is asserted the Judge had not done  enough  which  was  arguably
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    14. It is accepted on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
        findings made by the Judge  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  ex-
        husband are "very thin" but it was also submitted  that  there  was
        not a great deal of evidence on this point.
    15. The Judge notes at [22] the appellant's oral evidence that she  had
        suffered abuse at the hands of two former husbands and did not want
        to get hurt by anybody in Bangladesh, and that the appellant feared
        that if returned as a single lone woman to Bangladesh shew will  be
        in a vulnerable position, she has had two relationships  which  had
        ended which will be frowned on in Bangladesh. It does  not  appear,
        however, from the evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the  material
        adequately substantiated the claim to face a real risk on return at
        the hands of her previous husbands.
    16.  It  is  arguable  that  in  light  of  the  lack  of  evidence  to
        substantiate this point the finding by the Judge that  he  did  not
        think the appellant is at any risk on return from  Bangladesh  from
        either of her former husband's families is, in  reality,  the  only
        finding the Judge was able to make. It  is  effectively  a  finding
        that the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon
        her to the required standard to establish that such a risk existed.
    17. At [30] the Judge comments upon the level of support given  to  the
        appellant by her family in the United Kingdom  which  included  the
        appellant staying with her sister between 2001/2002 and  2011/2012,
        one of her brothers from 2002 to 2004 and another brother from 2005
        to 2008, before staying with the brother she stayed at between 2002
        to 2004 from 2009 until September 2012. The finding  by  the  Judge
        that the factual analysis demonstrated the strong level of  support
        is a finding reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
    18. In relation to the internal relocation point, such only  arises  if
        it is found the appellant faces a real risk in her home  area.  The
        finding by the Judge that the appellant  had  not  established  any
        real risk on return to Bangladesh in her home area makes  the  lack
        of  reasoning  in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  of   internal
        relocation arguably immaterial. The Judge does  not  find  internal
        relocation is the only option but states at [40] that the appellant
        could relocate if necessary. Necessity had not been established  in
        relation to any risk in the appellant's home area on the  basis  of
        the evidence before the Judge.
    19. There is also an important issue to  remember  which  is  that  the
        respondent  in  the  reasons  for   refusal   letter   raised   the
        availability of internal flight. Once raised the burden  passes  to
        the appellant to establish, by  adducing  sufficient  evidence,  to
        show that any relocation would be unreasonable. On the basis of the
        material provided by the appellant to the Judge it is arguable that
        the appellant failed to discharge this burden.
    20. The core finding is that the appellant can return to Bangladesh  to
        her home area where she has a sister and her sister's son. There is
        no evidence that those family members suffer any persecution or ill-
        treatment in Bangladesh or that the appellant would not be able  to
        settle with or near them and benefit from the presence  of  a  male
        family member.
    21. The appellant fails to make out  that  the  evidence  supports  the
        contention the Judge made an error of law material to the  decision
        to dismiss the appeal. Accordingly, the decision shall stand.

Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 30 August 2017
