
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13680/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 December 2019                  |on 7 January 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                JONATHAN [D]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr Frost instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier Tribunal Judge Ince promulgated on 25 June 2019 in  which  the
        Judge allowed Mr [D]'s appeal.




Background


     2. Mr [D], a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC),  was
        born on 25 December 1995. He appealed  against  a  decision  of  14
        November 2018 refusing  his  protection  and  human  rights  claims
        pursuant to what the Judge describes as the making of a deportation
        order against him.
     3. The chronology set out in the Secretary of States papers is in  the
        following terms (reference to appellant and respondent is  as  they
        appeared before the First-tier Tribunal):


             Home Office records show that the appellant's  mother  arrived
             in the UK on 22 April 2001 with the appellant's younger sister
             and claimed asylum.


             That the appellant and his older sister, [BD]  were  still  in
             the DRC.


             The appellant's mother's asylum application was refused on  10
             June 2004 and an appeal against that decision dismissed on  12
             October 2004  and  on  12  January  2005  an  application  for
             permission to appeal to  the  Tribunal  was  rejected.  On  22
             February 2005 a Statutory Review was dismissed and on 15 March
             2005 the appellant's mother's appeal rights became exhausted.


             On 15 March 2015 an  application  was  made  for  Humanitarian
             protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant's mother with the appellant and his siblings as  her
             dependents.


             On 5  April  2007  the  appellant's  mother's  representatives
             submitted further representations to be considered as a  fresh
             application  for  asylum  and  under  the  provisions  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). On 6  August  2007
             both the application for ILR and the  further  representations
             were refused.


             On 7 December 2007 the appellant, his mother and siblings  all
             granted ILR under the Legacy concession.


             On 13  November  2010  the  appellant's  mother  submitted  an
             application for naturalisation as a British citizen  with  the
             appellant and his siblings as her dependents, but on 4 January
             2011 the application was refused.


             On 4  October  2017  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Leeds
             Magistrates Court for violent disorder and on 1 December  2017
             he was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment.


             On 15 December 2017 the appellant was served with  a  decision
             to deport letter dated 14 December 2017.


             On 3  January  2018  the  applicant  made  representations  in
             response to the decision to deport letter.


             On 10 January 2018 the appellant's representatives  wrote  the
             Home Office requesting an extension of time in which  to  make
             representations and on 16 February 2018 he  was  permitted  an
             extra 5 working days to respond.


             On 22 February  2018  the  appellant's  legal  representatives
             submitted further  representations  together  with  additional
             documents citing Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


             On  20  April  2018,  the  appellant  completed  a   screening
             interview.


             On 21 May 2018, and asylum interview was completed.


             31 May 2018, the appellant's licence expired.


     4. On 14 November 2018 Mr [D] was served  with  the  reasons  why  his
        protection and human rights claim of the 22 February 2018 had  been
        refused. Part One of the Notice of Decision  is  in  the  following
        terms:


             Part 1 - Deportation decision


             We wrote to you on 15 December  2017  and  notified  you  that
             because of your criminal convictions in the UK  the  Secretary
             of State had decided to make a deportation order  against  you
             under section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  This  is
             because the Secretary of State deems your  deportation  to  be
             conducive to the public good. In response  to  that  decision,
             you submitted representations dated 22 February  2018  setting
             out why you should not be deported. Your representations  have
             been considered below.


             What this means for you


             You remain subject to a decision to make a deportation order.


             You do not have a right of  appeal  against  the  decision  to
             deport you. However you may appeal  against  the  decision  to
             refuse your protection and human rights claims  under  section
             82 (1) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  from
             within the UK.


     5. The decision maker noted that the reason for  the  deportation  was
        the above conviction for a  criminal  offence  resulting  it  being
        deemed his deportation was  conducive  to  the  public  good  under
        section 3(3)(a) Immigration Act 1971. The decision maker  noted  Mr
        [D] was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment and required  to  pay  a
        victim surcharge.
     6. The Judge at [2] sets out the provisions of Section 32  UK  Borders
        Act 2007 when it is not suggested in the respondent's decision,  or
        elsewhere, that this is an automatic  deportation  appeal.  Section
        32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  mandates  that,  unless  certain
        circumstances apply, the Home Secretary  must  make  a  deportation
        order against a 'foreign criminal', defined in the same Act  as  'a
        person who has been convicted of an offence  and  sentenced  to  12
        months imprisonment as a result'. Mr [D] has been convicted  of  an
        offence but not sentenced to 12 months imprisonment  and  so  these
        provisions cannot apply.
     7. The Judge at [17] wrote:


             "Prior to hearing evidence, I  discuss  the  issues  with  the
             representatives and it was agreed that  the  asylum  on  human
             rights (Article 8) issues were before me. Further,  there  was
             the preliminary point referred to above,  namely  whether  the
             Appellant  was  a  "foreign  criminal",  which  categorisation
             depended upon whether he had  been  convicted  of  an  offence
             "that has caused serious harm". Mr Spence  accepted  that  the
             burden of proving this was upon the Home Office on the balance
             of probabilities."


     8. In relation to the human rights aspect, the  Immigration  Rules  at
        398, 399 and 399A attempted to  define  exactly  what  qualities  a
        family or private life would need to have in order to outweigh  the
        public interest in deportation.
        These  rules  essentially  put   foreign   criminals   into   three
        categories:
        Those sentenced to 4+ years in prison;
        Those sentenced to 1-4 years in prison; and
        Individuals who had not  necessarily  been  sentenced  to  time  in
        prison, but
        whose offending had caused serious harm; or
        was a persistent offender and showed a particular disregard for the
        law.
     9. The Judge commenced by considering as a preliminary  point  whether
        Mr [D]'s offending had caused  serious  physical  or  psychological
        harm. At [29] the Judge writes:


             "I am therefore led to the conclusion that Miss  Pickering  is
             correct - there is insufficient  evidence  for  me  that  this
             incident of "Violent Disorder" has caused "serious physical or
             psychological "harm" to any person or that it "has contributed
             to  a  widespread  problem  that  causes  serious  harm  to  a
             community or to society in general"  -  no  evidence  of  this
             latter category has been provided."


    10. The Judge concluded that Mr [D] is not a 'foreign criminal', but so
        far as that term is defined in the UK Borders Act he never was. The
        Judge at [30 - 31] writes:


             30.  I therefore find that the  Appellant  is  not  a  foreign
                  criminal. Accordingly, there is no justification  for  his
                  deportation and his appeal must therefore be allowed.


             31.  Having made this preliminary decision,  it  follows  that
                  this is the end of the case and that there is no need  for
                  me to make any further  decisions  about  the  Appellant's
                  asylum, Humanitarian Protection or Article 8 appeals.


    11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal asserting, inter
        alia, the Judge erred in law in  failing  to  deal  with  Mr  [D]'s
        grounds of appeal pursuant to section 84 of the 2002  Act,  as  the
        Judge was required to make  findings  regarding  whether  Mr  [D]'s
        removal will be contrary to the Refugee Convention and ECHR.
    12. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Grubb in the following terms:


             1.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Ince)   allowed   the
                appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  his  human
                rights claim following a decision to deport him.


             2. The grounds are arguable. Even if the appellant was  not  a
                "foreign criminal" as defined in the UK  Borders  Act  2007
                and s. 117 D of the NIA Act 2002, all that meant  was  that
                the automatic deportation provisions in the  2007  Act  and
                the article 8 considerations in s.117C of the 2002 Act  did
                not apply.  The Judge still had to  decide  the  appellants
                Art 8 claim, albeit on the (now) rather unusual basis  that
                he is not a "foreign criminal". In  dismissing  his  appeal
                because these two sets of provisions  did  not  apply,  the
                judge did not resolve the issue in the  appeal:  would  the
                appellant's deportation breach Art 8.

             3. For these reasons permission to appeal is granted.





Error of law


    13. The self-direction set out at [17] of the decision under  challenge
        was correct although it appears the Judge, having focused upon  the
        question of whether the appellant caused serious harm,  appears  to
        have forgotten what the issues in this appeal actually are. It is a
        protection and human rights appeal.
    14. It is also the case that the power to make a deportation order and,
        as a first step, to decide  to  make  one,  stems  originally  from
        section  5(1)  and  section  3(5)(a)  and  section  3(6)   of   the
        Immigration Act 1971.
    15. Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act gives the Secretary of State power  to
        deport a non- British Citizen (a) if he deems it to be conducive to
        the public good (b) if another  member  of  the  family  is  to  be
        deported and (c) if a court recommends it after  conviction  of  an
        offence punishable by imprisonment.  Section 3(5)(a)  is  reflected
        in paragraph 363 of the Immigration  Rules,  which  states  that  a
        person is liable to deportation where the Secretary of State  deems
        that person's deportation to be conducive to the public good.
    16. The Judge referred to the case of Andell (foreign criminal  -  para
        398) [2018] UKUT 198 in which the Upper Tribunal held:


        (a)        A  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make   a
             deportation order under the 1971 Act is not predicated upon an
             individual being a "foreign criminal" as defined by  the  2002
             Act or the 2007 Act;
        (b)    "Foreign criminal" is a term of art in the 2002 Act and  the
             2007 Act whereas in the Rules the words simply denote that the
             individual is a "foreigner" and a "criminal";
        (c)       Paragraph 398 of the  Rules  includes  not  only  foreign
             criminals as defined in the 2002 Act and the 2007 Act but also
             other individuals who in the view of the Secretary  of  State,
             are liable to deportation because of their criminality  and/or
             their offending behaviour.


    17. It is also the case that as the Judge found that Mr [D]'s offending
        has not caused serious harm then paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A could
        not apply.  In such a case  the  Judge  was  required  to  consider
        whether the appellant's deportation was  conducive  to  the  public
        good which is a question of fact.
    18. The Rules assert at paragraph 397 that a deportation order will not
        be made if it would be contrary to the UK's obligations  under  the
        Refugee Convention  or  the  ECHR  or  if  not  contrary  to  those
        obligations, in exceptional circumstances.
    19. Even though the Judge determined Mr [D] was not a foreign  criminal
        he was still required to determine the protection and human  rights
        grounds and, as a result of not doing so, erred in law.
    20. I set the decision aside although the conclusion Mr [D]  is  not  a
        'foreign criminal' is it was not found by the Judge  his  offending
        had caused 'serious harm' is a preserved finding.




Discussion



    21. The Upper Tribunal was able to go on to remake the decision.
    22. Mr [D] was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment after a public  order
        offence in October 2017. He came to the United Kingdom as  a  child
        aged 6 and based his protection claim on an assertion that  he  had
        lived in the UK for the majority of his life and did not know  what
        life was like in the DRC, fears what he sees in the news  regarding
        Ebola and individuals being kidnapped, and confirmed in his  asylum
        interview that his fears are more to do with leaving his family  in
        the UK.
    23. The facts relied upon by Mr [D] do  not  establish  any  particular
        fear of returning to the DRC for a Convention Reason. The decision-
        maker considered sufficiency of protection if Mr  [D]  should  face
        problems on return to the DRC but concludes  that  as  he  had  not
        established any specific Convention or other  reasons  for  why  he
        would require state protection he had not  established  he  was  in
        need of the same.
    24. In October 2019 it was known the Secretary of State  was  reviewing
        her position in  relation  to  return  to  the  DRC  following  the
        publishing of the "Unsafe Return III" report by  Justice  First  in
        May 2019. At that time the internal review team  were  waiting  for
        further information in response to a request made to one of the key
        NGOs mentioned in the report before finalising  their  review.   It
        was anticipated that the review would have been  completed  by  the
        end of November 2019, but this has been shown to be  an  optimistic
        estimate. In the meantime, no decisions were being made in relation
        to foreign national offenders from the DRC.
    25. In reply to a question asked in  Parliament  to  the  Secretary  of
        State regarding such returnees it was stated on 13 June  2019:  "We
        only return those who are without a legal right to  remain  in  the
        UK, including foreign national offenders, when we  and,  where  the
        individual has exercised a right of appeal, the courts deem  it  is
        safe to do so, on a case by case basis. We are currently  reviewing
        our assessment of risk faced by rejected asylum seekers and foreign
        national offenders on return to the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
        (DRC). An updated country policy and information note  setting  out
        our position will be published in due course. The Home  Office  has
        regular discussions with the Foreign Office on a  range  of  issues
        and has on a number of occasions discussed the subject  of  returns
        to the DRC to establish as full an assessment of the  situation  as
        possible."
    26. The decision in this case was made on the 14 November  2018  before
        the review was though to be necessary and so did not  consider  the
        Unsafe Return III report.
    27. In the country guidance case of BM and Others (returnees  -criminal
        and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC), heard in March and April
        2015, the Home Office acknowledged,  amongst  other  things,  that,
        owing to the poor prison conditions, a period of detention of  more
        than approximately one day would result in a breach of  Article  3.
        The Upper Tribunal accepted this assessment as  'clearly  warranted
        by substantial and compelling evidence' (paragraph 13).  Conditions
        in detention centres and prisons continue to be very poor, with ill-
        treatment reportedly commonplace. It  therefore  remains  the  case
        that a person detained for more than a day, even for  short  period
        of time, is likely to face conditions that breach Article 3.
    28. Although it is not made  out  Mr  [D]  will  be  persecuted  for  a
        Convention reason, as he is not a  known  opposition  member  or  a
        person with an adverse profile, either actual or imputed, he  is  a
        foreign national criminal who will  be  deported  from  the  United
        Kingdom. He will be questioned on  arrival  and  if  imprisoned  is
        likely to receive treatment sufficient  to  breach  his  article  3
        rights.
    29. The issue of whether he will be detained on arrival and ill-treated
        was considered at the core of the Unsafe Returns III report. Mr [D]
        seeks to rely upon a country expert report  prepared  by  Catherine
        Ramos who is the author of the Unsafe Return, Unsafe Return II  and
        Unsafe Return III reports. The report is dated 15 May 2019. At  the
        latter part of the report it is written:


             Returnees I have monitored since 2012 have faced the following
             difficulties and  barriers  to  integration.  I  believe  that
             Jonathan [D] will be exposed  to  the  same  difficulties  and
             barriers to integration into society.


                   . Destitution and hunger and  homelessness  if  returnees
                     have no family in Kinshasa. Returnees do not  know  who
                     they can trust. People  who  have  taken  in  returnees
                     expect payment which puts a burden on families  in  the
                     UK. Case Study 16 (Unsafe Return III P.33) met a  human
                     rights activist who described him in  2017  as  'durty'
                     [sic] and crazy. He was sleeping  on  the  streets.  In
                     2012 the human rights group RENADHOC had stated to  the
                     UK  Fact  Finding  Mission  delegates  that  'Returnees
                     without  family  in  Kinshasa,  they  become   mentally
                     affected, with no one to care for them, no support,  so
                     become mentally ill, some just die.'


                   . Lack of ID (voters card) to present at  checkpoints  on
                     the street will lead to  risk  of  arrest.  It  is  not
                     possible to prove nationality.

                   . Jonathan [D] does not  speak  the  national  languages.
                     Speaking  English  puts  returnees  at  risk  of  being
                     identified as spies  in  communities  where  there  are
                     Secret Service/police informers. People in DRC  believe
                     Rwanda is infiltrating their country. Rwanda's official
                     language is English.

                   .  Gaining  employment  has  not  proved   possible   for
                     returnees.

                   . Even when returnees have been released from the airport
                     or prison following payment, officers have gone to  the
                     address to re-arrest the returnee. The  returnees  have
                     had to move on.

                   .  Returnees  have  no  support  and  no   recourse   for
                     protection  from  United  Nations  Joint  Human  Rights
                     Office, British Embassy or IOM as the returnees are not
                     within their mandate.

                   . Money sent from UK families via Western Union cannot be
                     accessed directly due to  lack  of  ID.  Intermediaries
                     have to be  used,  putting  the  returnee  at  risk  of
                     exploitation. Returnees are threatened with exposure to
                     the DRC authorities as a spy/combatant, if they do  not
                     hand over items/money sent from UK.

                   . Mental health problems  exasperated  by  worries  about
                     their families in  the  UK  and  fears  about  personal
                     safety.

                   . Phones and  belongings  have  been  stolen  at  N'djili
                     airport and in prisons.

                Communication with family by  phone  is  difficult  because
                phones cannot be charged, places of hiding are  outside  of
                network coverage and electricity cuts.


                Based on my monitoring and research, I believe that  as  an
                offender and asylum seeker, Jonathan [D] will be at risk of
                imprisonment and ill-treatment which will breach the  ECHR,
                if removed to DRC. He will not be able to avail himself  of
                protection from the DRC authorities. I also  believe  there
                are substantial barriers to his integration into  Congolese
                society.


    30. No evidence was called, or detailed submissions made by Mr  Diwnycz
        to counter the expert report. I find  based  upon  the  report  and
        research behind it that Mr [D] on return to the DRC  faces  a  real
        risk of harm which will involve at  least  a  period  of  detention
        which, in accordance with the current country guidance  case,  will
        give rise to ill-treatment sufficient to breach article 3 ECHR.
    31. In relation to article 8 ECHR, it is  accepted  Mr  [D]  is  not  a
        'foreign criminal' and not subject  to  the  automatic  deportation
        provisions or the Immigration Rules referred to above.   Assessment
        of the merits of  human  rights  claim  has  to  be  undertaken  in
        accordance with the Razgar principles and based solely on the facts
        as found in relation to his situation.  It is also the case that Mr
        [D] is not the subject of a deportation  order.  The  Secretary  of
        State on 15 December 2017 served a decision to make  a  deportation
        order. It is only if the appeal against the refusal  of  the  claim
        for international protection or leave on human  rights  grounds  is
        refused that the deportation order will be made. This stage has not
        been reached in these proceedings to date.
    32. The judgment in Razgar provides a five-stage process, as follows:


         1.Does the [refusal] amount to an interference by a public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?


         2. If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of article 8.


         3. If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


         4. If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
         the interests of national security, public safety or the economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
         crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


         5. If so, is such  interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public
         end sought to be achieved.


    33. It was not disputed that Mr [D] has established a private  life  in
        the United Kingdom. Mr [D] has lived in the United Kingdom for  the
        most significant proportion of his life with over 50% of  his  life
        now being spent in the United Kingdom. Mr [D] is  fully  integrated
        into British society and culture having been  educated  and  having
        attended college in this country. Mr [D] speaks  excellent  English
        and obtained GCSE's in 2012 and a BTEC Diploma in 2015. A number of
        supporting letters confirming Mr [D]'s integration and contribution
        to the community have been provided in the appeal bundle.
    34. Mr [D] was granted Indefinite Leave to remain when he was 13  years
        of age and has been free of immigration control since.
    35. The Sentencing Judge when dealing with Mr [D] stated:


             "Jonathan [D], you are 21 years  old,  you  have  no  previous
             convictions and after the mayhem broke  out  and  things  were
             being thrown towards your group you went around the  room  and
             joined  the  Wakefield  group   and   were   involved   in   a
             confrontation. You put your drink down and rushed towards  the
             Leeds group. That was  a  catalyst  for  a  bout  of  sporadic
             fighting which drew in others who had been passive  bystanders
             by then. You didn't manage to land a blow but you were knocked
             to the floor and stamped on by Buss.


             In mitigation, I have borne in mind, as I say,  your  lack  of
             previous convictions, that this is out of character  and  that
             you behaved irrationally and you  got  assaulted  yourself.  I
             have borne in mind your good work as a support worker and  the
             good work you have done for people with learning disabilities.
             The sentence is 6 months imprisonment; it would  have  been  9
             months after a trial, and you may go down. Thank you.


    36. There is also at page A19 of Mr [D]'s appeal bundle a  printout  of
        the GCID -Case  Record  Sheet  relating  to  this  matter  obtained
        following a Freedom  of  Information  request.  An  entry  dated  8
        October 2019 is in the following terms:


             I have revisited this case after taking some time off from  it
             to complete some other urgent work.


             I have been progressing the case to deportation however I have
             doubts over whether we are pursuing the right course of action
             in this case.


             I have discussed the case with the SCW in light of the  nature
             of the case: 6 months sentence (3 months custody and 3  months
             on licence): no prior criminal history, DRC nationality; etc


             Following our  conversation,  I  put  forward  a  proposal  to
             concede the  deportation.  I  am  now  waiting  for  a  formal
             response from the SCW.


    37. Whilst the  decision  to  deport  was  not  conceded  this  clearly
        illustrates doubt in the mind  of  the  caseworker  whether  it  is
        necessary or appropriate in all the circumstances to  proceed  with
        the deportation.
    38. Also within the bundle are statements from the appellant's  partner
        [EA] and from his mother,  younger  brother  and  Ms  [A]'s  mother
        attesting to the extent of Mr [D]'s integration and strong  private
        life, and in relation to [EA] family life recognised by article 8.
    39. There will be an interference in the protected rights sufficient to
        engage article 8.
    40. Such interference is in accordance with the law.
    41. When answering the  4th  of  the  Razgar  questions,  whether  such
        inference was necessary as  being  in  the  interests  of  national
        security, public safety or the economic well-being of the  country,
        for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
        health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and  freedoms
        of others,  the  answer  is  more  nuanced.  The  only  reason  the
        Secretary of State gave notice of her intention to  deport  Mr  [D]
        was because it was considered to be conducive to the public good to
        do so as a result of his criminal conviction.  It  is  a  preserved
        finding that there is insufficient evidence to show  Mr  [D]  cause
        serious  physical  or  psychological  harm.  There  is  also  clear
        evidence the offence was an isolated  'one-off'  out  of  character
        incident.   The  factors  referred  to  by  the  Sentencing   Judge
        warranted the short sentence given below the  threshold  length  of
        sentence set out  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  the  primary
        legislation.
    42. The OASYs report dated 9 October  2018  in  relation  to  the  risk
        assessment assesses risk to the public in the community  as  medium
        risk and in relation to all other persons, both in the community or
        in custody, as low. The circumstances that led to the offending are
        unique and unlikely  to  be  repeated  which  is  relevant  to  the
        indicators of risk of serious harm. The classification 'medium'  is
        a reflection of an offender who has the potential to cause  serious
        harm but is  unlikely  to  do  so  unless  there  is  a  change  in
        circumstances. It was not submitted that such an event is likely to
        occur in relation to Mr [D].
    43. Section 117 A+ B are applicable but  not  117C  not  as  he  not  a
        foreign criminal.
        s.117A: (1)This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required
        to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


        (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
        under Article 8, and


        (b)as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
        Rights Act 1998.


        (2)In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


        (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and


        (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
        considerations listed in section 117C.


        (3)In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
        respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
        8(2).


        117BArticle 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
        cases


        (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.


        (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
        English, because persons who can speak English-


        (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


        (b)are better able to integrate into society.


        (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
        seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
        independent, because such persons-


        (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and


        (b)are better able to integrate into society.


        (4)Little weight should be given to-


        (a)a private life, or


        (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


        that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
        person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
        precarious.


        (6)In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-


        (a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and


        (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom.


    44. Mr [D] speaks English, is not a drain on the public purse as he  is
        in employment undertaking valuable work with vulnerable adults,  is
        integrated into the United Kingdom, and relies  on  a  private  and
        family life developed at a time his status in  the  United  Kingdom
        has been lawful and not precarious,  warranting  due  weight  being
        given to the same.
    45. When considering whether such interference is proportionate to  the
        legitimate public end sought to be achieved I find the Secretary of
        State has failed to establish the balance falls in her favour, such
        as  to  make  any  interference  with  Mr  [D]'s  protected  rights
        proportionate, on the specific facts of this case.

Decision

    46. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

   Anonymity.


    47. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 December 2019
