
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13699/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 25th July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     kah
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant who is a national of Iraq, has been granted permission to
    appeal the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Henderson.   For
    reasons given in her decision promulgated 26 February 2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision  dated  13  November  2018  refusing  to  grant   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.  The appellant's claim is to have  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 15 May 2018 unlawfully and applied for asylum the
    same day.  He had travelled via Turkey to Greece and then by  lorry  to
    reach this country.

 2. The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.  His background is  recorded  in
    [10] of the judge's decision, as follows:

         "10. A summary of the Appellant's account is as follows.  He is  of
             Kurdish ethnicity.  He was born in Madera which is near  Ranya
             in the IKR.  The family moved to Warrita when he was a  child.
             His family originates from Qaladza.  He is  a  member  of  the
             Mahmallah tribe which is situated mainly around  Qaladza.   He
             is unmarried.   He  had  two  brothers  and  one  sister.   He
             attended school for approximately three years and then  had  a
             business  selling  sweets  and  drinks  and  saz  (a   musical
             instrument)."

 3.  Difficulties  arose  as  a  result  of   the   appellant's   brother's
    relationship with a  married  woman  whose  husband  found  out.   This
    resulted in his brother being forced to marry the woman concerned.  The
    appellant and his family fled to live in Erbil  where  they  sought  to
    reach a tribal agreement with the woman's  husband.   The  family  paid
    compensation but were told not to return to Warrita where they had once
    lived.  These events occurred in early 2015.  The  appellant's  brother
    disappeared in August that year.  It emerged that he was found dead and
    this led to the arrest of his wife and her former  husband  Omer,  both
    members of the GOL tribe.  In  the  face  of  continuing  threats  from
    Omer's family the appellant left Iraq.

 4. The evidence before the judge  included  certain  videos  and  after  a
    survey of that evidence set out her findings of fact in the  course  of
    which she surveyed the country  information  on  the  issue  of  honour
    killings in the IKR.  At [68] to [70] the judge set out her findings as
    follows:

         "68. The Appellant's account of the two  people  who  murdered  his
             brother is that they are now free and  able  to  seek  revenge
             against him with other family members.  The  first  difficulty
             with this proposition is that the video evidence is that  they
             are arrested and detained on charges of  murder.   This  is  a
             significant charge  for  anyone  to  then  be  able  to  avoid
             particularly when they have publicly confessed to murder.  The
             evidence suggests that there is corruption in the IKR and that
             those with great influence and  power  can  obtain  amnesties.
             There is no evidence to show that the couple in the video have
             obtained an amnesty.  I find it unlikely that having made such
             a public confession on a national TV network that  an  amnesty
             would be given.  No evidence was provided to show that  either
             Maryam or Omer are persons of influence.

         69.  The Appellant has referred to the tribe  of  Maryam  and  Omer
             being the Gol tribe.  I was not provided with any evidence  of
             the Gol tribe showing the extent of their influence and  power
             to control the authorities including the police.  The external
             evidence made no reference to this tribe.  The video films did
             not refer to the tribe of the murder perpetrators or show that
             they were persons of influence.  The scenario outlined in  the
             video is very different to the typical profile of  victims  of
             honour conflicts and I note that at pages 109 and 110  of  the
             Appellant's bundle there is  a  reference  to  men  in  honour
             conflicts and the fact that in some relationships the man will
             escape consequences whilst in others he and the woman will  be
             killed.  This is referring  to  the  couple  who  have  had  a
             relationship outside marriage.  The Appellant is not  in  that
             category.  He is a brother of the person at the centre of  the
             honour conflict and he has not carried out any violent act  or
             sought any revenge.

         70.  I note that the Appellant  has  the  possibility  of  internal
             relocation within the IKR.  He has relocated to  Erbil  and  I
             have rejected his account of being harmed  when  he  relocated
             there with his family.  I conclude that he can return  to  the
             IKR and seek the protection of the authorities as he  has  not
             shown that Maryam or Omer are seeking to harm him or that they
             have been released.  He has not shown that the Gol  tribe  are
             intent on  harming  him  and  have  the  influence,  power  or
             inclination to continue to look for him and harm him should he
             be returned to the IKR."

 5. In respect of the appellant's identity, the judge observed at [71] that
    evidence of a CSID had been provided and that it should be possible for
    him to obtain a full document from Iraq or a duplicate.  She  concluded
    at [72]:

         "72. I find that the Appellant is not at  risk  of  persecution  or
             serious harm should he be returned to Iraq.  In the event that
             he is returned to Bagdad [sic] he can travel by air  to  Erbil
             and relocate their [sic] or in another city in the IKR."

 6. Finally, the judge concluded that with reference  to  paragraph  276ADE
    she did not consider there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration.

 1. Three grounds of challenge are relied on.  The  first  ground  is  best
    understood with reference to paragraph [4] of the grounds:

         "4.  The Immigration Judge finds that A can relocate as he has  not
             shown that the perpetrators are seeking to harm  him  or  have
             been  released  or  that  the  Gol  tribe  has  the  influence
             suggested by A despite the findings in his favour in  relation
             to credibility.  It is  contended  that  the  release  of  the
             perpetrators is irrelevant  to  risk  as  the  family  of  the
             perpetrators would still pose a risk to A  and  this  was  his
             case.  Given that A's account of his experiences in  Iraq  was
             largely accepted and that there was  significant  evidence  in
             support of A's case which was not in dispute it  is  contended
             that  the  Immigration  Judge  has  materially  erred  in  her
             findings in relation to risk on return to Iraq."

 7. The second ground argues error by the judge in using her own  knowledge
    without giving the parties an opportunity to comment.  This related  to
    an aspect of the appellant's journey to the United Kingdom in which  he
    had explained he had been picked up by Ukrainian police on a  big  boat
    and landed on an island called Kalamata.  The judge explained  that  so
    far as she was aware no such island existed but Kalamata is a  city  in
    the south-west coast of mainland  Greece.   She  was  unclear  why  the
    Ukrainian police would be operating in the area.  It is contended  that
    the judge erred by relying on her knowledge.  Also within  the  compass
    of this ground, it is argued that  the  judge  erred  in  [64]  of  her
    decision in relation to the appellant's evidence that he  believed  his
    mother and sister had drowned or were taken elsewhere.   She  explained
    in her decision that she was aware from other  cases  and  of  her  own
    reading that records covering rescues in Greece and deaths by  drowning
    have been well recorded in contrast with boats sinking on the way  from
    Libya.  This led her  to  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  being
    straightforward about this aspect of his claim and did  not  accept  he
    was accompanied across Europe by his mother and sister.  It  is  argued
    that the judge had erred by failing to raise this issue at the  hearing
    and allowing the parties to comment.

 8. Turning to ground 3, it is argued that the judge  materially  erred  in
    her assessment of the country information in relation to honour crimes.
     Reference is made to country information in support  of  a  case  that
    "honour is eternal and that a family can seek retribution for years  to
    come".  It  is  argued  that  retribution  would  extend  beyond  those
    directly involved in the dishonour and the judge was wrong to find  the
    appellant would not be at risk.

 9. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane considered  the
    judge's reliance on her own knowledge and circumstances  regarding  the
    geography in Greece was arguably unfair.  He made  no  comment  on  the
    other grounds.

10. The first enquiry is to see what findings of fact the judge made and to
    then see if in doing so, the judge had erred by reference  to  each  of
    the grounds as each raises issues as to the  safety  of  the  findings.
    The case the appellant had to meet was set out in  the  refusal  letter
    which accepted the appellant's identity and  origins.   The  claim  was
    however rejected in blunt terms in paragraph [45], "Following facts are
    rejected:-Threatened and attacked by Omar's family and the Gul tribe.".
    Thus it was incumbent on the appellant to establish the credibility  of
    his account.

11. The judge's findings begin at [47] after a comprehensive survey of  the
    evidence.  Here it is noted that there was no rejection in the  refusal
    letter of the CSID documents.  In [48] the consistency of dates of  the
    account is acknowledged. Paragraphs [49] to [55] notes features of  the
    video evidence including at [52] a discrepancy between the  appellant's
    evidence and the video content. The judge then turns  in  [56]  to  the
    country information and notes  in  [57]  that  this  evidence  and  the
    transcript, pointed to the continuing existence of honour crimes in the
    IKR.  After addressing  the  argument  by  the  respondent  as  to  the
    likelihood of there being no continuing threat  in  the  light  of  the
    solution having been found (money was paid) at [59] the judge  explains
    that the core of the account "cannot be dismissed as implausible simply
    on the basis that a settlement was reached and a large sum of money was
    paid.  This ignores the situation outlined in the videos provided  that
    showed a murder was committed after a settlement was made".

12. At [60] the judge observes that there  were  elements  of  the  account
    which "are inconsistent and much less credible".  She illustrates  this
    by reference to the appellant's confused account of the attack  and  at
    [66] the consistency of his account of his father's health and the fate
    of the family house.

13. The  judge  then  leaves  the  IKR  based  account  and  turns  to  the
    appellant's journey.  This included at [63] the role of  the  Ukrainian
    police  and  being  taken  to  the  island  called  Kalamat.   Negative
    inferences are drawn over the likelihood of such  police  operating  in
    the area and the geography of Greece.  She also refers to the  lack  of
    clear evidence as to the fate of his mother and sister  who  appear  to
    have travelled with him.   It is noted in [66] that there was  evidence
    of the appellant suffering from mental health problems in  which  there
    was a inconsistency between the account given to the mental health team
    and that given to the Home Office.  The judge however accepted that the
    appellant has shown symptoms "suggestive of PTSD" which was thought  to
    be attributable to the journey.  After a direction as to the burden  on
    the appellant, the judge returned to the IKR based account at  [68]  to
    [70] cited above.

14. Both parties accepted that the judge has erred in failing to make clear
    findings on the evidence.  As result it was accepted that the  decision
    needs to be set aside and remade.  I consider that they were  right  to
    do so.  What is missing from the paragraphs that I have analysed  above
    and those cited are clear factual findings.  The judge appears to hover
    towards an acceptance of the account of murder and its  background  but
    matters are not sufficiently clearly stated for me to be sure  that  is
    what she concluded.  This is in part due to the qualified way in  which
    aspects of the account were identified in the  cited  paragraphs.   The
    judge seeks to resolve the matter by settling  on  internal  relocation
    but in order for this to be in play, it is first necessary to establish
    whether the appellant would be at risk in his home area from  non-state
    actors and whether there would be protection available.  If the  answer
    is positive as to risk and negative as to protection considerations  as
    to the reach of any available protection in the rest of the country are
    then required prior to embarking on a relocation analysis.

15. Ground one is poorly drafted but there is  enough  in  its  content  to
    persuade me that the challenge is  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the
    credibility findings.  The decision needs to be set aside.   Given  the
    nature of the error the case will need to be reheard by  a  differently
    constituted tribunal in  the  FtT.   None  of  the  findings  by  Judge
    Henderson is preserved but the judge's decision stands as a  record  of
    what was said in evidence.

16. There is no need to make a decision therefore on grounds two and  three
    but I observe as to the former, it was encumbent on the judge to invite
    submissions on the geographical concerns which could have  simply  been
    done in writing.  As to the latter, this is more  a  disagreement  with
    the judge's finding on the evidence rather than identification of legal
    error.  The decision of the FtT is set aside and the case  is  remitted
    to a differently constituted tribunal in the First tier for  it  to  be
    remade.


Signed                                  Date 22 July 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
