
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13157/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2020                  |On 15 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:        Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
Respondent:       Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1.  In  this  decision  I  remake  the  decision  on  the  appellant's
         international protection appeal.  This decision must be  considered
         alongside my 'error of law' decision, promulgated on 17  May  2019.
         In that decision the parties agreed that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FTT') erred in law in its approach to  the  appellant's  identity
         documentation and this aspect of the appeal should  be  re-made  in
         the Upper Tribunal ('UT') at a 'resumed hearing'.

Procedural history

      2. The resumed hearing was listed to be heard on 12 March 2019 but was
         adjourned because the respondent's representative was  too  ill  to
         attend court.  In directions dated 8 April 2020  (at  a  time  when
         face to face hearings were not taking place) I indicated that there
         should be a telephone case management hearing ('TCMH') with a  view
         to the resumed hearing taking place remotely.   Pursuant  to  those
         directions, the UT received a skeleton argument dated 30 April 2020
         and a consolidated  bundle  from  the  appellant;  and  nothing  in
         response to this (in breach of directions) from the respondent.

      3. At a TCMH on 28 May 2020, the parties agreed the following matters,
         and directions were made accordingly:

          i) the central issue in dispute i.e. the appellant's  ability  to
             obtain replacement suitable  identification  (it  having  been
             accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that   the   German
             authorities have failed to respond to  the  requests  for  the
             return  of  the  identity  documents  the  appellant  said  he
             submitted to them) is a very  narrow  one,  requiring  limited
             factual findings;

         ii) it is unnecessary for the appellant to give evidence  and  the
             decision can be re-made on the basis  of  written  submissions
             only in accordance with an agreed time-table.

Submissions and evidence

      4. The respondent relies upon written submissions dated 28  May  2020.
         The appellant relies upon his skeleton argument dated 30 April 2020
         and a consolidated bundle of evidence filed on 1 May 2020, and  his
         reply to the SSHD's submissions dated 10 June.

      5. Having reviewed the submissions made by both parties, I  remain  of
         the view that the limited issues in dispute are  such  that  it  is
         appropriate for the re-making decision to proceed on the  basis  of
         written submissions  only  in  the  light  of  the  Pilot  Practice
         Direction, the UTIAC Guidance Note No 1 of 2020 and the  overriding
         objective in the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Issues in dispute

      6. The following matters are not in dispute: the appellant is an Iraqi
         citizen of Kurdish origin.   He  is  from  Jalawla  in  the  Diyala
         governorate and cannot return to his home area.  His CSID was taken
         by the German authorities and both parties have  been  unsuccessful
         in obtaining a response from them regarding  it.   It  follows,  by
         agreement, that the overarching issue that remains  in  dispute  is
         whether the appellant is able  to  obtain  the  requisite  identity
         documentation to be able to safely reside in Iraq.

      7. The respondent accepts that the most recent country  guidance  'CG'
         case of SMO (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT
         400 (IAC) together with the older  CG  cases  (referred  to  below)
         support the proposition that the appellant faces  serious  harm  in
         Iraq if he is unable to access the requisite identity documentation
         in the UK and he  would  be  unable  to  obtain  a  CSID  within  a
         reasonable time in Iraq to obviate the risk of serious harm  there.



      8. This appeal turns on the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID  from
         the Iraqi Embassy in the UK  prior  to  his  return  to  Iraq.   Mr
         Diwnycz focused his written submissions entirely  upon  this  issue
         and acknowledged that on the issue in dispute is this  very  narrow
         one.

      9. This is not a case in which the  respondent  submitted  that  there
         were family members or others who could assist  the  appellant  via
         proxy.  The respondent's case was limited to this: there  was  some
         evidence to suggest the appellant  might  be  able  to  obtain  the
         requisite identity documentation from family members  in  order  to
         obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in  the  UK,  but  that  is  a
         matter for the UT to make factual findings in relation to,  without
         the need for oral evidence or cross-examination.

     10. I note from SMO that some governorates have replaced CSIDs with new
         biometric Iraqi National Identity Cards.  However the  parties  did
         not make any submissions on this.  This is presumably because these
         have not been introduced in the appellant's home governorate and in
         any event the appellant would need to  get  to  his  home  area  in
         person to gain one and the FTT has found he could not  do  so.   In
         addition he would need some form of identity documentation  to  get
         there.

Country guidance and country background information

     11. The CG cases on Iraq make it  clear  that  in  order  to  obtain  a
         replacement CSID at the Iraqi Embassy in  the  UK,  to  enable  the
         appellant to reside safely in Baghdad  or  elsewhere  in  Iraq,  he
         requires: (i) relevant information to confirm his identity, and  in
         addition; (ii) the relevant Iraq family book details.  That this is
         so is clear from headnote 13 of SMO, which states  as  follows  (my
         emphasis):

             "Notwithstanding the phased  transition  to  the  INID  within
             Iraq,  replacement  CSIDs  remain  available   through   Iraqi
             Consular facilities.  Whether an individual will  be  able  to
             obtain a replacement CSID whilst in  the  UK  depends  on  the
             documents available and, critically, the availability  of  the
             volume and page reference of the entry in the Family  Book  in
             Iraq, which system continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status
             Identity process.  Given the importance of  that  information,
             most Iraqi citizens will recall it. That information may  also
             be obtained from family members, although it is  necessary  to
             consider whether such relatives are on  the  father's  or  the
             mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal."



     12. The reference to "the documents available" above must be considered
         by reference to the older CG cases on the topic in AAH (Iraqi Kurds
         - internal relocation) CG UKUT 212 (IAC)  and  AA  (Article  15(c))
         Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).  This is because at  [383]  of  SMO,
         the UT made it clear they were  not  being  asked  to  revisit  the
         extant country guidance on the way in  which  an  individual  might
         obtain a replacement CSID from within the UK and in effect endorsed
         [26] of AAH which states this (my emphasis):

             "If applying through a consulate abroad the  requirements  are
             different. Having  contacted  the  consulate  in  London,  and
             checked on the website of the  Iraqi  embassy  in  Sweden,  Dr
             Fatah states that the authorities will require  the  applicant
             to first make a statement explaining why he needs a  CSID  and
             attach this to his application form, which must  countersigned
             by the head of the  applicant's  family  and  stamped  by  the
             consulate or embassy; he must then produce his Iraqi  passport
             and proof of status in the country where he is  applying,  the
             name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an  additional  form
             completed by the head of the applicant's family verifying that
             the contents of his application form were  true,  four  colour
             copies of his INC, and 10 colour  photographs.  Crucially  the
             applicant  must  be  able  to  produce  something  which   can
             establish the location of his family's details  in  the  civil
             register. This should be a CSID, an INC or birth  certificate.
             If none of these are available to the applicant he must supply
             the identity documents of his  parents.  This  evidence  again
             accords with that of Landinfo  (December  2017)  who  conclude
             that it can be difficult to obtain  replacement  ID  documents
             from an embassy abroad for the individual  who  is  unable  to
             verify his or her identity."

     13. The Tribunal also endorsed [173] to [177] of AA which  states  this
         (my emphasis):

             "Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK

             173. As regards those who have an  expired  or  current  Iraqi
             passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
             that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular  section  of
             the Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for  a
             replacement or renewed CSID to  the  General  Directorate  for
             Travel and  Nationality  -  Directorate  of  Civil  Status.  A
             request for a replacement  CSID  must  be  accompanied,  inter
             alia, by "any form of official  document  in  support  of  the
             applicant's identity" and the application form must be  signed
             by  "the  head  of  the  family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
             representative to verify the truth of its contents."  He  also
             added that an applicant must also authorise a person  in  Iraq
             to act as his representative  in  order  for  that  person  to
             "follow up on the progress of the application.

             174. However, Dr Fatah continued  by  explaining  that  if  an
             individual has lost his CSID and does not  know  the  relevant
             page and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy  in  London
             will not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead,  he  or
             she will have to attend the appropriate local office of family
             registration in Iraq or give  a  relative,  friend  or  lawyer
             power of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of  a
             giving power of attorney to a lawyer in  Iraq  to  act  "as  a
             proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this  himself.  He
             also explained that the power of attorney  could  be  obtained
             through the Iraq Embassy.

             175. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that  having
             a marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain  data
             found in the family records. It is, however, not  possible  to
             use a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is
             no primary health care or  GP  system  in  Iraq,  but  instead
             patients attended hospital when they needed to do  so  and  no
             central records are held.

             176. There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and  the
             following more general  evidence  provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in
             April 2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.

                  "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
                  citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through  Iraqi
                  embassies and consulates. There is a special authorization
                  granted to these bodies to  provide  documents  for  Iraqi
                  abroad on the condition that the beneficiaries should have
                  any  available  documents  in   order   to   prove   their
                  nationality."

             177. In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details. For persons without  such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.  For  reasons  identified  in  the  section  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring.

     14. In his written submissions, Mr Diwnycz referred  to  other  country
         background  evidence  including  the  respondent's  CPIN  on  Iraq:
         Internal relocation, civil documentation and  returns,  dated  June
         2020 ('the 2020 CPIN')  and  information  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy
         website.  Mr Diwnycz did not submit that the requirements  set  out
         in this evidence were materially different to the  requirements  in
         the CG cases.  Indeed, he accepted  that  they  did  not  "seem  to
         differ".  He expressly accepted that even  assuming  the  appellant
         knows the relevant  family  book  details  there  are  "nonetheless
         administrative hurdles" to be  faced  at  the  Iraqi  Embassy  when
         making a voluntary application for replacement documentation.  This
         too, is consistent with the CG summarised above.

     15. Mr Diwnycz therefore accepted that the appellant  would  need  both
         family book details and some type  of  identification  evidence  to
         successfully apply  for  a  replacement  CSID.   That  position  is
         supported by the endorsement of the clear statement to that  effect
         in [173] of AA at [383] of SMO.  In AA the Tribunal  also  accepted
         Dr Fateh's evidence that "it is necessary  to  prove  who  you  are
         beyond reasonable doubt" - see [22].  I note from the CG cases that
         the Iraqi government is highly bureaucratic and often  very  strict
         in the requirements for formal documentation and identification.  I
         also note from the 2020 CPIN that the process of redocumentation is
         generally haphazard and fraught with difficulties -  see  also  the
         caveats added by Dr Fateh at [104] and [105] of SMO.  However,  the
         Embassy is  likely  to  be  formalistic,  less  flexible  and  more
         bureaucratic in controlling who is entitled to a replacement  CSID.
         It is a matter of common sense that the Iraqi government  needs  to
         be careful about who is permitted to enter and travel around  Iraq,
         given the continuing problem with terrorist  attacks  and  this  is
         likely to mean careful vetting of identity  and  entitlement  to  a
         replacement CSID.  I am satisfied that when making  an  application
         for a replacement CSID, the appellant would need to (i) provide his
         family book details and (ii)  establish  that  he  is  that  person
         referred to in the family book by  providing  some  form  of  Iraqi
         identification considered satisfactory to an Iraqi official.

Application of CG to this appellant's case

     16. As noted in my error of law decision both parties accepted that  it
         would be necessary to remake findings on the appellant's ability to
         obtain a replacement CSID.  Although the FTT  accepted  aspects  of
         the appellant's account, it rejected others.  However, in doing so,
         it was accepted that the FTT failed to take  into  account  the  CG
         cases relevant to this issue in dispute.  With the consent  of  the
         parties I now re-make those factual findings,  having  taking  into
         account  the  written  submissions,  the  CG  cases,  the   country
         background evidence, the  appellant's  own  evidence  and  the  un-
         appealed findings of fact made by the FTT.

     17. I need to make factual findings in relation  to  two  issues:  when
         making an application for a replacement CSID, would  the  appellant
         be able to (i) provide his family book details and; (ii)  establish
         that he is that person referred to in the family book by  providing
         some form of Iraqi identification  considered  satisfactory  to  an
         Iraqi official.  I note that the appellant held  a  CSID  that  was
         taken by the German authorities some time ago.  The appellant  fled
         Iraq in 2015 when he was a young man of 20.  Although he would have
         used the CSID for a few years, and was employed in Iraq for a short
         while, the family book information will not have been used  by  him
         for an extended period of time.  In addition, he has  been  without
         that information for a number  of  years  now.   Although  the  FTT
         considered that the appellant exaggerated  them,  it  was  accepted
         that he had "some mental health  problems".   A  history  of  those
         problems is set out in a GP print out dated 3 January 2018.   These
         support the  appellant's  claim  that  he  finds  it  difficult  to
         remember dates and details - see for example Q  87  of  the  asylum
         interview.  I note from the CG in SMO that  many  are  likely  know
         their family book details.  I am nonetheless  satisfied  that  this
         particular appellant is unlikely to know his family  book  details,
         in the light of his age, past mental health and time without access
         to the information.  This information is critical, and  without  it
         the appellant would not be able to obtain a replacement CSID.

     18. If I am wrong about this and the appellant  does  know  his  family
         book details, I must also consider whether the appellant  would  be
         able to provide  the  Embassy  with  the  requisite  identification
         documents.  As conceded by Mr  Diwnycz,  the  family  book  details
         alone would be insufficient to obtain a  replacement  CSID,  absent
         the requisite identity documentation.

     19. The appellant's account of the  timing  and  circumstances  of  his
         departure from Iraq in August 2015 is consistent with  the  country
         background evidence.  He fled when his  home  area  was  seized  by
         Daesh in 2014.  The FTT appears to have accepted  that  his  father
         was killed at that time and he could not return to  his  home  area
         because it was generally unsafe.  The FTT  noted  at  [46]  of  its
         decision that the only family  the  appellant  could  turn  to  for
         support was his stepmother, who lived in Baghdad and his uncle  who
         lived in Khanaqin.   There appears to have been no dispute that the
         appellant's mother died of cancer when he was a young boy  and  his
         father re-married.  However the FTT made no clear finding regarding
         the ability of  the  uncle  and  /  or  stepmother  to  assist  the
         appellant  in  obtaining  the  requisite  identification  evidence.
         Rather, the FTT found that the appellant would be  able  to  obtain
         his CSID from the German authorities.  The respondent  now  accepts
         this is not feasible.  In addition, the FTT's findings were limited
         to the appellant having the potential  support  of  his  uncle  and
         stepmother.  No clear findings were made as to the contact  between
         them and  the  current  ability  to  make  contact  to  elicit  the
         necessary assistance.

     20.  I  must  therefore  consider  whether  the  appellant  can  obtain
         assistance to source identity documentation from his stepmother  or
         uncle.  In his witness statement dated 22 April 2020, the appellant
         explained that he no longer had any  contact  with  his  uncle  and
         stepmother, and the reasons for this.  Mr Diwnycz did  not  dispute
         this evidence and made it clear at the TCMH that he did not wish to
         cross-examine the appellant.  In his written submissions Mr Diwnycz
         offered no reasons why the appellant's evidence as to  his  current
         lack of contact with family members should not be accepted.  I note
         that the appellant has consistently maintained  that  he  lost  all
         contact with his very limited family members in  Iraq  (he  was  an
         orphan with no siblings) - see his asylum interview in  March  2018
         at Qs 14 and 15.  I also note that the appellant's explanation that
         the uncle was concerned to distant his family from the appellant in
         the light of the appellant's mental health is supported by  the  GP
         history referred to above.

     21. I have considered all the evidence in  the  round  and  accept  the
         appellant's evidence that he has  not  been  in  contact  with  any
         family members and has no means of contacting  them.   It  has  not
         been disputed that the appellant lost  both  his  parents  and  was
         their only child.  The appellant lived with his uncle when he  fled
         his home area.  His uncle assisted him with  significant  funds  to
         leave Iraq.  That does not necessarily mean that they  remained  in
         contact.  I accept the appellant's evidence that his uncle  felt  a
         sense of duty to assist him given the circumstances but  that  they
         have not been in contact since his departure from Iraq in 2015.   I
         also accept that it is  reasonably  likely  that  as  claimed,  the
         appellant lost touch with his stepmother when his  father  died  in
         2014.  It must also be remembered that there has  been  significant
         displacement since the appellant left Iraq in 2015.

     22. The appellant does not have contact with anyone in order to  assist
         with obtaining the requisite identity documentation and  would  not
         be able to meet the requirements in order for the Iraqi Embassy  to
         provide  him  with  a   replacement   CSID,   in   the   particular
         circumstances of this case.

Conclusion

     23. Without the requisite CSID, the CG  cases  make  it  clear  and  Mr
         Diwnycz accepted, that the appellant is at risk of serious harm  in
         breach of Article 3, ECHR.

     24. The appellant has not identified any  Convention  Reason  for  this
         harm and the written  submissions  are  silent  on  the  basis  for
         allowing the appeal.  This case succeeds  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant will be unable to reside in Iraq without coming to a real
         risk of serious harm for reasons relating to an absence of identity
         documentation.  It follows that to return him to Iraq  would  be  a
         breach of Article 3, ECHR and Article 15(b)  of  Council  Directive
         2004/83/EC.



Notice of Decision

     25. I remake the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
         protection and Article 3, ECHR grounds.


Signed:  UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 10 September 2020

