
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13155/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 November 2018                    |On 27 December 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 mr S A A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Thornhill, Thornhills solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 17  January  1993.   He
    made an asylum claim on 17 January 2017 on the basis of the  fact  that
    he is an atheist.  This application was refused on 30 November 2017 and
    his appeal against that decision was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Morris  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  6
    February 2018.  The Appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and in a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  25
    September 2018, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    adjourned the appeal for a hearing de novo before the  Upper  Tribunal.
    A copy of that decision is appended.

     Hearing

 2. The hearing next came before the Upper Tribunal on  26  November  2018.
    The Appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined  by  Mr  McVeety  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  The Appellant adopted his statement dated 17
    January 2018 and drew attention to photographic evidence at pages 20 to
    23 of a car with a smashed side window and windscreen, which he  stated
    was his previous car.  He  claimed  the  damage  occurred  when  parked
    outside his  house  and  he  believed  this  constituted  part  of  the
    harassment he had faced from his partner's ex-husband.

 3. He also sought to rely on the fact that his Facebook  profile  timeline
    at page 47 of the bundle, which is in the public domain, indicates that
    he is from Lahore and thus his partner's ex-husband is aware  of  that,
    although this is the only part of his Facebook page  which  is  public.
    At pages 48 to 50 are transcripts of texts the Appellant  claimed  were
    sent to him by his partner's ex-husband that he was  harassing  him  by
    giving the Appellant the registration number of his old car,  and  that
    he had used his partner's profile.  He communicated with the  Appellant
    by pretending to be  his  partner,  Ms  G,  but  instead  used  abusive
    language.  Some of these messages are in Urdu.

 4. The Appellant also relied on two years' worth of communication by text,
    WhatsApp and pictures shared between the Appellant and his partner  and
    photographs of them together.  At page 218 of the  bundle  onwards  the
    Appellant set out in detail where and when these pictures  were  taken.
    He stated he had lived with his partner, E G for more than  two  years,
    that they had started living together at the end of July  2016  in  his
    friend's house.  He said that the social worker had taken his partner's
    child into care and this was as a result of  his  partner's  ex-husband
    telling lies to them about the child.  It is alleged  that  she  is  an
    alcoholic.  However, his partner continues to see  her  son  every  two
    weeks and was due to give birth to a child of their relationship  on  6
    April 2019.

 5. During cross-examination the Appellant was asked  to  clarify  who  the
    conversation was between  (at  page  201).   When  asked  why  she  was
    referring to  her  ex-husband  when  they  are  not  yet  divorced  the
    Appellant responded in her witness statement at page 10 she  was  still
    living with him until July 2015, although they  had  separated  in  the
    sense they were no longer having marital relations.  She  has  gone  to
    Pakistan with him and their son so  that  his  family  could  meet  the
    child.  The Appellant was asked to give the name of his  partner's  ex-
    husband, which he did, and the location of his address.  When asked how
    the Appellant knew it was his partner's ex-husband who smashed his  car
    and whether it could have just been  a  random  attack,  the  Appellant
    stated that there were more expensive cars than his  on  the  road  and
    these were not attacked.  Whilst he did  not  have  any  proof  he  did
    report it to the police, told them he was being  harassed  and  who  he
    thought it was, but the police said that they  needed  evidence.   When
    asked how his partner's ex-husband knew where they lived he stated that
    when his current partner changed her address, she changed her bank  and
    credit card address details and it may be that her ex-husband  saw  one
    of these letters.  He also said that he knows one of his partner's good
    friends who was in contact with him, so she may  have  told  him.   The
    Appellant was not really able to explain why his partner's friend would
    give her friend's ex-husband's details and address to him, to which the
    Appellant stated he did not like the friend, which does not,  in  fact,
    answer the question.

 6. In relation to the Facebook timeline  the  Appellant  stated  this  was
    relevant because it shows he is from Lahore in Pakistan and it will  be
    easy for him to harm him, though he was unable to explain  why  he  had
    put up the Facebook timeline.  When asked if anything had  happened  in
    Pakistan the Appellant said that his partner's ex-husband had tried  to
    contact his brother.  The Appellant was then asked about his caste, the
    Syed caste, who are considered to be direct descendants of the  prophet
    and thus anyone from the caste is considered to be more religious  than
    anyone  else.   He  stated  his  family  would  not  approve   of   his
    relationship in the UK.

 7. Mr McVeety asked the Appellant how it was that  even  in  Pakistan  his
    attendance at the  mosque  was  sporadic  when  his  family  were  very
    religious and it was submitted there was a discrepancy in his  evidence
    at question 62, where the Appellant stated his parents were  well-aware
    he did not go to the mosque and that he would go to hell when he  died.
    When asked if his family attempted to harm him for  not  attending  the
    mosque, the Appellant stated that they were threatening him but did not
    harm him or punish him at that time.  When asked why his  family  would
    punish him now, the Appellant stated this was because he is an  atheist
    and has left Islam.  When asked how his family  found  out  he  was  an
    atheist the Appellant responded that when he came to the UK he  started
    in Pakistan, but it was here when he realised he  did  not  believe  in
    God.  He told his family this  and  they  said  it  was  their  biggest
    mistake sending him to the UK.  He stated  that  his  family  had  made
    threats, that they had the right to punish him,  and  he  would  be  in
    danger if others outside the family found out.

 8. When asked why or how anyone could find out that he is an atheist,  the
    Appellant stated that he had not told anyone, but in Pakistan he  would
    express himself that he did not want to spend his life being forced  to
    do something he did not want to do, that he would be asked to go to the
    mosque and pray, and if he did not do this then people would know  that
    something is wrong.  When asked if he was threatened previously for not
    going to the mosque, the Appellant said no-one did  anything,  that  it
    was a big city and they did not know. When asked why he could not  live
    elsewhere in Pakistan, when nobody would know or care that he  was  not
    going to the mosque, the Appellant stated  that  they  would  still  be
    Muslims.  When asked why he could not relocate to a Christian area  the
    Appellant stated he would still be in danger having left  Islam.   When
    asked who the Appellant had told that he is an atheist he said  he  had
    only told his partner and his uncle, that he  did  not  generally  tell
    people in the UK that he is an atheist  because  he  knows  bad  things
    could happen to him.  When asked why he could not just  continue  going
    to the mosque, the Appellant stated he could not do this,  that  if  he
    does not believe in God he would have to pretend and that previously he
    was young, he was only 17 years old and now he is an adult.

 9. In terms of signing a travel document  the  Appellant  stated  on  that
    document form that he did not have a religion and that has been sent to
    the Pakistani Embassy.  However, in respect of his identity  card  this
    does record that the Appellant is an atheist  because  otherwise  there
    will be problems for him.  When asked why he stated on the form he  was
    a Muslim, the Appellant said if he said anything  else  it  would  show
    that he is not a Muslim and maybe he will be put in the system that  he
    is an atheist,  and  if  he  was  deported  to  Pakistan  he  would  be
    prosecuted.  The Appellant was then asked why when  he  claimed  asylum
    had  he  not  mentioned  religion  and  whether  the  reason  was   his
    relationship with a Christian woman.  The Appellant denied this stating
    that it is one of the reasons, but that he had no religion.

10. The Appellant stated that he feared going back  because  he  was  in  a
    relationship with a Christian as well as being an atheist himself, that
    his family members would be offended by the relationship.  He confirmed
    that he and Ms G had moved in together in July or August  2016  to  the
    house of a friend and they became joint tenants in December 2016.  When
    asked if the Appellant's ex-partner was attempting to  get  custody  of
    her first baby back, he said that she was and this was to do  with  her
    ex-husband.  When asked if his ex-partner has a religion he  said  that
    she is a Christian but not religious.

11. The Appellant's partner, E G, then gave evidence in  English,  with  an
    interpreter on standby.   She  confirmed  her  name,  address  and  the
    contents of her statement at pages 8 to 13 of the bundle and  that  her
    nationality is Latvian.  She confirms she is expecting a child and  the
    Appellant is the father, and that the ante-natal records produced  were
    her ante-natal records showing her estimated date of delivery to  be  6
    April 2018.  She confirmed that she and the  Appellant  live  at  their
    current address and they have lived at  this  address  for  almost  two
    years since December 2016, that they had first lived with a friend  for
    about three months from the end of July and then in her friend's  house
    from the end of September.

12. On cross-examination by Mr McVeety, the witness stated that she is  not
    currently working in the UK because she has a health problem, that  she
    had worked until February 2018, but this was Christmas  temporary  work
    and her contract finished.  She stated she  had  had  three  interviews
    since to obtain work, the last one being in May or June,  but  she  had
    been suffering from back pain which had worsened since July 2018 due to
    her pregnancy.  She accepted however she had not been signed  off  sick
    by her doctor.  The  witness  stated  that  she  supported  herself  by
    receiving benefits and both she and her husband received some  benefits
    in relation to their son.   The  witness  confirmed  she  had  been  to
    Pakistan for two months, though she had had problems  and  had  had  an
    argument with her husband because she knew by that  time  she  did  not
    love him and loved someone else, and her husband threatened to take her
    son away from her.  She did not however claim that she had any problems
    in Pakistan because of her Christianity.

13. In relation to the Appellant's witness statement at [10], that she  had
    lost contact with the Appellant but had re-met him at an Eid  festival,
    she confirmed this was the case, and  when  asked  why  if  he  was  an
    atheist was he at this festival, she replied that it was an area  which
    he named which is very busy and one can eat late, which was the  reason
    that she was there and that her partner was also there too and  it  had
    been a coincidence.

14. The witness, Mr Q then gave evidence, confirmed his statement  and  his
    address, his statement being at pages 14 to  17  of  the  bundle.   His
    evidence was to the effect that the Appellant had lived with him at his
    address, that he was a friend of the Appellant's father,  who  had  not
    mentioned any concerns about religion and that the  Appellant  had  not
    mentioned that he was an atheist when they lived together.  However, he
    knew that he did not possess his own copy of the  Koran.   The  witness
    confirmed he had met the Appellant's partner, Ms G, previously in  2016
    or 2017 and that the Appellant had moved out of his house to live  with
    his partner in September 2016.

15. In terms of submissions, Mr McVeety submitted that in relation  to  the
    Appellant's asylum  claim  this  was  not  credible  in  terms  of  his
    religious beliefs.  There had been  delay  in  making  the  claim,  the
    Appellant having arrived on 10 August 2011, but did  not  claim  asylum
    until 17 January 2017, after he had been detained on 13  January  2017.
    Mr McVeety clarified that  the  Appellant's  previous  extended  family
    member application was based on his cousin  who  now  lives  in  Spain.
    Against that background the Appellant now says he was at risk  when  he
    left Pakistan.  Other than the  mention  of  his  ex-partner's  spouse,
    there is nothing of consequence that has happened to him in relation to
    his alleged conversion.  Mr McVeety submitted there is a  clear  delay.
    His explanation as to why he was claiming asylum is not a full  one  as
    recorded on the asylum minute, but he submitted it was nonsensical that
    it was due to his family's religious beliefs that he would not  mention
    that he was an atheist, in light of the fact that he is  living  in  an
    unmarried relationship with a Christian.

16. He submitted that  the  Appellant  was  not  attending  the  mosque  in
    Pakistan.  His family knew he did not attend,  yet  there  was  nothing
    more than parental concern about his wellbeing, nor any indication that
    anything had happened to him as a consequence.  Mr McVeety  invited  me
    to find this is entirely inconsistent and incredible, set  against  the
    backdrop of a family who are supposed to be extremely religious.

17. He submitted that the family allowed the Appellant to come to  the  UK,
    and whilst he has allegedly gone against his  family,  clearly  it  was
    important that one publicly professes a faith, but his family  did  not
    worry that he did not.  He submitted  it  was  not  credible  that  his
    parents were aging and from the Syed caste but had not  undertaken  the
    Hajj, either because the  Appellant  was  not  telling  the  truth,  or
    because his family are not that religious anyway.

18. In the alternative, Mr McVeety submitted  that  his  previous  lack  of
    attendance at the mosque did not cause him any problems.  He  does  not
    believe in God, but this would also not cause him problems, and  if  he
    was concerned about it he could relocate  somewhere  else  without  the
    need to go to the mosque.  He submitted the fact of the matter  is  the
    Appellant is not a proselytising atheist, and for example at  no  point
    did he mention to his witness, Mr Q, with whom he lived, that he is  an
    atheist, and he simply does not publicly proclaim his atheism.

19. In relation to any risk  from  his  partner's  ex-partner,  Mr  McVeety
    submitted that this is speculative.   Even  if  true,  they  were  more
    crimes of passion than because the Appellant is an atheist and that his
    partner's ex-partner could not be politically or religiously motivated,
    not least because he himself  had  a  relationship  with  a  non-Muslim
    Christian woman.  Mr McVeety invited me to dismiss the asylum appeal.

20. In relation to the Appellant's relationship with Ms E G, Mr McVeety did
    not seek to assert that the relationship is not genuine and subsisting,
    and he  accepted  clearly  it  is.   However,  he  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's partner has no settled status in the UK and is not working.
     He submitted she would not qualify under the EEA  Regulations  because
    she is not exercising treaty rights, nor was it the case that  she  had
    retained a right of residence under the Regulations.

21. In terms of the Appellant's ability to meet the Immigration  Rules,  Mr
    McVeety submitted if the Appellant were  to  be  returned  to  Pakistan
    there would clearly be consequences, but insurmountable obstacles is  a
    very  high  test  to  meet.   The  Appellant's  partner,  clearly   has
    experience of Pakistan and has been there before.  They  are  unmarried
    and she is pregnant and the child would not be British unless  it  were
    accepted that she had permanent residence from July 2016.

22. In relation to the public  interest  considerations,  he  accepted  the
    Appellant speaks English, but the maintenance requirements of the Rules
    would not be met and his partner is not yet divorced, although  she  is
    going through the process.

23. In his submissions, Mr Thornhill submitted that  whilst  the  Appellant
    did not historically have any problems as a result of not attending the
    mosque on a  regular  basis,  at  interview  the  picture  is  somewhat
    confused.  Up to the age  of  16  the  Appellant  would  attend  Friday
    prayers, and from that time until he came to the UK his  attendance  at
    the mosque was sporadic.  This was known by his parents who were deeply
    upset.  Mr Thornhill submitted that parents are going to give  latitude
    to children of that age because it is  a  phase  that  they  are  going
    through and it was not a matter of great concern  if  others  did  know
    outside the family.  He submitted the Appellant is in his mid-20s.   If
    he were to go back to Pakistan now and attempt  to  relocate  he  would
    have massive problems as it is out in the open that  he  has  lost  his
    religion.  Mr Thornhill submitted this is not simply a matter of  going
    to the mosque.  The Appellant is an atheist, he has no religion.   This
    will be wholly unacceptable to his family and if  known  about  by  the
    wider family he would be at risk of  serious  harm.   He  submitted  it
    would be difficult for that information to remain  within  the  family.
    There would be question marks from others if the  Appellant  failed  to
    attend the mosque, and clearly it will be wrong for him to have  to  do
    something against his non-belief, i.e. go to the mosque  every  Friday,
    and that this will be contrary to the doctrine set  out  in  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31.

24.  In  respect  of  internal  relocation,  Mr  Thornhill  submitted  that
    strangers in Pakistan  with  no  family  or  kinship  would  be  viewed
    suspiciously and it would be known that the Appellant  is  someone  who
    does not attend the mosque, which would require  him  to  be  not  only
    discreet but to tell lies and that his life would be put at risk if  he
    did not lie.

25. In relation to whether or not he is a  genuine  atheist,  Mr  Thornhill
    sought to rely on a Home Office minute of  13  January.   He  submitted
    that no-one asked the Appellant to set out details of his atheism, only
    at the very end.  This was a time when he was having problems with  his
    partner's ex-partner and this was uppermost in his mind.

26. In respect of the interview record  as  to  why  he  had  come  to  the
    realisation he was an atheist, the Appellant stated he  thinks  he  was
    about 50% an atheist in Pakistan, but when he came to  the  UK  it  was
    emphasised to him that he does not have a faith.  His partner  was  not
    cross-examined about her witness statement evidence as to the Appellant
    reporting to her that he was not religious.

27. Mr Thornhill submitted that her evidence could be given weight,  albeit
    she is not an impartial witness, but the way  in  which  she  is  given
    evidence shows she was endeavouring to  give  truthful  evidence.   The
    second witness only found out the Appellant is an atheist after he  was
    detained, nevertheless his evidence was capable  of  corroborating  the
    Appellant's account in that he can attest the Appellant did not  attend
    the mosque while staying with him and  did  not  read  or  possess  the
    Koran.

28. Mr Thornhill invited me to accept that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine
    subjective fear of his partner's ex-partner, however he accepted  there
    is a lack of evidence to show that this was a well-founded fear.

29. In relation to the Appellant's relationship with  his  current  partner
    and the fact that the Presenting Office had accepted  it  was  genuine,
    subsisting and durable, and that the couple had cohabited together  for
    more than two years, Mr Thornhill accepted that he  did  not  have  the
    evidence to show that the Appellant's partner had been accepting treaty
    rights throughout and this is because the focus was  on  her  obtaining
    her divorce so that the Appellant and his partner could marry.

30. Mr Thornhill invited me to determine the appeal on the basis of Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules in that there  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for the Appellant or his partner if he  were  to  be
    removed to Pakistan.  He submitted that the Appellant's partner  cannot
    go to Pakistan, they are  not  married,  she  is  pregnant,  they  will
    clearly have problems under the Hudood  Ordinance.   Moreover,  she  is
    subject to a contact order in respect  of  her  son  on  a  fortnightly
    basis, so therefore  whilst  neither  the  Immigration  Rules  nor  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations could be met currently, there  were  very
    strong reasons as to why the Appellant's partner could not relocate  or
    join the Appellant in Pakistan, the consequence of which they would  be
    separated for a very long time, be unable  to  marry,  and  it  is  not
    possible to come to the UK as a fianc�e under the EEA Regulations.   He
    submitted  thus  removal  of  the   Appellant   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8.

     Findings and reasons

31. In respect of the Appellant's asylum claim, I have  concluded  that  he
    does not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan. Whilst  I
    accept that the Appellant no longer practises his religion,  I  do  not
    find that he  would  positively  assert  his  atheism  if  returned  to
    Pakistan. He was not an impressive witness. There was a marked contrast
    between his evidence in respect of his fears and concerns arising  from
    his partner's former husband, which was  clear  and  detailed  and  his
    evidence in respect of his lack of religion, which I find was vague and
    lacking in detail.

32. I accept that atheism or a lack of  religion  falls  for  consideration
    under the Refugee Convention  in  light  of  Article  10(1)(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive. I also  accept  that  atheism  is  potentially
    punishable by death as blasphemy in Pakistan, in light  of  pages  244-
    245. Whilst I have taken into consideration the evidence at pages  246-
    250 as to the forcible disappearance of 5 atheist, secular bloggers  or
    activists in Pakistan in January 2017, there was no evidence  that  the
    Appellant is a blogger or an activist and I find that it is the  public
    nature of the denial of Islam which appears to have attracted  the  ire
    of the Pakistani authorities. Consequently, I have concluded  that  his
    atheism is a personal matter and not something that he  would  actively
    put in the public domain via social media or otherwise.

33. In light of the fact that historically he was able to  avoid  attending
    the mosque whilst living in Pakistan I  find  that  on  the  particular
    facts of this case that he would not be at risk  of  persecution  as  a
    consequence of having no religion.  Applying  HJ  (Iran)  I  find  that
    whilst he would seek to conceal his atheism, this would not be in order
    to avoid persecution so much as to avoid attracting the disapproval  of
    his parents and society.  I  do  not  believe  that  his  parents  have
    threatened him, particularly as from their point of view he  is  living
    in and settled in the UK. I also doubt that his parents are  as  deeply
    religious as he claimed, otherwise they  would  have  ensured  that  he
    attended the mosque regularly when he was living with them in Pakistan.
    I further find that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    Appellant to internally relocate from  Lahore  to  another  large  city
    where his failure to attend the mosque could pass unnoticed.

34. For the avoidance of doubt, I find that the Appellant does not  have  a
    well founded fear of persecution from his partner's former husband, who
    continues to live in the UK and is the primary carer for his child with
    the Appellant's partner. There is no evidence that  he  would  seek  to
    find and harm the Appellant if he were returned to Pakistan, even if he
    knows that the Appellant  is  from  Lahore.  Whilst  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has a subjective fear  of  him,  this  does  not  engage  the
    Refugee Convention and there is no evidence that the Appellant would be
    at risk of treatment contrary to Article  3  of  ECHR  if  returned  to
    Pakistan. Whilst there have been  incidents  in  the  UK  I  accept  Mr
    McVeety's submission that this are likely to be as a consequence of the
    breakdown of his marriage and the fact that his wife has left  him  for
    the Appellant, rather than anything to do with the Appellant's atheism.

35. However, I find that the Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with EG with whom he has been cohabiting  since  at  least
    September 2016, having previously met and formed  a  relationship  with
    her whilst she was married to and living with  her  husband.  I  accept
    that she is currently pregnant with his child, who is due to be born in
    April 2019. I found Ms G to be a credible  witness  and  I  accept  her
    evidence, which was clear and straightforwardly given.

36. Mr Thornhill candidly accepted  that  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    currently available  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  either  the
    Immigration  Rules  or  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 because, although his partner arrived  in  the  UK  in
    July 2013 and was previously working and then a  job  seeker,  she  has
    neither applied for nor been granted permanent residence in the UK  and
    is not currently working or exercising treaty rights and has  not  done
    so since February 2018.

37. I find that the Appellant and Ms G share family life and  the  decision
    to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom  would  interfere  with
    that. Despite the fact that Ms G previously visited Pakistan  with  her
    former husband and her son, I find that it would  be  unreasonable  and
    unjustifiably harsh to expect her to relocate there with the Appellant,
    given that they are unmarried  and  she  is  pregnant.  It  would  also
    disproportionately interfere with her right to  family  life  with  her
    son, who she sees fortnightly pursuant to  a  Contact  order  from  the
    Family Court and it would be contrary to his  best  interests  to  lose
    contact with his mother in light of the fact that the Family Court have
    deemed it appropriate for there to be contact.

38. I have attached weight to the public interest considerations,  set  out
    in section 117B of the NIAA 2002. These do not  assist  the  Appellant.
    Whilst he speaks English there is no evidence that  he  is  financially
    independent and his leave has at all times been precarious. He does not
    have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his  partner's
    son. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 10 August  2011  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student and having made an  unsuccessful  application  for  a
    residence card as  the  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    relative, he only claimed asylum on 17 January 2017 after  having  been
    detained  as  an  overstayer.  Thus   clearly   the   public   interest
    considerations attract substantial weight on the facts of this case.

39. However, I have concluded  that  the  consequences  for  Ms  G  of  the
    Appellant being removed to Pakistan would be  unjustifiably  harsh,  in
    light of my finding that they have established family life; that she is
    pregnant with his child and that she cannot reasonably be  expected  to
    go to Pakistan for the reasons set out in [37] above. I find  that  the
    fact that they are unmarried would mitigate against their ability to be
    reunited via entry clearance and that Ms G is likely to  be  unable  to
    exercise treaty rights effectively for some time following the birth of
    their child, thus they would be likely to face  a  lengthy  separation.
    For these reasons I find that removal of the Appellant would constitute
    a disproportionate breach of Article 8 of ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 18 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


