
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13577/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 June 2019                      |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 MIKHEIL [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, Counsel, instructed by Justice and
                    Rights Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal E B Grant (the judge), promulgated on  14  February  2019,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 19 November 2018 refusing his  protection  and  human  rights
         claim.



Background

      2. The appellant, a national of Georgia, was born in 1989. He  entered
         the UK with his wife on 1 July 2014 on the  basis  that  they  were
         celebrating their honeymoon. He and his wife overstayed and,  after
         being served with papers indicating that they were overstayers,  he
         claimed asylum on 30 May 2017.

      3. I summarise the asylum claim. The appellant was  a  member  of  the
         United National Movement (UNM), the former ruling party of Georgia.
         He was also employed with the Ministry of Internal Affairs  between
         July 2012 and 2014. In  October  2012  the  UNM  were  defeated  in
         elections and the Dream Party took power. As he was a civil servant
         the appellant, though he remained a member  of  the  UNM,  was  not
         involved in any decision-making in the  party,  did  not  have  any
         specific designation within the party,  but  would  participate  in
         meetings and reform discussion forums.

      4. The appellants cousin, [LS], was a prominent member of the UNM, and
         had previously been a Senior Investigator within the Serious  Crime
         Department of the  Georgian  penitentiary  system.  [LS]  was  made
         redundant in November 2013. From December 2013  the  appellant  was
         asked by a Chief  Inspector  of  the  Special  Task  Force  of  the
         Constitutional Security Department  of  the  Ministry  of  Internal
         Affairs to implicate  [LS]  in  the  torture  and  rape  of  prison
         inmates. The appellant was later threatened  and  then  beaten  for
         refusing to cooperate. After getting married on  10  May  2014  the
         appellant and his wife fled Georgia. [LS] had previously worked  as
         the Head of Security at Tbilisi airport and,  through  connections,
         was able to assist the  appellant  and  his  wife  in  leaving  the
         country. Since leaving Georgia the appellant's family have received
         threatening  phone  calls,  and  [LS]  fled  in  August  2014,  his
         whereabouts unknown.

      5. The respondent accepted that the appellant was  employed  with  the
         Ministry of Internal Affairs. The respondent did not however accept
         that the appellant had faced any  persecution  on  account  of  his
         membership of the UNM, and rejected as incredible  his  account  of
         events that caused him to leave Georgia. The appellant appealed the
         respondent's decision to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to  s.82
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife,  and
         was provided with a bundle of documents that included several human
         rights reports. The bundle also included,  inter  alia,  statements
         from the appellant and his wife and some translated  documents.  At
         the appeal hearing the  appellant  served  a  document  purportedly
         issued by an NGO named Sociometry, and its translation, setting out
         the appellant's account  of  events  and  briefly  describing  ill-
         treatment meted out by the Dream Party against political opponents.

      7. At [10] the judge stated,

             "The respondent does not accept as  credible  the  appellant's
             claims that he was persecuted by the  authorities  in  Georgia
             and it is not accepted that he  is  a  member  of  the  United
             National Movement."

      8. At [16], under the heading, "My  Findings",  the  judge  found  the
         appellant had told "a pack of lies." At  [17]  the  judge  drew  an
         adverse inference from the  appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum
         until 4 years after his arrival  in  the  UK,  and,  at  [18],  his
         claimed  ignorance  as  to  [LS]'s  whereabouts.  The  judge  found
         implausible the appellants answer, when asked why he made no effort
         to find [LS], that he did not think [LS] could be of assistance  in
         his case. Whilst the judge accepted that [LS]  worked  as  Head  of
         Security at Tbilisi airport, the judge did not accept that  he  had
         been a Senior Investigator within the Serious Crime Department.  At
         [21] the judge stated,

             "The abuses committed within the prison system in Georgia have
             been well documented in background material and I am satisfied
             that if [LS] had been involved in  the  rape  and  torture  of
             prisoners, that there  would  be  some  independent  objective
             background material to support this claim."

      9. At [22] the judge rejected the appellant's claim that he  had  been
         approached by the authorities  in  order  to  give  false  evidence
         against his cousin, and that if his cousin had been wanted  by  the
         authorities, that he would not have retained his employment or  his
         security pass to enable him to walk freely through the secure areas
         of the airport. At [23] the judge noted  the  absence  of  evidence
         that [LS] was a member of the UNM and satisfied herself that  there
         would be no reason for him to be persecuted by way of false charges
         as alleged or at all.

     10. At [24] the judge noted that the document from Sociometry read as a
         summary of the appellants claim to the respondent  and  that  there
         was nothing to indicate any independent source for the  information
         contained in the document.  At  [25]  the  judge  drew  an  adverse
         inference from the belated  production  of  the  document  and  the
         consequent inability of the respondent to verify it.  At  [26]  the
         judge  noted  an  inconsistency  between  the  evidence  from   the
         appellant and his wife in relation to a head injury.

     11. Having found the appellant's account to be a  fabrication  "in  its
         entirety", the judge dismissed the appeal on  both  protection  and
         human rights grounds.



The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     12. The grounds of challenge are fourfold. The  first  ground  contends
         that the judge failed  to  make  any  finding  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's membership of the UNM, and failed to determine  whether
         he would face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  his
         political association. The second ground contends  that  the  judge
         erred in law through her  expectation  that  there  would  be  some
         independent  or  objective  background  material   supporting   the
         authorities' claim if [LS]  had  been  involved  in  the  rape  and
         torture of prisoners. The third  ground  contends  that  the  judge
         erred in law by attaching no  weight  on  the  Sociometry  document
         "solely" on the basis of its belated production. The Fourth  ground
         contends that the  judge  attached  a  disproportionate  amount  of
         weight to the appellant's immigration history, and  in  particular,
         the late timing of his asylum claim.

     13. Permission was explicitly granted in respect  of  the  first  three
         grounds. There was no  reference  to  the  fourth  ground.  In  the
         absence of any express refusal to grant permission  in  respect  of
         the fourth ground, I am  satisfied  the  judge  intended  to  grant
         permission in respect of all grounds.

     14. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing Mr Clarke accepted,  in
         relation to the first ground,  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
         Reasons for Refusal  Letter  and  that  the  respondent  had  never
         expressly found that the appellant was not a member of the UNM.  As
         a consequence, there had been no assessment of any  risk  faced  by
         the appellant on return to Georgia  on  account  of  his  political
         association.

     15. On behalf of the appellant Mr Anderson submitted,  with  particular
         reference to [21] and  [22]  of  the  judge's  decision,  that  she
         misunderstood or mis-characterised the appellant's account and that
         she was not entitled to draw an adverse inference from the  absence
         of any evidence that [LS] had been involved in the rape and torture
         of prisoners. This was said to go to the "core of the case."

     16. Mr Anderson further submitted that the principal reason  the  judge
         attached little weight to the Sociometry document  was  because  of
         its late production and that she failed to  give  credible  reasons
         for her conclusion. Mr Anderson finally submitted, albeit  briefly,
         that the judge erred in attaching undue weight to the timing of the
         appellant's asylum claim.

     17. With respect to the second ground, Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the
         judge fully understood the appellant's case as  she  made  specific
         reference to his claim that he was being coerced into giving "false
         evidence" against his cousin. In respect of the  third  and  fourth
         grounds, Mr Clarke submitted, with reference to [24] and [25], that
         the judge had not attached little weight to the Sociometry document
         "solely" because of its late production but had given other  cogent
         reasons for finding the document unreliable, and that the judge was
         entitled to draw an  adverse  inference  from  the  timing  of  the
         appellant's asylum claim.



Discussion

     18. I find the first ground is made out. As  Mr  Clarke  accepted,  the
         Reasons for Refusal Letter makes no clear findings  in  respect  of
         the appellant's claimed membership of the UNM (see paragraphs 28 to
         33). It is sufficiently clear from paragraph 33 of the Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter that the respondent does not accept the  appellant's
         claim to have  been  persecuted  by  the  Georgian  authorities  on
         account of his membership of the  UNM.  It  is  not  however  clear
         whether the respondent accepted that the appellant was a member  of
         the party. Given this ambiguity it is perhaps  understandable  that
         the  judge  assumed  that  there  had  been  a  rejection  of   the
         appellant's claim to membership of  the  UNM.  As  conceded  by  Mr
         Clarke, this was not the case. In misstating,  at  [10],  that  the
         respondent rejected the appellant's claim to be  a  member  of  the
         UNM, the judge failed to appreciate or engage  with  the  ambiguity
         within the Reasons for Refusal Letter. The  judge  then  failed  to
         determine whether the appellant was in fact a member of  the  party
         and whether, as a consequence of any association with the  UNM,  he
         faced a real risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  if  returned  to
         Georgia. Given that this was an element of the  appellant's  asylum
         claim, it was incumbent on the judge to determine this issue.

     19. I note the absence of any reliable independent evidence relating to
         the appellant's membership of the UNM, including the absence of any
         evidence from the UNM itself (in his statement the  appellant  said
         that he had to complete a form to join the UNM, and claimed in  his
         interview that he would try to obtain a copy of this form but  that
         there were internal divisions within  the  party).  I  additionally
         note  the  appellant's  limited   involvement   with   the   party.
         Nevertheless, it cannot be said that  the  judge  would  inevitably
         have concluded that the appellant was not a member of the party had
         she specifically addressed this point. Nor, having brief regard  to
         the background evidence contained  in  the  appellant's  bundle  of
         documents before the First-tier Tribunal, could it be said that any
         appeal would inevitably fall to be dismissed  on  the  basis  that,
         even if the appellant was a member, he would not face a  real  risk
         of persecutory ill-treatment. I consequently find the judge's error
         was a material one.

     20. I now consider the second ground. At [21], set out in  paragraph  8
         above, the judge found, having referred to well  documented  abuses
         committed  within  the  Georgian  prison  system,   that   if   the
         appellant's cousin had been involved in the  rape  and  torture  of
         prisoners, there would be "some  independent  objective  background
         material to support this claim." The appellant's claim however  was
         that [LS] was not involved in the ill-treatment of prisoners. As  a
         consequence, the basis upon which the judge relied  when  assessing
         the likely existence of such evidence collapses. If the appellant's
         cousin was not involved in such ill-treatment, one would not expect
         any "independent objective background material". I  acknowledge  Mr
         Clarke's submission that, at [22] and  again  at  [23],  the  judge
         refers to "false charges", suggesting that she  was  aware  of  the
         nature of the appellant's  account.  It  is  however  difficult  to
         reconcile these references to what the judge clearly said at [21].

     21. I am mindful that the judge advanced other reasons for finding  the
         appellant an  incredible  witness.  I  am  nevertheless  satisfied,
         albeit by the narrowest of margins, that the  error  identified  in
         [22] is material in the sense that it renders the judge's  ultimate
         adverse  credibility  findings  unsafe.  Had  the  error  not  been
         committed, it cannot be said that the judge would  inevitably  have
         concluded that the appellant fabricated the entirety of his case.

     22. I deal briefly with the third and fourth grounds. At [24] the judge
         accurately noted that the Sociometry document read as a summary  of
         the appellant's claim to the respondent, and that there was nothing
         to indicate the provenance of  the  information  contained  in  the
         document. The judge was unarguably entitled to attach little weight
         to the document given its late production together with the reasons
         identified at [24]. Nor has the judge erred in law  in  drawing  an
         adverse inference from the late timing of  the  appellant's  asylum
         claim. Whilst an assessment under  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  would  usually
         be  found  at  the  end  a  credibility   assessment,   the   judge
         demonstrably looked at the evidence 'in  the  round'  and  did  not
         attach a disproportionate amount  of  weight  to  the  late  asylum
         claim.

     23. I am nevertheless satisfied, for the reasons given above, that  the
         decision must be set aside. Given that the issue of the appellant's
         credibility needs to be revisited, and  that  primary  findings  of
         fact need to be  made  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  political
         involvement with the UNM, it is appropriate for the  matter  to  be
         remitted for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  before
a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E B Grant.


[pic]    11 June 2019

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
