
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/13501/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Bradford                                  Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 21 June 2017                                     On 1 August 2017


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                    [R T]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
Appellant

                                     and

           THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss B Morjaria, of Counsel, instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Brambles, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. The Appellant
      has not sought an order. I consider  that  there  are  no  reasons  to
      justify an order so none is made.

Background

   2. The Appellant has been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Cary
      (hereafter "the judge"), whereby he dismissed her appeal  against  the
      decision of the Secretary of State refusing  to  recognise  her  as  a
      refugee or otherwise requiring international protection.

   3. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born [ ] 1987. She  arrived  in
      the UK on 26 May 2016 and claimed asylum on the basis that she  is  an
      ethnic Oromo and her father had been detained by the authorities as  a
      member of the Oromo Liberation  Front.  The  Respondent  rejected  the
      claim and the Appellant's appeal against that decision was listed  for
      oral hearing before the judge on 6 January 2017. The Appellant did not
      attend the hearing and the judge heard the appeal in her absence.  The
      appeal was dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  13  January  2017
      essentially because the credibility of the claim was found wanting.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

   4. The Appellant's representatives applied on her behalf  for  permission
      to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that she had been  denied
      a fair hearing, and that the  judge  erred  in  reaching  his  adverse
      findings. Permission was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11
      April 2017.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

   5. At  the  hearing  before  me,  after  hearing  submissions  from  both
      representatives, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for the following reasons.

Decision on Error of Law

   6. I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
      vitiated by a procedural irregularity and cannot stand.


   7. The judge heard the appeal in the Appellant's absence by virtue of her
      non-attendance. The judge noted a Notice of  Hearing  stipulating  the
      time, date and venue of the hearing had been sent to the Appellant c/o
      her representatives, that being the address given  in  the  Notice  of
      Appeal, and separately to her representatives. The judge called on his
      clerk to telephone the representatives and the message communicated to
      the judge via the clerk was that the representatives "... did not know
      what was happening about the case but that they would telephone  back.
      They did not do so prior to the commencement of the hearing."


   8. The Appellant and  her  representatives  contend  that  they  did  not
      receive the Notice of Hearing. The judge records that  the  Notice  of
      Hearing had been sent to the Appellant and to her representatives on 7
      December 2016. He does not refer to the method of service used by  the
      Tribunal to effect service. A close inspection of the various  notices
      on the Tribunal's file indicate that, whilst a  notice  requiring  the
      Appellant to pay a fee was sent to her and to her  representatives  by
      first class post on 7 December 2016, the Notice of Hearing stipulating
      the date, time and venue of the hearing was served on  the  Respondent
      by first class post, but on the Appellant and her  representatives  by
      "EM". Through my enquiries with the Tribunal's  administration  I  was
      informed that the Notice of Hearing was sent, for some unknown reason,
      to the Appellant and her representatives by electronic mail only,  but
      the Tribunal did not hold a record of that email being sent.


   9.  I  was  informed  by  Miss  Morjaria  who,  having  spoken  to  those
      instructing her on the morning of the hearing on my request,  that  no
      email containing details of the hearing or telephone call on  the  day
      of hearing was received from the Tribunal by the solicitor  with  care
      and conduct of the Appellant's case. While the absence of a  statement
      to this effect from the solicitor  concerned  was  unsatisfactory,  Mr
      Bramble did not dissent from the Tribunal's view that it could not  be
      satisfied that the Notice of Hearing had been served on the  Appellant
      and her representative, and that  in  the  circumstances  the  fairest
      course was  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing. I thus set aside the judge's decision.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  reheard  de  novo  by  a
judge other than Judge Cary.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                             Date 20 July 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral









