
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13741/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st August 2018                           |On 4th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     Ba
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated 13 July 2018, I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, BA, is a female citizen of Eritrea who was born
         in 1987.  By a decision in the Upper Tribunal which  I  promulgated
         on 24 November 2017, I returned this appeal to  the  judge  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)  who  had  heard  the  appeal
         initially.  My reasons for returning the  appeal  to  him  were  as
         follows:

             "1.  There are several challenges  to  the  judge's  decision.
             First, the appellant complains that the judge's reasoning  was
             too brief.  Further, the  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
             failed to make findings  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  a
             witness (H).  The appellant also asserts that the judge failed
             to have proper regard to a letter sent to the appellant by her
             mother and drew adverse inferences from the letter as  regards
             the appellant's credibility as a witness which should not have
             been drawn.  Secondly, the appellant submits  that  the  judge
             has not, on the basis of  the  factual  matrix  which  he  had
             established, completed an assessment of the risk of return  to
             this appellant.  Unusually, the appellant claims to have  left
             Eritrea legally for medical treatment and not as a consequence
             of having been released from military service.  The  appellant
             claims that the judge assumed that, because the appellant  had
             been given an exit visa for medical treatment, she  would  not
             in any event face risk on return.  The fact remains,  however,
             the appellant is of military service  age  and  could  be  re-
             drafted into  the  Eritrean  Army.   Such  a  possibility  was
             acknowledged by the Upper Tribunal in  country  guidance  case
             MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG
             [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) at head note [11]:

             While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person
             who had exited lawfully may on forcible return face having  to
             resume or commence national service.  In such a case there  is
             a real of persecution  or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such
             service constituting forced labour contrary  to  Article  4(2)
             and Article 3 of the ECHR.

             2.   As regards the first ground of appeal, I find it  has  no
             merit.  The judge carried  out  a  thorough  analysis  of  the
             evidence.  He has set out in some detail the evidence given by
             the witness.  The witness had left  Eritrea  some  four  years
             before the appellant herself let the country.  The judge dealt
             with the discrepancy in the evidence given by H which did  not
             match that evidence given by the appellant herself [40].   The
             judge acknowledged at [40] that the evidence of  H  "supported
             the evidence of the appellant."  It is difficult to  see  what
             else the judge might have said about the evidence of  H  given
             that  she  could  provide  little  assistance  concerning  the
             account and circumstances of the appellant after H herself had
             left Eritrea.  I find that the judge  has  not  erred  in  his
             treatment of the evidence of the witness.

             3.   The judge dealt with  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
             mother to the appellant at [37].  The judge  was  entitled  to
             make findings in respect of the physical nature of the  letter
             which he found to be "remarkably well preserved" for a  letter
             which it was claimed had been written in 2009.  At  [54],  the
             judge gives sustainable and cogent reasons for  rejecting  the
             authenticity of the letter.   The  challenge  to  the  judge's
             findings regarding the letter represent nothing  more  than  a
             disagreement with those findings.

             4.   I note that there is some uncertainty as  to  whether  or
             not the appellant is still married.  What is  clear,  however,
             is that the appellant has children  with  her  in  the  United
             Kingdom who are British  citizens.   In  practical  terms,  it
             seems unlikely that she will be returned  to  Eritrea  in  the
             foreseeable future.  However, as regards her asylum appeal, it
             is necessary to deal with the hypothetical situation in  which
             she is returned and  whether  or  not  she  would  be  thereby
             exposed to a real risk.  It is at this point that the  judge's
             decision  becomes  problematic.   Looking  at  the  Record  of
             Proceedings, it appears  that  a  submission  was  made  that,
             notwithstanding  the  fact  the  appellant  has  left  Eritrea
             legally, she is still of  military  service  age  and  may  be
             exposed to risk on return.  That assessment has not been  made
             by the judge.  Having  established  the  factual  matrix,  the
             judge should then have considered risk on return by  reference
             to that matrix.  Because he did not do  so,  his  decision  is
             incomplete.  In consequence, I find that the judge  has  erred
             such that the decision should be set aside.  However, in  this
             particular case I find that, save for  the  challenge  to  the
             decision as regards risk on return, the  judge's  decision  is
             sound.  I see no reason to  interfere  with  his  findings  of
             fact, including his findings as regards the credibility of the
             evidence.  I direct, therefore, that the decision is  returned
             to the First-tier Tribunal and to Judge Turnock so that he may
             hear submissions in respect of risk on return and complete his
             decision.  There will be no need for him to hear any  evidence
             in respect of those matters upon which he has  made  findings.



             Notice of Decision

             The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
             on 11 May 2017 is set aside.  All other findings of  fact  are
             preserved.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
             (First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock) for that judge  to  remake
             the decision."

         2.   The appellant now challenges  the  second  decision  of  Judge
         Turnock.  She asserts that the judge has  not  completed  the  task
         which I required him  to  undertake  because  he  has  not  made  a
         definitive finding as to whether or not the appellant would  be  at
         risk on return to Eritrea as a potential draft evader.  At [37]  of
         his decision dated 12 February 2018, Judge Turnock wrote:

             "What is not addressed by or on behalf  of  the  appellant  is
             why, given the appellant had a passport and an entry exit visa
             with no entry to show when she was required to return or  that
             it was  granted  with  any  restriction,  that  would  not  be
             consistent with her having  been  granted  an  exemption  from
             military service.  If she  had  been  exempted  from  military
             service, which I find the most probable explanation for  being
             granted an exit visa, then she would not be considered to be a
             draft evader or a deserter."

         3.   The judge went on to find [39]  that  the  appellant  had  not
         discharged the burden of proving that  she  would  be  at  risk  on
         return.  The problem with the judge's analysis is that he  has  not
         made a firm finding of fact that the appellant  has  been  exempted
         from military service.  He appears to have done  no  more  than  to
         conclude  that  "the  most  probable  explanation"  was  that   the
         appellant had been exempted.  It was necessary for Judge Turnock to
         make an unequivocal finding regarding  exemption  which  would,  in
         turn, have enabled him to reach a firm conclusion as  regards  risk
         on return.  Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State,
         told me that he did not consider Judge  Turnock  had  unequivocally
         settled the issue as regards risk on return.

         4.   In the circumstances, I set  aside  Judge  Turnock's  decision
         promulgated 12 February 2018.  Findings of fact  reached  by  Judge
         Turnock in his earlier decision promulgated on 11  May  2017  shall
         stand.  The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) will  remake
         the decision following a hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed.



         Notice of Decision

         5.   The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  12
         February 2018 is set aside.  The Upper  Tribunal  will  remake  the
         decision following a hearing at Bradford on  a  date  to  be  fixed
         (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane).  Both parties  may  adduce  additional
         evidence but must file at the Upper Tribunal and serve on the other
         party copies of any evidence upon which they may respectively  seek
         to rely at least ten days prior to the resumed hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 31 August 2018 proceeded  by  way
    of submissions only.   At  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 3. The appellant is now divorced.  She has children living with her in the
    United Kingdom who are not British citizens.  Both parties  acknowledge
    and agree that the appellant left Eritrea in 2008 on a valid  passport.
    The appellant claimed that he was granted medical leave  from  military
    service.  The Secretary of  State  (Judge  Turnock  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) did not believe that she left from  military  service.   This
    appeal turns on the question as to whether the appellant if returned to
    Eritrea would be required to undertake military service.   She  remains
    of draft age and is now not a married woman.  Mrs  Pettersen,  for  the
    Secretary of State, submitted  that  the  hypothetical  return  of  the
    appellant to Eritrea would be on the basis that she would return  there
    with her children.  It was submitted that the appellant  would  not  be
    required to undertake military service with minor children in her care.



 4. Mr O'Ryan, for the appellant, submitted that the hypothetical return of
    the appellant to Eritrea did not involve the children  not  parties  to
    this appeal nor did they have separate appeals themselves.   He  relied
    on the provisions of the Section 84(1)(a) of the 2002 Act (as amended):

         '84. Grounds of appeal

         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal of protection claim)
         must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-

             (a)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
             would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
             Refugee Convention;'

 5. I agree with Mr O'Ryan's  submission.   The  Tribunal  is  required  to
    consider the return of the appellant as required  by  Section  84(1)(a)
    and the consequences arising from her return to Eritrea.  It is  likely
    that if the appellant were required to return to Eritrea  her  children
    would return with her such a  consequence  is  not  inevitable.   As  I
    understand  Mrs  Pettersen's  submission,  only  the  presence  of  the
    children together with the appellant would exempt the appellant from  a
    requirement to undertake military  service  if  returned.   She  is  no
    longer a married woman and remains of draft service age.  Leaving aside
    the question as to whether the appellant has been granted  a  permanent
    exemption from military service (see below), then I hold that it is not
    correct to apply the provision of Section 84(1)(a) as referring to both
    the appellant and her children.  It follows that if the  appellant  has
    not been granted a permanent exemption from military service her return
    (without the children on a hypothetical basis that they did not  return
    with her) would lead to her having to undertake military service as the
    Secretary of State accepts would lead to a breach of  Article  3  ECHR.
    MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 443 (IAC) is the relevant country guidance. Headnote (11) reads:

         "While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that a  person  who
         has exited lawfully may on forcible return face having to resume or
         commence national service. In such a case there is a real  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm by virtue of such service  constituting
         forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article 3 of the ECHR."

 6. Moving on to the question as to whether the appellant has been  granted
    a permanent exemption from military service, I refer to Judge Turnock's
    second determination [37]:

         "What is not addressed by or on behalf of  the  appellant  is  why,
         given the appellant had a passport with an exit visa there  was  no
         entrance shown when she was required  to  return  or  that  it  was
         granted with any restriction, that it would not be consistent  with
         her having been granted an exemption from military service.  If she
         had been exempt from military service, which I  find  is  the  most
         probable explanation of being granted an entry and exit visa,  then
         she would not be considered to be a draft evader or deserter."

 7. Mr O'Ryan submitted that there is credible evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant had been granted leave to exit Eritrea for  medical  reasons.
    He referred to the SEF and Asylum Interview Record  in  particular  the
    latter at questions 17 and 20.  The appellant had given  evidence  that
    she had  "passed  out"  and  also  "blacked  out"  and  needed  medical
    treatment outside Eritrea.

 8. I have to assess this evidence on the basis of the  lower  standard  of
    proof.  I am aware that the appellant  had  not  been  found  to  be  a
    credible witness by Judge Turnock on two occasions.  I  note  also  the
    appellant did not give oral evidence (which might have been  tested  by
    cross-examination) in respect of her claimed illness. Bearing  in  mind
    these matters,  I  am  satisfied,  having  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence as a  whole  and  having  set  this  in  the  context  of  the
    background material relating to Eritrea, that it is  reasonably  likely
    that she left Eritrea because she was unwell.  It is not clear  whether
    she left from military service or whether any illness for which she may
    have been suffering has led to her being granted a permanent  exemption
    from military service.  I have considered the expert evidence  produced
    on behalf of the appellant by Dr Seddon.   Having  read  that  evidence
    carefully, I agree with Mr O'Ryan's submission that it remains  unclear
    as to whether (i) different forms of exemption  from  military  service
    (temporary or permanent) actually  exist  (ii)  whether  the  grant  of
    permission to leave Eritrea whilst of military service age amounted  to
    a de facto permanent exemption from  military  service.   The  evidence
    provides no  basis  for  Judge  Turnock's  conclusion  that  "the  most
    probable explanation for [the appellant] being granted  an  exit  visa"
    was that she "had been exempted from military service."  The  appellant
    remains of military service age and (for the reasons which I have given
    above) and she would not be entitled to  any  exemption  from  military
    service on account of being a married woman or because  she  had  minor
    children in her care.  It may be the case that grant of  permission  to
    leave Eritrea has in some way  entitled  the  appellant  to  be  exempt
    permanently from military service; the fact is we simply do  not  know.
    I am reminded that the appellant  need  prove  her  case  only  to  the
    standard of reasonable likelihood.  We do know that the Eritrean regime
    adopts an oppressive policy of military service and that there  was  no
    reliable evidence that permanent exemptions are issued to those who are
    otherwise eligible to take part in that service.  In  my  opinion,  the
    appellant has established that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that
    she would encounter the real  risk  of  ill-treatment  if  returned  to
    Eritrea.  In the circumstances, her appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated
25 November 2016 is allowed on  asylum  grounds  and  human  rights  grounds
(Article 3 ECHR).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

