
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13699/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 23 July 2021                    |On 13 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     KAH
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rogers, of Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing  was  Microsoft  Teams.  A  face-to-face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  born  on  1
February 1992. He claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  15  May
2018. He claimed asylum that day. His  claim  was  refused  on  13  November
2018. His appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 26 February 2019, but that decision was set aside and  the  case
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, where the  appeal  was  dismissed  once
again, on 14 February 2020.

The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was  at  risk  on  return  to
Iraq as a result of his brother's relationship  with  M,  the  wife  of  his
neighbour, O, which caused a tribal feud.  The  appellant  belonged  to  the
Mamahamala tribe whilst O belonged to the Gul tribe. When O found out  about
the relationship an agreement was reached between the two tribes,  that  the
appellant's family was to pay US$40,000 to O, O would divorce M and M  would
then marry the appellant's brother, and the appellant's family had to  leave
the area. They moved to Erbil. His brother and M were  married  on  6  March
2015, but he then received threats from O's  family  because  he  had  known
about the relationship, and on 25 August 2015 his brother  disappeared.  His
body was later found and M and  O  were  arrested  for  his  murder,  having
reunited. The appellant claimed that he was later  shot  at  by  O's  family
when he was driving home and lost consciousness when the car overturned.  He
was hospitalised for two days. After he was discharged his mother  told  him
that the family home had been burned down and that  his  father  had  had  a
heart attack and passed away. He then left Iraq  two  or  three  days  later
with his mother and sister. He feared O's family and the Gul  tribe  because
he knew about the relationship between M  and  his  brother.  The  appellant
claimed further that he had seen the interviews and confessions of M  and  O
on the news challenge and that M had lied about her  relationship  with  his
brother and had claimed that he had raped her  and  threatened  her  with  a
gun.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, noted that the  appellant
had produced a memory stick containing three videos  of  news  reports  with
transcripts for two of the reports, but did not accord the  evidence  weight
as the transcripts  did  not  include  the  full  name  of  the  victim  and
perpetrators and did not identify the news channel. The respondent  rejected
the appellant's account of the threats and attacks by  O's  family  and  the
Gul tribe and did not accept that the appellant  had  a  genuine  subjective
fear of return to Iraq. The respondent considered that the  appellant  could
relocate to another part of the KRI, in any event,  and  that  he  would  be
able to obtain a CSID as he had retained a copy  of  his  previously  issued
CSID. As for Article 8, the respondent considered that there  were  no  very
significant obstacles to integration for the appellant in Iraq and that  his
removal from the UK would not breach his human  rights.  It  was  considered
that his claim to suffer from PTSD was not such as  to  meet  the  threshold
for an Article 3 or 8 claim.

The appellant's appeal was initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Henderson who dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.  However,  her  decision
was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on the grounds  of  a  failure  to  make
clear findings on the evidence and the case was remitted to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for the decision in the appeal to be re-made.

The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on  4  December
2019. The appellant gave oral evidence  before  the  judge.  The  judge  had
before  him  documentary  evidence  including  video  recordings   and   the
transcripts.  In  light  of  that  evidence  and  the  consistency  of   the
appellant's account both internally and with  the  background  evidence,  he
found the account to be true and accepted that the appellant was at risk  of
being targeted on the basis of the feud between  the  tribes  and  families.
The judge did not accept that the appellant could seek protection  from  the
Kurdish authorities. However, the judge considered that the appellant  could
safely and reasonably relocate  to  another  part  of  the  country  and  he
accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and
was granted on 14 May 2020. At a hearing on 11 February  2021,  following  a
concession by Ms Cunha on behalf of the respondent, I set aside the  judge's
decision in relation to his findings on internal relocation  on  the  basis,
as conceded by Ms Cunha, that he had failed to apply  the  country  guidance
in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  CG  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
400. It was agreed that there would be a further hearing in  order  for  the
appeal to be re-decided on the issue of internal relocation.

The matter then came before me on 23 July 2021 for the decision  to  be  re-
made. The appellant had produced a country  expert  report  from  Dr  Rebwar
Fatah and a skeleton  argument  from  Ms  Rogers  addressing  the  issue  of
internal relocation in light of the expert report.

In his report, Dr Fatah opined at [83] that:

    "It is possible that in the case of a tribal feud, the members  of  the
    other tribe or clan would attempt to kill [KAH]."


    at [86]  that:  "it  is  plausible  that  [KAH]  would  receive  little
    protection"


    at [87] and [88] that:


    "The patronage system in Kurdistan means it is relatively easy to  have
    friends and family in positions of power or access to  databases  check
    for an address or other information about an individual. However, it is
    possible that [KAH] could be traced by a member of the Gul tribe due to
    the collective nature of Iraqi Kurdish society.


    Iraqi Kurdistan has a very small  population  of  roughly  5.5  million
    Kurds. This means that most people will know of or at least have  heard
    of other families. It is common for an  individual  to  ask  around  in
    local communities in search of an individual and for that individual to
    either be directed to the person or be given  information  about  other
    who may know of the individual."


    and at [99] that:


    "Iraqi Kurdistan has a  relatively  small  population  of  roughly  5.5
    million people. Society is also relatively  collectivist,  with  people
    usually being aware of the families and tribes in the same area. It may
    thus be relatively easy for somebody to be located in the IKR, if  they
    are being sought..."


In her skeleton argument, Ms Rogers referred  to  the  guidance  in  SMO  on
relocation to the IKR and submitted on the basis of that  guidance  that  it
would be unreasonable for the appellant to relocate within  the  IKR  as  he
had no support network there, his brother having been killed and his  father
deceased, and he had lost contact with his mother and sister. She  submitted
that it would be unlikely that any extended family the appellant had in  the
IKR would offer him shelter as that would result in them  being  drawn  into
the feud and would put them at risk. Without such assistance  the  appellant
would  face  significant  difficulties   in   securing   accommodation   and
employment in Iraq. Ms Rogers submitted further  that  there  was  also  the
risk, as confirmed by Dr  Fatah  in  his  report,  of  the  appellant  being
located by the Gul tribe, given the ease by which he could be traced due  to
the collective nature of Iraqi Kurdish society.

In her oral submissions at the hearing before me, Ms Rogers relied upon  her
skeleton argument. She referred to Dr Fatah's expert report  confirming  the
ease with which the appellant could be located and  therefore  the  risk  he
faced even if he relocated to another part of the IKR. She  also  relied  on
the guidance in SMO in relation to the difficulties faced in relocation,  in
light of the appellant's lack of a support network in the IKR.

Mr Walker, in response, submitted that the strength of the appellant's  case
was with the practicalities of relocation, as set out in SMO, but  also  due
to the risk of being found by the Gul family. He submitted that as a  result
of this, the appellant had made out  his  case  and  the  appeal  should  be
allowed.

In light of Mr Walker's concession, there is no need for me to set  out  any
detailed reasoning, save to state that the respondent now concedes that  the
appellant would be at risk of being found if he were to relocate to  another
part of the IKR and that relocation would  be  unreasonable  in  any  event,
given his lack of family support, in line with  the  guidance  in  SMO.  The
appellant has therefore shown that he would be at risk  on  return  to  Iraq
and, accordingly, his appeal is allowed on asylum and human  rights  grounds
on that basis.

DECISION

The original Tribunal was found to  have  made  an  error  of  law  and  the
decision was set aside. I re-make the decision by allowing  the  appellant's
appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 26 July
2021
