

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13892/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 04 September 2017                     |On 07 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms M Thirumaney of Shervin Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  01
    December 2016 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge M.K.P. Davies ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 13 February 2017 because the  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant had given a  credible  account  or
    that he had genuinely converted to Christianity. The appellant  appeals
    against the decision on the following grounds:

       i) The judge failed to give adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  the
          respondent's position was preferred, as set out in  the  decision
          letter, and failed to  make  any  findings  to  explain  why  the
          appellant's response was rejected.
      ii) The judge failed to give adequate consideration to evidence  that
          supported the appellant's claim, including the  detailed  account
          given in interview, and failed to give  adequate  weight  to  the
          supporting evidence given by witnesses from his church.
     iii) The judge unfairly made negative findings on a credibility  issue
          that was not raised in the decision letter and was not put to the
          appellant to answer at the hearing.
      iv) The judge gave undue weight to his failure to claim asylum  in  a
          safe third country under section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration
          (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 ("the 2004 Act").

Decision and reasons

3.    Having considered the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the oral submissions made by both parties at the  hearing  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

4.    Some of the complaints made about the decision are unfounded. Many  of
    the findings were open to the judge to make. The judge  was  unarguably
    entitled, and indeed obliged, to take into account any matters outlined
    in section 8 of the 2004 Act. It was open to the judge  to  assess  the
    plausibility of certain aspects of the appellant's account. The matters
    that were not put to the  appellant  were  not  so  central  to  create
    unfairness. The judge gave adequate reasons to explain why less  weight
    was placed on the evidence given by the two church witnesses.

5.    However, having read the decision with some care, I  find  that  there
    is some force in the appellant's first two grounds  of  appeal.  It  is
    acknowledged that a judge is entitled to rely on the reasons  given  in
    the respondent's decision letter, but  it  is  still  necessary  for  a
    decision maker to explain why  that  evidence  is  preferred  to  other
    evidence produced in support of the appeal. The Tribunal in MK (duty to
    give reasons) [2013] UKUT 641 reiterated the  basic  principle  that  a
    judge should give adequate reasons to explain his or her core findings.



6.    In this case the judge took  into  account  the  "consistency  of  the
    Appellant's overall account" in interview, his witness statement and in
    evidence at the hearing. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant
    had given a credible explanation as to why he  chose  to  convert  from
    Islam to Christianity [33] for the reasons given in paragraphs  15  and
    17 of the decision letter. Again, the judge relied on the reasoning  in
    the decision letter  at  paragraphs  24-30,  which  asserted  that  the
    appellant's account of the Christian religion was "vague and lacking in
    detail" [38].

7.    First, there was no analysis of whether the  assertions  made  in  the
    decision letter were correct and little explanation was provided as  to
    why they should be given weight. On the face of it  the  appellant  had
    been able to provide a fairly detailed response to the questions put to
    him in interview. Second, the decision letter itself acknowledged  that
    the appellant had shown some knowledge of the Christian  religion  [24-
    25]. Whilst the letter went on to state that  the  appellant  had  been
    inaccurate in some aspects of his account of the nativity story and the
    Pentecost, no assessment was made  by  the  judge  as  to  whether  the
    appellant's knowledge was nevertheless broadly consistent with  someone
    who had recently converted to the religion. Third, although  the  judge
    noted that the appellant had responded to the reasons  for  refusal  in
    his witness statement [38], there is no assessment of that evidence and
    no reasons are given for preferring the respondent's decision letter.

8.    The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  provide  adequate  reasons
    for rejecting core aspects of the claim, or  to  consider  any  matters
    that might have supported the appellant's account, amounts to an  error
    of law. It is possible that the negative findings made in  relation  to
    the appellant's account of events in Iran might have  impacted  on  the
    judge's overall view of the evidence  relating  to  his  attendance  at
    church in the UK.

9.    For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law. The parties
    agreed that if an error was found that the appropriate course of action
    would be to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing

Signed

   [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Canavan
Date: 06 September 2017


