

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/13236/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated On|
|On 13th September 2019                 |1st October 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     JB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Jones Whyte LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Debra Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait.  The
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not consider the appellant's
      evidence to be credible.  The judge was not satisfied that the
      appellant was an undocumented Bidoon or that he was of any interest to
      the Kuwaiti authorities.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on two main
      grounds.  The first of these was that the judge erred over a material
      fact, and therefore erred in law, in identifying an apparent
      inconsistency in the appellant's evidence relating to his employment
      in the black market.  The second ground, identified on the initiative
      of the Upper Tribunal, was that the judge had arguably erred in
      assessing the appellant's evidence either by procedural unfairness or
      by applying a higher standard of proof.  This error was suggested by
      the use of phrases such as: "I cannot understand"; "I cannot see"; "I
      really do not understand his account"; and " I am also at a complete
      loss to understand...".  Reference was made to the case of ME (Sri
      Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 (per Lewison LJ at paragraph 18).

Submissions
   4. For the appellant, Mr Winter referred me, in particular, to paragraph
      102 of the decision on the issue of the appellant's employment.  The
      appellant had never said he was working in any official capacity.  He
      was working unofficially on a farm and was not paid money for his
      work.  As set out in the application for permission to appeal, there
      was a further error over the judge's treatment of the appellant's
      evidence about his father's use of a car.  The judge failed properly
      to address the appellant's account of his detention and ill treatment.
       In addition, the phraseology used by the judge amounted to something
      more damaging to the appellant's case than could be characterised as a
      matter of style.

   5. Mr Govan submitted that the judge was entitled to make assumptions
      based on a lack of evidence or a lack of explanation from the
      appellant.  The country information showed that undocumented Bidoons
      were unable to work. The language used by the judge was a matter of
      style.

Discussion
   6. The difficulty arising from this decision is encapsulated in paragraph
      102, which is expressed in the following terms: "The appellant in his
      asylum interview and in his witness statement was inconsistent about
      whether or not he worked.  In his witness statement he clearly says
      that he was working on a farm for Mr Mohammed though admittedly he
      says he was not paid.  Prior to that he appears to have been working
      with his father in the buying and selling of sheep and yet in his
      screening interview he said he had no occupation.  Even leaving that
      discrepancy aside he was clearly working.  That appears to have been a
      regular occupation of his despite the fact that he says he was working
      in the black market.  As stated above however undocumented Bidoon are
      not able to work.  He appears according to his own evidence to have
      regularly attended at the market and I cannot see how he would be able
      to do this if he was not documented.  He also says that his father had
      the stall in the market and it was implied that his father is also
      undocumented.  I cannot understand how he would have been able to have
      a stall in these circumstances."

   7. The finding in this paragraph that the appellant was inconsistent
      about whether or not he worked is central to, and prominent among, the
      judge's adverse credibility findings but it is not based upon the
      evidence and is not supported by adequate reasons.

   8. As was pointed out in the application for permission to appeal, the
      appellant has never denied working and has consistently stated that he
      worked.  Contrary to what was said by the judge, there was no
      inconsistency in the evidence about whether or not the appellant
      worked in Kuwait.  However, he never said he worked in any officially
      recognised capacity which required some form of documentation.  At
      paragraph 102 the judge failed to distinguish between the physical
      activity of working and official recognition or sanctioning of that
      activity.  Similarly the judge did not distinguish between the
      physical activity of working and the concept of an occupation.  The
      judge increases her confusion by describing the appellant as appearing
      to have a "regular occupation" although claiming to work in the "black
      market".  It is far from clear what the judge means in this context by
      a "regular occupation".

   9. The judge noted at paragraph 101 of her decision that undocumented
      Bidoon "are prevented from working".  It does not follow from this
      that, as the judge seems to assume in paragraph 102, undocumented
      Bidoon do not work illegally in the black market.

  10. I agree with Mr Winter that there is no basis in the evidence for the
      judge's finding to the effect that the appellant has been inconsistent
      about whether or not he was working in Kuwait.  The appellant's
      evidence was that he was working but not doing so legally.  The judge
      has confused her findings by failing to distinguish clearly between
      work which is done illegally and work which is carried out legally.
      She has made a significant adverse finding which is not supported by
      the evidence.  This amounts to an error of law.

  11. Before leaving paragraph 102 I think it is also appropriate to refer
      to the judge's use of language.  She states that she "cannot see" how
      the appellant would have been able to attend the market regularly if
      he was not documented.  She adds that she "cannot understand" how the
      appellant's father would have a market stall.

  12. As is pointed out in the application for permission to appeal, if
      there was something in the evidence which the judge did not understand
      it was open to her to ask clarifying questions at the hearing. Indeed,
      I note that in his witness statement the appellant provided
      explanations for matters queried by the respondent.  It is further
      pointed out in the grant of permission to appeal that where the
      question was whether there was a real risk to the appellant on return
      "findings expressed in negative terms such as 'I cannot see' and 'I
      cannot understand' are terms that do not squarely confront the
      relevant, indeed crucial, question."

  13. There is one further point raised by Mr Winter to which I will refer.
      Mr Winter stated that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not
      address the appellant's claim to have been detained and ill-treated.
      The judge dealt very briefly with these matters at paragraphs 110-113,
      relying to an extent on the adverse credibility findings she had
      already made in respect of other issues, such as whether the appellant
      was working.  In these circumstances it is difficult to be satisfied
      that the judge properly addressed her mind to these issues or provided
      adequate reasons for her conclusions.

  14. While other adverse credibility findings were also challenged on
      behalf of the appellant, it is not necessary for me to consider these
      arguments further.  The judge's finding which was central to her
      assessment of credibility, namely that the appellant was inconsistent
      about whether he was working, is flawed by an error of law and cannot
      stand.  Without this finding I cannot be satisfied that the judge's
      overall assessment of credibility would have remained the same.  The
      proper course is for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set
      aside.  The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no
      findings preserved to be reheard before a differently constituted
      tribunal.

Conclusions
  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error of law.

  16. The decision is set aside.

  17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved to be reheard before a differently constituted tribunal.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  In order
to preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is decided I make
a direction in the following terms.  Unless or until a court or tribunal
directs otherwise no report of these proceedings shall identify either
directly or indirectly the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and the respondent.  Failure to comply
with the direction may give rise to proceedings for contempt of court.





M E Deans
                         27th September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
