
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13969/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |On 28 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    Z. O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who entered the UK  illegally,  and
    when encountered at port, claimed asylum.  That  protection  claim  was
    refused on 6 December 2016.   His  appeal  against  that  refusal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 19 May 2017, when it
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope.  He dismissed  the  appeal
    on all grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14  June  2017.   The
    Appellant sought to challenge that decision, and  his  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  all  of  the
    grounds advanced, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on  25  September
    2017. Thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The grounds take a number of  points  of  challenge  to  the  decision.
    Before me the parties agreed that there was one challenge which if made
    out meant that it was unnecessary  to  engage  with  the  others.  That
    complaint relates to paragraph 66 of the decision in  which  the  Judge
    expressed himself thus;

         "I do not wish to  stereotype  or  make  assumptions  about  family
         patterns in particular societies. All that I can say is that I have
         heard nearly 100 appeals both asylum and otherwise involving people
         from an Iraqi Kurdish background  and  in  none  of  them  has  the
         appellant been the single child of effectively single child parents
         with no grandparents or cousins or other relatives of their parents
         being alive."

 3. In short the Appellant's complaint is that no such passage should  ever
    appear in a decision of the Tribunal. It is not based upon any evidence
    that the Appellant has ever seen, and it makes no allowance for  either
    particular  family  circumstances,  or  the  effects  of  modern  armed
    conflict. The Respondent accepts  that  this  passage  is,  of  itself,
    sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge's approach to the weight  that
    could be given to the evidence was unsafe, and that as a result none of
    his findings of fact could stand. I agree. In the circumstances  it  is
    unnecessary to engage with the  other  complaints  raised  against  the
    decision which turn on the absence of identifiable reasons for  adverse
    findings of fact, notwithstanding the length of the decision.

 4. I turn then to the question of whether or  not  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted or whether the decision is capable of being remade  before  me
    today. Both parties urge me to remit. In circumstances where  it  would
    appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been  considered  by
    the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
    finding  exercise  is  such  that  having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  13
    November 2014.

 5. To that end I must remit the appeal for a  fresh  hearing  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Cope at the North Shields Hearing Centre.  It  is  not
    anticipated that any further evidence is to be filed. A Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter is required.



Notice of decision

 6. The decision promulgated on 14 June 2017 did involve the making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

