
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13005/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                    [S H]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Grubb of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 30th March 1972 is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Miss Grubb of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr Howells, a Senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues Under Appeal

 2. The Appellant claimed to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  13th
    July 2014 and was granted a visit visa until December 2014.  He made an
    application for asylum in August 2014 which  was  refused.   He  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 28th September 2015.  He then lodged further
    submissions which were  rejected  and  also  made  an  application  for
    judicial review in October 2016 and in February 2017 the  decision  was
    made to reconsider his application.  That application was refused.

 3. The Appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Suffield-Thompson sitting at Newport on 22nd
    January 2018.  She dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.   Permission  for
    application to appeal was  made  and  that  permission  to  appeal  was
    initially refused on 14th March 2018.  The application was  renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal and on 12th June 2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
    granted permission to appeal in respect of Grounds 3 and 4, namely that
    the judge had failed to give appropriate weight to the expert  evidence
    and had failed to give the necessary anxious scrutiny to in  particular
    the video footage.  Directions were issued for the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    first of all decide whether an error of law had been made by the First-
    tier Tribunal in this case.  The matter came before  us  in  accordance
    with those directions. On enquiry neither party had any  concerns  with
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb who had granted permission to  appeal  being
    on a member of the panel.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Miss Grubb provided us with submissions in respect of Grounds 3  and  4
    of the Grounds of Appeal.  In respect of Ground 3,  it  was  said  that
    there had not been appropriate weight given to the expert report  which
    had been prepared and submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant.   It  was
    submitted that at paragraphs 55 and 56 of the decision where the  judge
    had dealt with the expert report it appeared the judge  had  taken  the
    view that the lawyer was not  an  expert  in  respect  of  those  legal
    documents and it was said that that  was  a  wrong  approach.   It  was
    further said that the decision had only focused on  that  part  of  the
    expertise that considered the verification of documents  and  at  least
    some weight should have been placed  on  her  expertise  as  a  country
    expert, and no consideration had been given to  other  aspects  of  the
    report which dealt with plausibility, sur place activity  and  risk  on
    return.

 5. In respect of Ground 4, it was submitted that the judge had  not  given
    anxious scrutiny to the probative value of the video footage  or  other
    evidence  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's  broadcasting   activities
    including evidence that  demonstrated  that  the  programmes  which  he
    broadcasted had over 5 million viewers.  It was  submitted  that  again
    the expert had dealt with the potential risk on return  in  respect  of
    those matters which had not been considered sufficiently if at  all  by
    the judge.

 6. Reference was also made to a particular FIR which was one of three that
    had been submitted by the Appellant.  It was said that  the  Respondent
    accepted that two out of those three  had  been  verified  as  genuine.
    Although this one had not been verified, little weight had  been  given
    to the expert view on that matter or the fact that there had been other
    FIRs presented which had been accepted as genuine by the Home Office.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 7. Mr Howells stated that the FIR in  dispute  dated  2012  had  not  been
    submitted in advance by the Appellant but had simply  appeared  in  the
    appeal bundle with no explanation as to why it had not  been  submitted
    for verification alongside the other two.  It was further said that the
    contents of this particular FIR were very different to those which  had
    been found to be genuine.  It was further submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings on risk and credibility demonstrated that any failure to  deal
    with the expert report fully was not  a  material  error  and  that  in
    respect of any sur place activities matters had been focused  on  other
    evidence not simply that contained within the expert report.   We  were
    referred to paragraphs 59 to 62 of the decision  where  the  judge  had
    reached findings.  In respect of the video footage, it  was  said  that
    the reasons provided by the judge at paragraph 48  were  adequate.   It
    was said that there was no translation of what the Appellant was saying
    on the video and that  any  audience  figure  provided  was  subjective
    evidence from  someone  who  had  not  attended  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence.

 8. At the conclusion we reserved our decision to consider the  submissions
    and evidence presented.  We now provide that decision with our reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The judge had before her an expert report from Mrs Moeen at pages 1  to
    48 of the Appellant's supplemental bundle.  She described herself  both
    as an experienced lawyer in Pakistan but also  an  experienced  country
    expert.  The judge dealt with her report briefly at paragraphs  55  and
    56 and essentially took the view that as Mrs Moeen was not  a  document
    expert she took no regard of her views and  conclusions  upon  the  FIR
    dated 2012 contained at paragraphs 11 to 40 of her report.   There  was
    in our judgement, an inadequate consideration of her evidence  and  the
    extent of her expertise  when  considering  this  particular  FIR  that
    played some significance in the Appellant's case.   Further  the  judge
    did not take any account of the expert's findings and  views  on  other
    matters such as the plausibility of the Appellant's account  generally,
    state protection and internal  relocation  which  her  expertise  as  a
    country expert may have to some extent required.  Whilst the judge  was
    of course not bound to agree with the report, she  needed  to  consider
    the totality of that report in the  found  in  her  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case and that was not done.

10. The judge had been presented with video footage  and  dealt  with  this
    matter at paragraph 48 of the decision.  The Appellant had  claimed  to
    be the manager of a mosque and in part is claimed to be at risk related
    to his claimed high profile.  The judge had  accepted  that  the  video
    footage showed the Appellant speaking to a large crowd, and potentially
    introducing speakers to the crowd.  Whilst the judge was not  incorrect
    to say that this did not necessarily mean the Appellant was the manager
    of the mosque as claimed, she failed to  consider  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant clearly had some profile not inconsistent with  either  being
    the manager of the mosque and perhaps more importantly the fact that it
    was his potential profile that he held within the Shia  community  that
    produced the alleged risk.  Within the same category of the Appellant's
    profile evidence, there had been provided evidence that  the  Appellant
    presented a TV programme and had developed a significant  international
    profile.  At paragraph 59 the judge had found "there was nothing before
    me to say how widely this channel is watched or broadcast and I do  not
    find that presenting the programme  has  heightened  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return".  That was not the case as the  judge  had  before
    her the witness statement of the Appellant's  co-presenter,  Mr  Zaidi,
    who had said the channel had more than 5 million viewers.  That was not
    insignificant evidence concerning the Appellant's  raised  profile  but
    needed to be considered by the judge.

11. The 2012 FIR, the evidence of the Appellant's profile and potential job
    within the mosque  and  his  raised  profile  from  his  TV  work  were
    significant features in  the  Appellant's  claim  to  fear  persecution
    because of his religion and  known  profile  within  that  religion  in
    Pakistan.

12. The judge's failure to adequately  deal  with  the  expert  report  and
    consider the proper inferences that  could  be  drawn  from  the  video
    evidence and a failure to take account of  the  evidence  of  Mr  Zaidi
    taken  together  produced  an  error  of  law.   That  is  because  due
    consideration had been given to those significant pieces of evidence it
    may well  have  led  to  a  different  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's profile and therefore his claimed risk on return.   It  was
    therefore a material error.

Decision

13. We find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this case
    and set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

