
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13207/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                          |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MAO [W]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel, instructed by AGI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity direction is made.

 2. The appellant is a national of China.  The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom clandestinely on August 7, 2009. He  was  detained  and  served
    with Form IS151A as an illegal entrant on March 21, 2012. He claimed to
    have formed a relationship with [LZ] and stated  that  they  had  three
    children aged six, five and one at the date of the original hearing. He
    claimed asylum on September 27,  2017  and  this  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on November 30, 2017 under paragraphs 336 and  339M/339F  HC
    395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 13, 2017.  His
    appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Heatherington
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on January 23, 2018 and in a  decision
    promulgated on January 29, 2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision arguing the  Judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the appellant's claim under articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen on February 16, 2018 in relation to (a) whether the  Judge  had
    given sufficient consideration to the best interests  of  the  children
    and (b) whether returning the appellant would leave him  destitute  and
    thereby engage article 3 ECHR.

 6. A Rule 24 response dated March 12, 2018 was filed by the respondent. In
    the  response   the   respondent   submitted   that   there   were   no
    inconsistencies in the Judge's findings and there was  nothing  in  the
    grounds of appeal to suggest that there was any evidence of destitution
    on return to China given his asylum claim had  been  rejected.  It  was
    open to the appellant to return to his former home  and/or  demonstrate
    it would take too long  for  him  to  reregister  thereby  leaving  him
    destitute.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Ms Faryl adopted the grounds of appeal together with the views of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Brennan who had granted permission to
    appeal. She referred to the inconsistency that existed in the Judge's
    decision between 9.13 and 9.23. She argued that the Judge had accepted
    that removing the appellant would have an impact on his partner and
    more importantly his children, especially [J], and she submitted that
    the Judge had failed to have full regard to the letters from the
    hospital and the evidence provided by the parties as to the level of
    involvement the appellant had with his children. She submitted that it
    was in the children's best interests to have their father in the United
    Kingdom and she submitted that [J]'s best interests, as an autistic
    child, had been given insufficient weight by the Judge.


 8. Ms Faryl made reference to a second error by the Judge on the basis the
    Judge had failed to consider article 3 in circumstances where the
    appellant had stated that returning him would leave him destitute.


 9. Mr Tan adopted the Rule 24 letter dated March 12, 2018 and submitted
    that with regard to the best interests of the children there was no
    inconsistency in the decision. The Judge had accepted the appellant had
    played a role in the children's upbringing and recognised this in
    paragraph 9.13 of the decision. However, the Judge had then gone on to
    assess all the evidence and more importantly what effect his removal
    would have on the children. Having looked at the documents (in
    particular, the medical letters) the Judge concluded that removing the
    appellant would be proportionate and consequently the finding in
    paragraph 9.23 was open to the Judge. With regard to the second ground
    of appeal the Judge had no evidence before him that the appellant would
    face destitution. His whole claim had been rejected and the Judge made
    findings open to him.

    FINDINGS

10. This was an appeal brought initially on protection grounds but  in  the
    alternative the Tribunal was invited by  the  appellant  to  allow  his
    appeal on human rights grounds.

11. The Judge did not accept his protection  claim  and  I  note  that  the
    current grounds of appeal take no issue with the Judge's conclusion  on
    this issue. At paragraphs 8.3 and 8.6 the Judge set out reasons why his
    credibility had been damaged. At paragraph 8.4 the Judge concluded that
    the appellant's fear amounted to a fear  of  "prosecution"  as  against
    "persecution". At paragraph 8.5 the Judge noted the appellant had  made
    no reference to any fear of the state when he was detained in 2012.

12. Since being in the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  had  struck  up  a
    relationship they now had three children. Both the children  and  their
    mother were Chinese nationals with limited  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country until 2020.

13. Ms Faryl did not dispute  the  appellant's  relationship  and  all  his
    private  life  commenced  at  a  time  when  the  appellant  was   here
    unlawfully.

14. The fact the appellant never had any immigration status in this country
    meant his immigration status was always precarious. Neither he nor  the
    children's mother spoke English and the appellant was  not  financially
    independent. Due to the children's status the appellant  did  not  have
    the benefit of either Section EX.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules or section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

15. The Judge was aware of the  medical  evidence  and  in  particular  the
    evidence relating to [J]. The evidence given by both the appellant  and
    the children's mother was that they did not  live  together  with  both
    claiming the appellant would visit her and the children and stay up  to
    5 days a week. It is against this background that the Judge  considered
    the article 8 claim.

16. Ms Faryl submitted that there was an inconsistency  between  paragraphs
    9.13 and 9.23 of the Judge's decision  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on this point. However, I am satisfied that at  paragraph  9.13
    the Judge made a finding on the evidence presented  that  removing  the
    appellant would have the potential  of  interfering  with  the  current
    visiting arrangements. This is of course one of the questions posed  in
    the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

17. As I indicated to Ms Faryl during the hearing the issue ultimately  was
    one of proportionality and more importantly whether the Judge had taken
    into account all the evidence.

18. At paragraph 9.14 of the decision the Judge quite properly set out  the
    statutory matters that had  to  be  taken  into  account  and  all  the
    findings made were both correct and open to the Judge.

19. The Judge then made  the  point  that  precariousness  can  in  certain
    circumstances apply not only to  private  life  but  also  family  life
    although this was probably somewhat of an academic  point  because  the
    appellant's private and  family  life  had  been  created  whilst  here
    unlawfully. The Judge also found that there had been a  burden  to  the
    public purse and taxpayers because the appellant had received free  NHS
    treatment.

20. Having made those findings, the Judge then  went  on  to  consider  the
    fourth question in Razgar. It is not suggested they met the Immigration
    Rules. The grounds of appeal do not take  issue  with  the  finding  in
    paragraph 9.17 and it therefore follows that the finding  at  paragraph
    9.20 was both correct and open to the Judge.

21. Ms Faryl argued the Judge's approach in paragraphs 9.2 to 9.26  of  the
    decision was flawed. However,  the  appellant  could  not  come  within
    Appendix FM so far as his children were concerned because they  neither
    had settled  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  nor  were  they  British
    citizens.

22. Ms Faryl referred me to letters provided by  the  Rotherham  MBC  which
    appeared in the  main  appellant's  bundle.  Some  of  these  documents
    referred to the appellant living with his children and others  referred
    to the difficulties experienced by [J].

23. The information provided to the doctors would have been based  on  what
    they had been told. The fact some of  the  letters  record  the  family
    lived together was clearly inconsistent with the actual evidence  given
    by the appellant and the children's mother. Both told  the  Judge  they
    did not live together although the appellant did spend periods of  time
    at the family home.

24. Looking at the letters from Rotherham MBC I note in January  2013  (see
    page 88 of the bundle) the appellant was reported to be living with his
    family whereas on September 1, 2016 (See page 83  of  the  bundle)  the
    appellant was not living in the property with the family.

25. The letter from Rotherham MBC  dated  March  29,  2017  referred  to  a
    meeting that took place at the clinic and  whilst  it  seems  both  the
    appellant and the children's mother attended this  meeting  the  report
    ends by pointing out [J] had been  discharged  from  Child  Development
    Centre Service.

26. Mr Tan  pointed  out  that  there  was  very  little  evidence  of  the
    appellant's involvement with the children and the Judge concluded  that
    the children's best interests were  being  met  by  their  mother.  The
    consequence of refusing the application did not mean the children would
    have to leave the United Kingdom. Both they and the mother had leave to
    remain and this would continue

27. Whilst the Judge did not go into any real  detail  about  each  child's
    medical condition I am satisfied that the Judge was fully aware of  the
    respective medical problems because the information was set out in  the
    decision.

28. This was not an appeal  where  section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules applied and it was not an appeal where the  appellant
    could rely on section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

29. The Judge considered all the  evidence  in  the  round  but  ultimately
    concluded in paragraph 9.25 that there were reasons why  the  appellant
    should leave the United Kingdom  outweighed  allowing  him  to  remain.
    Those findings were open to the Judge and I therefore reject Ms Faryl's
    submissions that there was an error in this assessment.

30. The second ground of appeal related to the  purported  failure  by  the
    Judge to deal with an article 3 claim.  The  Judge  made  reference  to
    article 3, as a claim, in paragraphs 4.2 and 8.1 of the decision.

31. The Judge rejected the appellant's account of what  happened  in  China
    and  as  Mr  Tan  pointed  out  no  documentary  evidence  of  possible
    destitution was included in any documentation.

32. The appellant has the burden, to the  lower  standard,  to  demonstrate
    that returning him would breach article 3 but he failed to provide  any
    supporting evidence that this was the case.

33.  The  Judge  considered  whether  the  appellant  would  encounter  any
    significant problems in China and concluded at paragraph 9.24  that  he
    would not. I am satisfied there is also no error on this issue.

    DECISION

34. There is no error in law and the original decision shall stand.


Signed                              Date     01/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     01/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
