
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13681/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2020                  |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     GY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. Cleghorn, instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bircher) (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  5  May  2019,
    dismissed his claim for protection.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at  paragraphs  10-14  and  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State issued on 23 November 2018.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Iraq. He  claims  to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 6 November 2017 and made an  application  for  asylum
    and/or humanitarian protection on the 8th November 2017. The  basis  of
    his claim was that he was a national of Iraq and of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    having been born in xx in the IKR. In April 2015  he  claimed  to  have
    been working for the Peshmerga as a driver and  that  his  job  was  to
    drive them to and from a changing point in a 21-seater bus.  He  stated
    that they were on duty for one to 2 weeks at a time  and  therefore  he
    drove them to their base and collected other peshmerga  from  the  base
    back to their home.  He  was  paid  approximately  575,000  dinars  for
    driving them two days in every month. The base was in a remote area.

 5. The appellant also stated that his father was also a Peshmerga and that
    he had found the job of driver for the  appellant  and  forced  him  to
    accept that job. His father had been in the Peshmerga for 20 years  and
    held the rank of captain.

 6. The appellant did not have a rank whilst working as a  driver  and  did
    not wear uniform or carry a  weapon.  Nor  did  he  have  any  specific
    training for his role. He was not the subject of  any  security  checks
    because of the position his father held.

 7. It was said that on one day the appellant's father woke him  and  asked
    him to drive to work. He needed to attend an urgent  meeting  which  is
    why he asked the appellant to drive him. He dropped his father  off  at
    work and then slept in the car. Later  that  morning,  the  appellant's
    maternal uncle phoned him to say that his home had been  ransacked  and
    there was no sign of his mother and younger brother. The same  maternal
    uncle asked the appellant to make enquiries of his  father's  work  and
    see if he was still there. The appellant did ss but could not find  him
    anywhere.

 8. On 4 July 2017 the appellant's father phoned the  appellant's  maternal
    uncle and explained that he had forcibly removed the appellant's mother
    and younger brother and recruited them into Daesh along  with  himself.
    The appellant's father phoned the maternal uncle to tell him  that  the
    appellant was to join his father otherwise he would send people to kill
    him. The appellant's father disclosed to the maternal  uncle  that  the
    reason why he wanted his son brought to him was to recruit him also.

 9. The appellant and his maternal uncle then fled to xx where they  stayed
    for one night before travelling on to Turkey.

10. The appellant claimed that an arrest warrant had  been  issued  against
    him and whilst he had never seen the arrest warrant,  he  knew  of  its
    existence because friends who he had driven  to  work  and  transported
    back home had told him so.

11. The appellant and his maternal uncle could  not  stay  in  xxx  because
    people they wanted to physically assault him because his father  joined
    Daesh and had taken the appellant's mother  and  younger  brother.  The
    appellant lost contact with his maternal uncle because his mobile phone
    was broken.

12. The appellant left Iraq in September 2017 and travelled through several
    countries until his arrival in the United Kingdom.

13. The decision letter of the Secretary of State dated  23  November  2018
    considered that he did not have a genuine subjective fear on return  to
    Iraq. It was not accepted that the appellant had ever  worked  for  the
    Peshmerga nor that he had been threatened by his father or  from  those
    Kurdish civilians or the government in the IKR and set out a number  of
    issues of credibility and by reference to the country materials.

14. The respondent to set out  the  country  materials  and  the  CPIN  and
    consideration  was  also  to  the  country  guidance  decisions  in  AA
    (Article15 (c ) Iraq CG [2015] KUT 544  as  amended  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA Iraq v SSHD[2017] EWCA  Civ  944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-
    internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 0212.  Specific  consideration  was
    given to documentation and feasibility of return. Taking  into  account
    the factors identified in the case law and country  materials,  it  was
    noted that he had confirmed that he was from xxx in the  IKR  but  that
    the objective information confirmed the security  situation  there  did
    not engage Article15 ( c)   and  that  he  could  obtain  documentation
    either through family members in Iraq ( including his  maternal  uncle)
    or via the Iraqi embassy in the  UK.  His  claim  was  refused  on  all
    grounds.

15. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision.

16. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal before FtTJ Bircher.  In
    a decision promulgated on 5 May 2019, the FtTJ dismissed his appeal.

17. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and initially refused  by
    FtTJ Pedro but was granted on the 10 June 2019 by UT Judge S. Smith for
    the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge's plausibility -based findings  were
         insufficiently supported by the background materials,  for  example
         in relation to the likelihood of the appellant's  father  revealing
         his role to him, or of the appellant carrying a gun.

         It is also arguable that the judge misapplied the country  guidance
         cases. Having quoted extensively from AA (Iraq) v SSHD 2017  EW  CA
         Civ  944  (including  paragraph  1,  which  states  there  are   no
         international flights to  the  IKR),  the  judge  stated  that  the
         appellant could fly directly back to Erbil. It is arguable that the
         judge failed properly to apply the country guidance concerning  the
         method of return, and the documentation needed to facilitate such a
         return (for example, at [23], the judge did not specify which  male
         relative could attend the "Iraqi consulate", nor in  which  country
         the consulate would be located, given  such  premises  are  usually
         established in countries other than the sending state's territory).

18. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal. Ms Cleghorn,
    who had   appeared before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the appellant
    and Ms Petterson, senior presenting officer, appeared on behalf of  the
    respondent. At the hearing Ms Cleghorn  confirmed  in  her  submissions
    that she did not seek to rely upon Ground  2,  which  referred  to  the
    issue of return to Iraq and documentation and that she only  sought  to
    advance Ground 1 which related to the findings of fact made by the FtTJ
    and her assessment of the appellant's credibility.

Ground 1:

19. Ms Cleghorn relied upon the written grounds where it was asserted  that
    the FtTJ erred in law in her assessment of the appellant's credibility.
    In those grounds it was submitted  that  rather  than  identifying  any
    credibility issues, the appellant's case was dismissed because  of  the
    FtTJ's assumptions as to how the  appellant's  father  would  act.  For
    example, the FtTJ did not accept that the  appellant  would  know  more
    about the Peshmerga from his father (at [16]) and that depended on  his
    father who was a captain sharing that information. The  grounds  assert
    that "presumably there are clear confidentiality agreements within  the
    Peshmerga which prevent people from  sharing  information  with  family
    members".

20. It is further submitted that the FtTJ assumed that he could not  obtain
    this role through nepotism at [18] and because of the nepotism to  earn
    an inflated salary. Equally the FtTJ did not understand why he was  not
    specially trained and did not carry a gun notwithstanding his role  was
    only to take people on the base and back to their homes.

21. It is therefore submitted that given her findings  of  fact  which  are
    central to her decision it is difficult to see how the decision can  be
    a safe one. This is particularly the case as the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 19 rely entirely on plausibility. A failure  to  explain  why
    his father might behave in a particular way cannot form  the  basis  of
    dismissing the claim without something more.

22. The grounds also challenge  paragraph  21.  It  is  asserted  that  the
    findings are difficult to understand and that it is  difficult  to  see
    how, if his mobile phone was damaged, he could attempt to  contact  his
    family members who, with  the  exception  of  his  maternal  uncle  had
    disappeared to join Daesh. The judge also records at [15] that he  does
    not want to contact family and friends because he does not want them to
    know that he is in the UK.

23. In her oral submissions Ms Cleghorn submitted that the FtTJ fell into a
    classic "HK error" and that the decision reached was based on  how  the
    judge would think a member of the Peshmerga in Iraq would  operate  and
    it was on this basis that the FtTJ dismissed the claim.

24. Ms Cleghorn further submitted that at paragraph 18 of the decision, the
    FtTJ failed to understand how society  in  the  IKR  operated.  In  the
    decision of AAH (as cited) there is reference made to the importance of
    patronage and nepotism in securing employment (see the head  note)  and
    that this ties into the "HK point" and that this  is  relevant  to  the
    background country information and  society  in  general.  The  judge's
    decision was in essence considering the factual circumstances based  on
    a western perspective. Thus, she submitted that in the appellant's case
    he was able to obtain his job without any expertise or training because
    of his father's role in the Peshmerga.

25. Ms Petterson on behalf of  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  rule  24
    response filed on 16 July 2019. That document concentrated on ground  2
    which was no longer pursued but at paragraph 6 set out the respondent's
    position that the credibility of the appellant's account was a question
    of fact and that the judge properly made adverse  credibility  findings
    that were reasonable and open to her on the evidence.

26. In her oral submissions, Ms Petterson submitted that the FtTJ  rejected
    the appellant's account that his father was a  senior  Peshmerga  (  at
    [16]) and at [17 ] gave adequate and sustainable reasons as to why  she
    did not accept that the appellant was recruited as a driver and that it
    was not only because it was said his father had given him the  job  but
    that even if his father had secured such employment it was not credible
    that he received no special training and did not carry a gun. The judge
    looked at the security risks around driving  and  did  not  accept  his
    account.  Ms  Petterson  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  consider
    credibility from a western standpoint and that even if he had  got  his
    job through some form of nepotism that the fact that he  had  not  been
    provided with any training at all  was not credible (see [18]).

27. Furthermore, the judge also referred to the hugely inflated salary  for
    only working two days a week for a  job  that  required  no  specialist
    training. It was open to the judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  was
    someone with a lack of knowledge of how the Peshmerga operated. It  was
    in the public domain that the  Peshmerga  were  a  well  organised  and
    highly trained force and their success in their operations in defending
    the IKR involved fighting Daesh.

28. Ms Petterson submitted that the grounds did not seek to  criticise  the
    FtTJ's findings at paragraph 19 and 20 which related  to  his  father's
    asserted defection to Daesh and issues related to how the appellant was
    taken and the opportunity to make his escape. At [20] the FtTJ did  not
    accept that the appellant's father  supported  or  aligned  himself  to
    Daesh.

29. At [21] the FtTJ considered the issue of contact  to  family  relatives
    and it was open to the judge to reject his account as he had failed  to
    explain why he had not used other  methods  of  communication  such  as
    writing to his family members in Iraq and also his  maternal  uncle  or
    attempting to contact his  relatives  via  the  red  cross.  Thus,  she
    submitted the grounds  were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of fact made by the FtTJ.



Discussion:

30. I remind myself that I can only interfere with the decision of  a  FtTJ
    if it is demonstrated that she  made  a  decision  which  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

31. The FtTJ set out her findings of fact at paragraphs [15]-[21]. The FtTJ
    rejected the appellant's account as to the occupation  of  his  father,
    his own occupation and as  to  the  subsequent  events  in  Iraq  as  a
    "complete fabrication" (at [15]).

32. The grounds assert that the FtTJ fell into  error  by  considering  the
    issues of credibility from  a  westernised  perspective  and  based  on
    plausibility which is what Ms  Cleghorn  described  as  a  "classic  HK
    error".

33. The  Upper  Tribunal  in  KB  &  AH  (credibility-structured  approach)
    Pakistan [2017] UKUT 491 (IAC) accepted that plausibility is a relevant
    factor when assessing credibility but it is  a  factor  which  must  be
    treated with a degree of caution. The Tribunal in that case cited  from
    HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 as
    follows:

           "28. Further, in many asylum cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
           appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not
           mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the  story,  and  the
           story as a whole, have to be considered  against  the  available
           country  evidence  and  reliable  expert  evidence,  and   other
           familial factors, such as consistency with  what  the  appellant
           has said before, and with other factual evidence (where there is
           any).

           29. Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many  domestic
           cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly  inappropriate,  factor
           to rely on in some asylum cases. Much of the  evidence  will  be
           referable to societies with customs and circumstances which  are
           very different from those of which  the  members  of  the  fact-
           finding tribunal have any (even second-hand) experience. Indeed,
           it is likely that the country which an  asylum-seeker  has  left
           will be suffering from the sort  of  problems  and  dislocations
           with which  the  overwhelming  majority  of  residents  of  this
           country will be wholly unfamiliar. The point  is  well  made  in
           Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991) at page 81:

                 'In  assessing  the  general  human   rights   information,
                 decision-makers  must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid
                 implicitly recharacterizing the nature of the risk based on
                 their own perceptions of reasonability'

           30. Inherent improbability in the context of  asylum  cases  was
           discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala v Secretary  of
           State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed  out  that  it
           was 'not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on  the
           basis that it is not credible or not plausible. To say  that  an
           appellant's account is not credible is to  state  a  conclusion'
           (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he said that rejection  of  a
           story on grounds of implausibility must be done  'on  reasonably
           drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture  or  speculation'.
           He went on to  emphasise,  as  did  Pill  LJ  in  Ghaisari,  the
           entitlement of the fact-finder to rely 'on his common sense  and
           his ability, as a practical and  informed  person,  to  identify
           what is or is not plausible'. However, he accepted  that  'there
           will be cases where actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if
           judged  by  ...Scottish  standards,  might  be  plausible   when
           considered within the context  of  the  applicant's  social  and
           cultural background."

34.  The Tribunal also made the point at [30] that plausibility ought to  be
      considered along with other factors; this is "also illustrative of the
      need to avoid basing credibility assessment on  just  one  indicator".
      Plausibility is also "not a  concept  with  clear  edges";  there  may
      therefore be varying degrees of implausibility and some aspects  of  a
      claim may be plausible even if others are not.

35.  In Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ
    1223,  the Court of Appeal stressed the importance of viewing an
    account of events in the context of the conditions in the country from
    which the appellant comes and of being cautious before finding an
    account inherently incredible. These are indeed important principles.
    However, this does not mean a judge cannot, applying common sense to a
    particular situation, reach the conclusion that an account (or an
    aspect of an account) is implausible. It is important, when considering
    plausibility, to keep in mind what the Court of Appeal in Y stated at
    paragraphs 26 - 27, not just paragraph 25. I therefore set out below
    paragraphs 25-27 of Y:

         25. There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties
         as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which an
         adjudicator, now known as an immigration judge, should adopt
         towards issues of credibility. The fundamental one is that he
         should be cautious before finding an account to be inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that he will be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or is not plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been influenced by his own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of our own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to view an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in the
         context of conditions in the country from which the appellant
         comes. The dangers were well described in an article by Sir Thomas
         Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by the IAT in
         Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken from an article in
         Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

             "'An English judge may have, or think that he has, a shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds Broker or a Bristol wholesaler, or a
             Norfolk farmer, might react in some situation which is
             canvassed in the course of a case but he may, and I think
             should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
             Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav
             banker. Or even, to take a more homely example, a Sikh
             shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No judge worth his salt could
             possibl[y] assume that men of different nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments would
             act as he might think he would have done or even - which may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what a
             reasonable man would have done."

         26 None of this, however, means that an adjudicator is required to
         take at face value an account of facts proffered by an appellant,
         no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of human
         behaviour the account may be. The decision maker is not expected to
         suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr Singh contend that he should.
         In appropriate cases, he is entitled to find that an account of
         events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to be incapable
         of belief. The point was well put in the Awala case by Lord Brodie
         at paragraph 24 when he said this:

             "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily accept an
             applicant's account simply because it is not contradicted at
             the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact is entitled to make
             reasonable findings based on implausibilities, common sense
             and rationality, and may reject evidence if it is not
             consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a
             whole".

         He then added a little later:

             "... while a decision on credibility must be reached
             rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw
             on his common sense and his ability, as a practical and
             informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".

         27. I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not to do so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had happened in
         this country. In essence, he must look through the spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the country
         in question. That is, in effect, what Neuberger LJ was saying in
         the case of HK and I do not regard Chadwick LJ in the passage
         referred to as seeking to disagree.



36.  With those points set out, I now turn to the  challenges  made  to  the
      decision of the FtTJ. The grounds advanced on behalf of the  appellant
      assert that the FtTJ's findings upon both his occupation and  that  of
      his  father  as  members  of  the  Peshmerga  did  not  identify   any
      credibility issues but that such findings were  solely  based  on  the
      judge's own assumption as to how a father would act ( see paragraphs 2-
      3 of the grounds).

37.  The FtTJ set out her  reasons  at  paragraph  [16]  for  rejecting  the
      appellant's account that his father was a member of the Peshmerga. The
      evidence of the appellant was that his father had been a member of the
      Peshmerga for 20 years and that he had attained the rank  of  captain,
      both in his interview and evidence. However, when questioned  further,
      the appellant was unable to provide any further details or provide any
      further account concerning that employment. The FtTJ  identified  that
      the appellant could not produce any explanation as to how and why  his
      father became a  Peshmerga  (also  set  out  at  question  25  of  the
      interview). The judge considered the appellant's response which was "I
      really do not know because I  was  only  two  when  he  joined  them."
      However, it was open to the FtTJ to reject  that  explanation  in  the
      light of the factual background given in the appellant's own  evidence
      that even if the appellant's father had become a  Peshmerga  when  the
      appellant was two years of age,  it  did  not  explain  why  over  the
      following years the appellant as a young boy would be  precluded  from
      learning more  about  his  father's  role  in  the  peshmerga.  In  my
      judgement that finding was not based on any assumption but  was  based
      on the judge's consideration of the appellant's evidence.

38.  The grounds at paragraph 3 assert  that  "presumably  there  are  clear
      confidentiality agreements within the Peshmerga which  prevent  people
      from sharing  information  with  family  members".  I  have  not  been
      referred to any evidential  foundation  for  such  a  submission  from
      either the country materials or from the appellant's own evidence.  By
      way of comparison, the FtTJ was entitled to  make  her  finding  based
      upon the appellant's own evidence of length of service of  his  father
      alongside the appellant growing up in the family home.

39.  At [17]-[18] the  FtTJ  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
      account that he was also employed in the Peshmerga. The point made  by
      Ms Cleghorn is that  the judge did not take into account  in  reaching
      her conclusion is  that  there  was  background  evidence  to  support
      patronage and nepotism as important factors in securing employment  as
      set out in the head note in AAH(Iraq) (as cited at iv), and  therefore
      it was plausible that the appellant had obtained his job  through  his
      father.

40.   However, that part of the head  note  does  not  expressly  relate  to
      employment in the Peshmerga forces but even if it did, the  FtTJ  gave
      other reasons for rejecting his claimed occupation.  The FtTJ did  not
      accept that he had such a role in the light of his  evidence  that  he
      was provided with no training for his role at  all.  The  FtTJ  stated
      that the role of driving  Peshmerga fighters to and from work was  "an
      important one given that all the passengers on board were   Peshmerga"
      and the FtTJ was entitled to consider that evidence in  the  light  of
      the information known about the Peshmerga who are the security  forces
      and described in the material before the FTT  as the  armed  units  of
      the KDP and the PUK (p71 AB). The FtTJ found that his  claim  to  have
      received no training and no  preparation  was  inconsistent  with  the
      "security risks involved with such a job and it is not  credible  that
      nothing was done by way of preparation to assist the appellant in  his
      job. The Peshmerga had other Peshmerga could drive the bus which could
      be at risk of ambush because of the  pressure  at  passengers  it  was
      carrying" (at [17]).

41.  At [18] the judge expressly considered that even if the  appellant  had
      secured his job through his father, it was not credible  that  he  had
      not received any training for such a role and did not carry a gun.  It
      was open to the FtTJ when considering his account that  his  claim  to
      have received no training was inconsistent with the  security  of  the
      men whom he was driving around.

42.  Furthermore, at [18]  the  FtTJ  considered  the  appellant's  evidence
      about the salary he received and that  the  sum  claimed  was  "hugely
      inflated" and was not consistent with the job which he claimed  to  be
      undertaking of limited employment of two days a week for  a  job  that
      required no special training. This had been supported in the  decision
      letter by country materials which referred to his claimed  daily  rate
      which was 4.4 times the national average (see paragraphs 27 and 30  of
      the decision letter). That was  also  inconsistent  with  the  country
      materials which demonstrated that the  Kurdistan  Regional  Government
      had been unable to pay the Kurdish fighters.

43.  Consequently,  it  was  reasonably  open  to  the  FtTJ  to  reach  the
      conclusion that the appellant and his  father  were  not  employed  as
      claimed.

44.  As Ms Petterson submitted the grounds did not seek to  challenge  other
      findings of credibility made by the judge at paragraphs 19 and 20.  In
      those paragraphs, the  FtTJ  considered  the  appellant's  account  of
      events in Iraq concerning his father's efforts to forcibly recruit him
      to Daesh. The appellant's evidence was that his father was seeking  to
      forcibly recruit him (along with his mother and brother). However, his
      evidence was that on 4 July, after he drove his father to work and his
      father returned home again and  then  forcibly  took  his  mother  and
      brother. When considering  that  evidence  the  FtTJ   found  that  no
      credible or plausible reason was  given  as  to  why  the  appellant's
      father did not see fit to  have  his  son  accompany  his  mother  and
      younger brother to a meeting point or for his father to  simply  place
      all four members in the car and drive them to a Daesh stronghold if he
      was intent on recruiting the appellant to Daesh. The  FtTJ  also  made
      the point that if the appellant's account was  true  that  his  father
      wanted to forcibly recruit him to Daesh, it was not reasonably  likely
      that he would have telephoned the appellant's maternal  uncle  to  ask
      him to bring him to a meeting point. The FtTJ set out the  appellant's
      evidence at [19] on this issue and was entitled to conclude  that  the
      appellant's account of events "put  the  appellant  via  his  maternal
      uncle on notice that he was going to be  recruited  into  Daesh.  This
      lacks credibility because it afforded the appellant an opportunity  to
      escape and the appellant's father would be aware that by revealing his
      intentions to the maternal uncle there was always  the  risk  that  he
      will tell the appellant of  his  father's  plans  to  recruit  him  to
      Daesh."

45.  In my  judgment,  it  was  open  to  the  FtTJ  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant's account lacked credibility because it gave  the  appellant
      an opportunity  to  escape  and  that  his  father  by  revealing  his
      intention to a third party would mean that there was a  risk  that  he
      would inform the appellant of plans to recruit him.  In  essence,  the
      FtTJ found that the appellant's account of his father's conduct to  be
      inconsistent with his own evidence that  the  appellant's  father  was
      seeking to forcibly recruit him.  That  was  a  finding  based  on  an
      assessment of the appellant's evidence  set  in  the  context  of  his
      claim.

46.  As to paragraph [21] of the  decision,  the  grounds  assert  that  the
      judge's findings of fact are difficult to understand and that  if  the
      appellant's mobile phone was damaged it was difficult to  see  how  we
      could contact his family members. However, the grounds  fail  to  take
      into account what the judge actually set out at [21]  where  she  made
      reference to other ways of contacting his family other than by way  of
      phone such as attempting to contact relatives via the  Red  Cross,  by
      writing to relatives or via his maternal uncle.

47.  Having considered the grounds in the light of the decision of the  FtTJ
      and the evidence that was before her, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
      judge fell into any error as asserted. The  judge  gave  adequate  and
      sustainable reasons for reaching the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
      overall had not given a credible account as  to  events  in  Iraq  and
      those reasons were based on the evidence before her.

Conclusion:

  48. In summary,  the  FtTJ  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
      reaching his conclusion that he had not given a credible and plausible
      account of the events that he claimed to have occurred in Iraq.

  49. The assessment made was  one  reasonably  open  to  the  FtTJ  on  the
      evidence, both oral and documentary, and I am not satisfied  that  the
      decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of an error on a point of
      law. The decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

  50. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an error  on  a
      point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 27 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

