

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13643/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th July 2019                    |On 31st July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Majid, Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan  whose  year  of  birth  is
    2001[1].  He appeals with permission the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge B Cox) to  dismiss  his  protection  and  human  rights
    appeal.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


      Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellant's protection and  human  rights  claims  was
    that he faced a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Afghanistan  for
    reasons of his membership of a particular social group  (children/young
    person) and imputed political opinion  (refusal  to  join  the  Taliban
    interpreted as political opposition/father being in the Afghan Army).


 4. The Respondent had rejected the claim for want of credibility.  He  had
    not accepted the Appellant's account and had given several reasons why.


 5. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal had  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant. The determination records the uncontested country background
    material showing that the Appellant's home area of  Nangarhar  province
    had, at the relevant time, been  under  Taliban  control.   It  further
    records the evidence that  persons  perceived  to  be  opposed  to  the
    Taliban in these areas face human  rights  abuses  including  terrorist
    attack.    Against this background the Tribunal found  the  Appellant's
    account to be plausible.  The Tribunal noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been only 14 at the material time so some lack of detail and  confusion
    in his recollection  were  to  be  expected.   The  determination  then
    proceeds to  consider,  and  discount  with  reasons,  the  credibility
    concerns raised in the Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter.   The
    Tribunal drew no adverse inference from the fact that the Appellant had
    not claimed asylum en route to the United Kingdom, since he was only  a
    child at the time and under the control of agents at all times. Nor did
    it attach any weight to the fact that  he  had  claimed  to  be  14  on
    arrival whereas social services had assessed him to be 15.   So far  so
    good: all of the findings in the determination til this point had  been
    in the Appellant's favour.


 6. At paragraph 46 the Tribunal identifies one issue in the evidence  that
    caused it concern. That was the identity of the uncle who had  assisted
    the Appellant and his mother after  the  Appellant's  father  had  gone
    missing:

         "46.     At the outset of the hearing, I intended  to  clarify  one
         issue that troubled me.  The Appellant had stated  that  his  uncle
         lived in Kabul, but he had also stated that his uncle had  come  to
         the house to help find his father, after his father had  gone  with
         the Taliban.  The Appellant confirmed that they lived some distance
         from Kabul and I then asked who his mother  had  called,  when  his
         father had not answered his phone and the Appellant stated that she
         had called his maternal uncle, [AK].  He then mentioned a [LG].  At
         this  point,  the  Appellant's  solicitor  offered  to  help.   The
         Appellant confirmed that [LG] lived in the UK and that  [AK]  lived
         in Kabul.  The Appellant  then  stated  that  his  father  had  two
         brothers living in the village.  He added "they  are  connected  to
         the Taliban and one of them is disabled, Ismail".


         47.      The Appellant also reiterated that his mother  had  phoned
         [AK] and added "he did not come the same night, but he  came  later
         ... after my father's body was found".  The  Appellant's  solicitor
         noted that the Appellant had previously stated that "my  uncle  and
         others tried to find out where my father was" (paragraph 7  of  the
         asylum statement) and asked whether that is right?   The  Appellant
         replied I don't remember properly what I said we have an  uncle  in
         the village.  I am referring to Ismail.


         48.      However, the Appellant had previously stated in the asylum
         statement "then my mother called my uncle and he also came to  find
         out where my father was my uncle is called [AK]" (paragraph 6).  In
         my view, the Appellant has clearly stated that the uncle  who  came
         to find his father was his maternal uncle which is at odds with the
         oral evidence.  The Appellant's  solicitor  acknowledged  that  the
         Appellant has now given a different account,  but  noted  that  the
         Appellant had previously given a consistent account and  that  over
         three  years  had  passed.   I  appreciate  that  the   Appellant's
         consistent accounts had been  given  at  closer  proximity  to  the
         alleged events and that he became upset during his  age  assessment
         when providing information about his father.


         49.      Nevertheless, it is my view that if the Appellant's father
         had disappeared, then the Appellant ought  to  have  been  able  to
         consistently identify the uncle who turned up that  night  to  help
         find his father, even if he is a minor and  a  vulnerable  witness.
         In my view it is the type of detail  that  would  remain  constant.
         Especially as the Appellant also stated that that night he  learned
         for the first time from his mother and his uncle  that  his  father
         had been with the Afghan army.  I also do not believe that a  child
         would forget or confuse which uncle had helped when one of them  is
         disabled.  In my view, the appellant realised that if his  maternal
         uncle had been in Kabul, as he had originally stated, he would  not
         have been able to get to the home village that night  and  that  is
         why he changed his account.


         50.      In any event, the Appellant's failure to give a consistent
         account of the uncle that helped that  my  leads  me  to  seriously
         doubt that the Taliban took  the  Appellant's  father,  or  had  an
         adverse interest in the Appellant's father.  In turn this leads  me
         to have serious reservations about the Appellant's claim  that  his
         father was in the Afghan army".

 7. The appeal was thereby dismissed.




    Error of Law


 8. The Appellant lodged grounds of appeal himself. He said that he had not
    understood what he was being asked and that the Judge had not asked him
    any questions.  Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Scott Baker who considered  it  arguable  that  the  determination  was
    insufficiently/inadequately reasoned.


 9. At a hearing before me in September 2018 the parties were in  agreement
    that the passages I have cited above  were  insufficiently  clear.  The
    Respondent invited me to proceed to a continuance hearing in  order  to
    remake the decision myself.   The basis of the Respondent's  concession
    was that it is difficult to discern from the Tribunal's reasoning  what
    the discrepancy in the evidence actually was. It would appear that  the
    Appellant had consistently said that the uncle who helped was [AK], his
    maternal uncle who lives in Kabul. He is said to have "mentioned" [LG],
    and then to have clarified that this uncle lives in the United Kingdom.
    He also refers to his father's brother Ismail, a disabled man who lives
    in the village, but it is far from clear  from  the  evidence  recorded
    that the Appellant at any point asserted that it was this man who  came
    to assist after being called to do so by the  Appellant's  mother.    I
    have had regard to the 'record of proceedings' and to  the  typed  note
    very helpfully taken by the judge. The Appellant was asked "which uncle
    did your mother call when no answer  from  father"  to  which  he  said
    "maternal uncle - [AK]".  There then  follows  a  series  of  questions
    about [LG] and Ismail. The Appellant's is recorded as saying "I think I
    got confused. I did not understand the question. I was being asked  for
    both".  Whilst there was certainly some confusion at this point in  the
    evidence, nowhere can I see it asserted that it was anyone  other  than
    [AK] who came the family's assistance that night. As Mr Diwnycz for the
    Respondent very fairly agreed, where all of the other matters in  issue
    were resolved in the Appellant's  favour,  and  having  regard  to  the
    Appellant's age, it would be  appropriate  to  give  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to clarify.

10. I would add this.  At paragraph 50 of the determination (set out above)
    the Tribunal uses a curious formulation that is  arguably  inconsistent
    with the appropriate application of the burden and standard  of  proof.
    The determination there reads:  "the  Appellant's  failure  to  give  a
    consistent account of the uncle that helped  that  night  leads  me  to
    seriously doubt that the Taliban took the Appellant's father...in  turn
    this leads me to have serious reservations about the Appellant's  claim
    that his father was in the  Afghan  army".     The  Tribunal  can  have
    serious doubts or reservations that an account is true, but still  find
    that the burden of proof has been discharged to the lower  standard  of
    proof.

11. For those reasons the determination of the First-tier Tribunal was  set
    aside.



    The Re-Made Decision

12. That initial hearing  in  September  2018  was  adjourned  because  the
    Appellant was unrepresented. He asked for some time to find a solicitor
    and in view of his age I considered it appropriate to do so.  It  is  a
    matter of some regret that the case did not get  re-listed  until  now.
    The parties have my apologies for that delay.   The  time  was  however
    well spent, since the Appellant managed to instruct Legal Justice,  who
    in turn instructed Mr Tim Foxley MBE to prepare an expert report.   The
    Respondent accepts that Mr Foxley is qualified to give the opinion that
    he does, and that his report should be afforded considerable weight.


13. At the outset of the hearing I agreed with the parties that my starting
    point had to be whether the Appellant would face a real risk of harm in
    Nangarhar today.

14. Nangarhar is a province in  the  east  of  Afghanistan,  bordering  the
    Federally Administered Tribunal Areas of Pakistan.  It had been  agreed
    before the First-tier Tribunal that it was under Taliban control at the
    time that the  Appellant  left  in  early  2015.   The  area  had  long
    association with the Taliban and al-Qaeda, being home  to  the  Haqqani
    network, 'Tora Bora' mountain complex and  an  easy  staging  post  for
    fighters crossing backwards and forward  from  Pakistan.  It  was  this
    evidence that led the First-tier Tribunal to find the  overall  account
    to be plausible.  The report of Mr Foxley indicates  that  the  picture
    was in fact even more complex. 'Islamic  State  of  Khorasan  Province'
    (ISKP) had by then begun to emerge in Nangarhar  as  a  major  fighting
    force. They used the province to stage strikes into Kabul.   There were
    reports of the ISIS black flag being hoisted in some areas,  and  their
    preachers taking over key mosques.  They attracted disillusioned Talibs
    as well as fighters retreating from the Middle East.

15. The strength of ISKP  has  markedly  increased  since  the  Appellant's
    departure. Today  Nangarhar  is  "strongly  contested  in  a  three-way
    conflict between the government, the Taliban  and  Islamic  State".  It
    suffers from extensive Islamic militant activity. Mr Foxley quotes with
    approval the assessment of the highly  respected  Afghanistan  Research
    and Evaluation Unit (AREU):

         "Nangarhar - a province that historically has been one of the major
         entry points for the capture of Kabul - is in complete disarray. It
         lies in chaos, riven by a process of political  fragmentation  that
         has increased in both pace and  severity...there  seems  little  to
         currently bind the province together given the faltering economy, a
         reduction in aid flows  and  the  continued  disassembling  of  the
         political alliances that maintained stability...without US military
         support, and with little direction from Kabul, the Afghan  National
         Defence Security Forces  (ANDSF)  appear  reluctant  to  leave  the
         sanctuary of their fortified bases...These centrifugal  forces  are
         apparent in the province, as it  becomes  a  setting  for  multiple
         armed groups  and  their  activities,  which  are  hostile  to  the
         government and each other, including  Islami  Emirati,  Daesh,  and
         Lashkar-e-Islami. A dramatic uptick in levels of violence over  the
         last twenty-four months is evident, in which the  rural  population
         has been subject to acts of extreme brutality - even in the context
         of the country's three decade long conflict".

16. At the date that  he  completed  his  report,  April  2019,  Mr  Foxley
    considered civilians in Nangarhar to be at "high risk" of being  caught
    in the middle of the intense three-way  fight  gripping  the  province.
    More generally Mr Foxley points to evidence that  in  2018  Afghanistan
    was the deadliest conflict in  the  world,  with  an  estimated  41,000
    fatalities over the 12 months: I note that at over 112 deaths  per  day
    this is more than Syria and Yemen combined.  Mr Foxley  also  expressed
    some pessimism about whether the "talks about  talks"  ongoing  between
    the Americans and the Taliban were likely to lead anywhere.

17. Against this background the Respondent accepted that as a young man  of
    fighting age the Appellant had demonstrated that he faced a  real  risk
    of harm in Nangarhar  today,  regardless  of  whether  his  'historical
    claim' , or some of it, was true.   This was a realistic concession  in
    view of the wholesale acceptance of Mr Foxley's  evidence.   Given  the
    heightened hostilities in the province  I  find  it  to  be  reasonably
    likely that a young man, absent for four years, returning to  the  area
    would attract the attention of one or more militant groups,  who  would
    target him for recruitment, or possibly regard him with suspicion.   At
    the date of my decision Mr Foxley's report is already three months old.
     I note for the sake of completeness that recent media reports have not
    demonstrated any improvement on the ground. For instance,  just  a  few
    days before the hearing a story was run confirming that the conflict is
    ongoing, and that at least one of the  parties  -  the  Taliban  -  are
    prepared to use children as weapons: on the 12th July  a  13  year  old
    Taliban suicide bomber carried out an attack on a wedding, wounding  40
    and killing at least 5[2]. As an 18 year old the Appellant would  be  a
    prime target for recruitment, which if he refused he  would  be  marked
    out as an 'enemy'. I find that the Appellant would today  face  a  real
    risk of serious harm in his home province for reasons of his  (imputed)
    political opinion.

18. I now must decide whether he could reasonably be expected  to  relocate
    to  Kabul.   I  begin   by   considering   the   Appellant's   personal
    characteristics.

19. The Appellant is today a young man who has spent the  past  four  years
    living in the United Kingdom.   He is, as far as  the  Home  Office  is
    concerned, 18 years  old.   He  speaks  fluent  Pushto  and  reasonable
    English.  He has demonstrated some level of resilience  in  that  as  a
    young boy he survived a  hazardous  journey  that  took  him  from  the
    village he had not hitherto left, in the boot of a car across the Hindu
    Kush to the city of Peshawar,  and  from  there  by  means  of  various
    transport across two continents. He spent months fending for himself in
    the Calais 'jungle'.  The flip side of that is that the Appellant  has,
    by his own account, been left deeply traumatised  by  that  experience.
    The court file contains  a  number  of  letters  from  the  Appellant's
    student mentor/tutor at Sheffield College expressing his concern  about
    the Appellant's high levels of stress.   Having had the opportunity  to
    see the Appellant give evidence he  struck  me  as  a  shy,  and  quite
    anxious, teenager.

20. The Appellant told me that he has started learning to be a plumber.  He
    has passed his 'level 1' exams which means that he knows how to cut and
    join a pipe, and has some  rudimentary  understanding  of  systems.  He
    reckoned that he would be able to unblock a sink, but did caution  that
    this was a 'more professional' task that his current level  2  standard
    would officially permit him to undertake. So far all  of  his  training
    has been workshop based.  He  has  not  actually  undertaken  any  paid
    employment as a plumber.  He is a Sunni Muslim and as such does not run
    the risk of harm as a member of a minority faith.

21. To those facts I apply the country guidance in AA (unattended children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC). Although that decision  is  now
    seven years  old,  it  has  been  expressly  endorsed,  and  marked  as
    continuing country guidance, in both  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan
    CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC) and AS (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  AA in turn endorsed the guidance given in  HK
    and Others (minors - indiscriminate violence -  forced  recruitment  by
    Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378
    (IAC).  I  further  had  regard  to  what  is  said  about  age  in  KA
    (Afghanistan) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1014, namely that there should be  no  "bright  line"  between
    minority and majority and that a young person who faced a risk the  day
    before his 18th birthday will likely face it the day  after.  Per  Lord
    Justice Maurice Kay [at �18]:

         "Given  that  the  kinds  of  risk  in  issue  include  the  forced
         recruitment or the sexual exploitation of vulnerable  young  males,
         persecution is not respectful of birthdays -  apparent  or  assumed
         age is more important than chronological age".

22. The parties agree that the sum of these authorities, as they relate  to
    the proposed return of a young person is as follows. An individual  who
    does not have male relatives in the  city  to  whom  he  can  turn  for
    support will be vulnerable to risks of indiscriminate violence,  sexual
    violence and trafficking. In respect of the latter that arises  from  a
    situation  of  destitution.  Gangs  running  begging/criminal   rackets
    recruit street children with a promise of shelter and  food,  and  then
    trap them in a situation of exploitation and violence.


23. This Appellant, although tall, appeared to me to be  very  obviously  a
    teenager. He has never been to Kabul. If he has no protection there, no
    family network to call upon, I am quite satisfied that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect him to try and make a life for himself  in  Kabul.
    He would face the risks identified in the authorities: I find  it  hard
    to see that  his  rudimentary  plumbing  skills  and  English  language
    ability would make any discernible difference to his situation.

24. The question then arises: would the  Appellant  actually  find  himself
    alone in Kabul?

25. It has been the Appellant's consistent evidence that, as far as  he  is
    aware, his maternal uncle [AK] has some kind of job with the government
    and he is based in Kabul.  He said in both his  asylum  interviews  and
    age assessment that he had told his uncle that he did not want to leave
    Afghanistan, and that he wanted to stay with  him  in  Kabul,  but  his
    uncle had told him that this was  not  possible  and  that  it  was  as
    dangerous there. The Appellant repeated this account before me. He said
    that he was under the impression that his uncle had a 'sensitive'  role
    but he did not know what it was.   He knows  that  his  uncle  did  get
    married but it was not to a relative and he did not know the lady.  She
    does not live in the village with his family. It has further  been  the
    Appellant's consistent evidence that he last spoke with his  family  in
    Afghanistan by phone when he was in the camp in Calais. He  had  had  a
    mobile telephone when he left Afghanistan with key numbers stored on it
    but this had been lost when he tried to board a moving lorry. His other
    possessions, including written  numbers,  were  lost  when  the  French
    authorities moved in to clear the Jungle and his tent was set on  fire.
    The one number he could recall is now dead- when he tries to call it is
    like the phone is switched off.  He has tried the Red  Cross  but  they
    have been able to assist him.

26. Taking into account the generally positive credibility findings made by
    the First-tier Tribunal, the consistency in  the  Appellant's  accounts
    and my own positive impression of him as a witness,  I  find,  applying
    the lower standard of proof, that the  Appellant  has  told  the  truth
    about his lack of contact with his family, and the fact that he has  an
    uncle whom he calls [AK] and whom he believes to work in Kabul.

27. I have no reason to doubt that [AK] would  help  the  Appellant  if  he
    turned up on his doorstep, given the assistance  that  he  has  already
    offered to him. I must however consider the likelihood of the Appellant
    actually locating [AK].   Kabul has a population of  some  4.6  million
    people.  He has no  idea  where  he  lives,  or  where  he  works.  The
    situation may have changed in the past four years - [AK] may have moved
    jobs, left Kabul or even Afghanistan. He could  be  dead  for  all  the
    Appellant knows. It is not even clear that '[AK]'  would  be  the  name
    that the man is officially known  by,  given  the  practice  in  Pathan
    families of honorific titles for elder family members.  'Khan'  is  one
    such typical honorific, as is 'Gul': I note that the  Appellant  refers
    to his other maternal uncle - believed to be in London - as 'Lal  Gul',
    a name that translates as 'red flower'.  If the  Appellant  is  correct
    and [AK] works in a 'sensitive' role it would seem  unlikely  that  his
    presence in any given department would be confirmed to a young man from
    Nangarhar making enquires.      Having considered  all  of  that  I  am
    satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant will  not  be
    able to find his uncle. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.




    Decisions


28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error  of
    law.


29. The decision in the appeal is remade: the appeal is allowed.

30. There is an order for anonymity.











                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               21st July 2019
                           -----------------------
[1]   At the hearing, the Appellant's 'appropriate adult' a Mr [K],
  informed the Tribunal that as far as Sheffield Social Services are
  concerned, the Appellant was born in 2000. The Tribunal file has the
  Appellant's date of birth recorded as January 2001. Mr Diwnycz informed
  me that this is also the date of birth on the Respondent's file.
[2]                    See                   for                   instance:
  https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/afghanistan-attack-suicide-
  bomb-child-nangarhar-death-toll-isis-taliban-a9001716.html


