
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13082/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2019                                 |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr S M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher of Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Iraq born on 28 May 2001.  He arrived in the UK unlawfully  on  10  May
    2017 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His application was refused  in  a
    decision dated 5 November 2018, but he was granted a  short  period  of
    discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor until 28 November 2018.

 2. The Claimant appealed and his appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Boylan-Kemp for hearing in Birmingham on 21 January 2019.
    In a decision promulgated on 15 February 2019, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal on protection grounds but allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  of
    humanitarian protection.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed in time  against  that  decision  on  a
    number of grounds described as Making a material  misdirection  of  the
    law/Lack of adequate reasoning/mistake of fact.  It was asserted:

         (i)   The  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give   adequate   reasons
         particularly at 23 to 27 when assessing the Appellant's ability  to
         obtain a CSID.

         (ii) In allowing the appeal on HP grounds without  specifying  what
         the  "significant  difficulties"  were  that  the  Appellant  would
         encounter in trying to obtain a CSID at 25.

         (iii)    There was nothing preventing  the  Claimant  returning  to
         Iraq/the IKR in the absence of  risk.   There  was  clearly  family
         there who could help the Claimant.

         (iv) There was no evidence to show the Claimant was abused  by  his
         uncle or aunt in assessing risk on return (19 to 21).

         (v)  At 20 the judge found:

             "20. Upon consideration of the evidence I find that it is more
                  likely that his family have willingly paid for him to join
                  his brother in the UK so that he  can  secure  his  future
                  here and not because of any specific risk to him in Iraq."



    It was asserted that this is  a  crucial  finding  by  the  judge  that
    completely undermines the entirety of the Appellant's  claim  and  that
    the decision could simply be set aside  on  this  singularly  important
    point.

         (vi) It was asserted at [6] that the Claimant's  family  reside  in
         Makhmour within the Erbil governorate  in  Northern  Iraq  and  the
         Claimant has a cousin who could assist him  in  obtaining  a  CSID.
         The Claimant's brother in the UK was clearly in  contact  with  the
         cousin in Iraq and the judge's finding at 25:

             "... although the appellant has male relatives in Iraq who may
             be able to help him locate his CSID there is no evidence  that
             the appellant's cousin or uncle would be willing  or  able  to
             help him with the process"

         is entirely speculative and contrary to the finding that the cousin
         actively helped the Claimant with money to leave Iraq.

         (vii)    The judge's  reasoning  on  the  Claimant's  inability  to
         obtain a CSID is flawed;

         (viii)   Paragraphs [8] onwards through to [15] are concerned  with
         removal to the IKR and are essentially a challenge to the  judgment
         in AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212
         (IAC), however, as will become apparent,  these  are  not  in  fact
         material.

         (ix)  Lastly,  it  was  asserted  that  any   submissions   as   to
         vulnerability due to the Claimant's age are redundant  because  the
         Respondent would not remove the Claimant whilst a minor.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hodgkinson on general terms in a decision dated 19 March 2019.

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the  parties  agreed  at  the
    outset that some of the grounds were misconceived  in  that  they  were
    premised on the basis that  Makhmour  was  in  the  IKR  in  the  Erbil
    governorate, whereas as in fact, as was clear from the  report  of  the
    expert Sheri Laizer, Makhmour is in Iraq not the IKR.

6.   In his submissions, Mr Whitwell on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that it is clear from [116] of the refusal  that  it  is  not
    accepted that the Claimant is no longer  in  possession  of  his  Iraqi
    passport and CSID. However, at [23] of the  decision  and  reasons  the
    Judge states erroneously that it is accepted by the Secretary of  State
    that the Claimant does not have a CSID. At [45]  the  Judge  accepts  a
    false CSID had been submitted (sent to the Claimant by his brother).

7.   Mr Whitwell submitted that it is clear from [16] that  the  credibility
    of the Claimant is the crux of the claim and at [20] and [21] the Judge
    rejects the basis of claim.

8.    At  [25]  the  Judge  finds  the  Claimant  would   face   significant
    difficulties in obtaining a  CSID  and  that  AAH  states  that  it  is
    possible for an Iraqi national to obtain a CSID in a reasonable  amount
    of time, rather than encounter significant difficulties and that  there
    was no evidence the Claimant's cousin or uncle could  assist  him  with
    the process. However, Mr Whitwell submitted that, on the contrary,  the
    Claimant's cousin could assist him and it was equally likely he or  the
    family could assist him in obtaining a CSID card.

9.   Mr Whitwell submitted that at [26] the  reference  to  flights  may  be
    academic as the Appellant is not required to  travel  to  the  IKR.  Mr
    Whitwell sought to rely on 4.2.1. of the CPIN, which was in the bundle.
    He submitted that the Judge's finding at [25] regarding  the  CSID  was
    speculative and was thus flawed and inadequate.

10.  In her submissions, Ms Fisher for the Claimant sought to  rely  on  the
    skeleton argument dated 1 May 2019.  She submitted that no  mention  of
    the expert report was made at all in the grounds,  however,  the  judge
    does refer to this report. The Judge has to give adequate  reasons  and
    show why the decision has been made.

11.  In respect of the assertion in respect of return to IKR at [9]  of  the
    grounds of appeal, return would be to Baghdad, not the IKR. She pointed
    out that Makhmour has always been under government control and parts of
    it were seized by ISIS. This was all dealt with by the expert. There is
    reference to troops and checkpoints at page 38 of the expert report  of
    Sheri Laizer at [x]. The Claimant will be returned to Baghdad  and  not
    the IKR. Photographs of the road to Makhmoor are at page 42  (vi).  The
    question is how the Claimant gets  from  Baghdad  to  Makhmour  without
    documentation?

12.  Having dismissed his asylum claim the Judge then consider  article  15C
    and how the Claimant would get to the IKR.  This was addressed at [116]
    of the refusal decision. In theory  Ms  Fisher  submitted  that  it  is
    straightforward, but in practice one would need  documents  such  as  a
    birth certificate etc. in respect of which she sought to  rely  on  the
    expert report. She submitted that a laisser passer would be confiscated
    on arrival in Baghdad. In respect of whether the Claimant could  get  a
    male relative to travel to Baghdad from Makhmoor in order to vouch  for
    his nationality for him to get a CSID, Ms Fisher submitted that another
    added difficulty is that often getting the documents one has to  travel
    to one's former place of residence: [29](iii) of expert report  refers.
    The issue also is whether the local  registry  office  in  Makhmoor  is
    operational or whether it is held by ISIS. At [106] of the refusal  the
    Secretary of State accepts that there are no flights to  Erbil,  albeit
    the Home Office have subsequently changed their minds about this.

13.  Ms Fisher submitted that the  Judge's  finding  that  if  the  Claimant
    could have obtained a genuine CSID why would he  obtain  a  false  one:
    [18]-[21] and the submissions  recorded  at  [22]  onwards.  Ms  Fisher
    submitted that the grounds of appeal are misconceived in how  they  are
    presented; that the drafter of the  grounds  did  not  see  the  expert
    report which addressed the issues  raised  in  half  the  grounds.  She
    submitted that there was no material error of law and that the  Judge's
    findings should stand.

14.  In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that [25] of  the  decision  emphasises
    the point he was seeking to make and this contained  three  strands  of
    reasons: (i) no documentation to obtain a CSID; (ii) no  certainty  the
    registry office is operational, although he submitted that  this  is  a
    matter for the Claimant to prove and  with  regard  to  (iii)  and  the
    finding that there was no  evidence  the  uncle  and  cousin  would  be
    willing to help, however, on the contrary  the  Claimant's  cousin  has
    helped in the past.

    Findings and reasons

15.  At [26] the Judge found that the Claimant was entitled to  humanitarian
    protection because it was not  reasonable  to  require  him  to  travel
    between Baghdad and IKR. The Claimant has consistently maintained  that
    he was from Makhmoor albeit he moved to Erbil (in the IKR) in 2013 when
    ISIS occupied the neighbouring villages [10]. In her  submissions,  the
    Presenting Officer argued that the Claimant could live anywhere  within
    the IKR and had experience of living in Erbil, which would  assist  him
    on return. Consequently, the Judge was under a misapprehension that the
    proposed place of relocation was the IKR, rather than focus on Makhmoor
    and consider whether the Claimant could internally  relocate  elsewhere
    within Iraq, bearing in mind that he would be returned to Baghdad.  The
    question is whether this is a material error.

16.  I have concluded that, whilst the grounds of appeal are in  large  part
    misconceived in that they are predicated on the erroneous understanding
    that Makhmour is in Erbil province and thus in the IKR, the Judge  also
    made the same error. However, it is clear from [26] of the decision and
    reasons that the Judge's findings were predicated on the basis that the
    Claimant would not be able to make the journey between Baghdad and  the
    IKR due to a lack of documentation. The same argument  would  apply  to
    Makhmour in light of the expert evidence at 3(xv)  and  (xviii)  and  4
    (iii)- (xvi). Thus I find that the error is not material,  particularly
    given that Makhmour is in a disputed area and thus the  Claimant  could
    not reasonably be expected to return there.

17.  Mr Whitwell sought to challenge the Judge's findings at [25]  that  the
    Claimant would face  "significant  difficulties  in  obtaining  a  CSID
    because he has no documentation." He submitted that the  Judge  had  at
    [23] misunderstood the refusal decision at [116] which provides: "it is
    also not accepted that you are no longer in possession  of  your  Iraqi
    passport and CSID" and then goes on to consider  the  position  in  the
    alternative i.e. that the Claimant does not possess those documents.

18.  However, the Claimant has always consistently maintained  that  he  did
    not have any identity documents on his journey and it is  not  disputed
    that he entered the UK unlawfully. I find the  Judge  was  entitled  at
    [25] to take into consideration the fact that  the  CSID  sent  to  the
    Claimant by  his  cousin  was  a  false  document  and  that  this  was
    indicative of the difficulties he would face  in  obtaining  a  genuine
    CSID, otherwise one would have been obtained and I find that the  Judge
    provided adequate reasons for his  decision  in  this  respect  in  the
    context of both the expert report and the CG  decision  in  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC), the headnote  to
    which he sets out at [24].

19.  I find  that  the  remainder  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  either
    erroneous, as they are based  on  the  erroneous  assumption  that  the
    Claimant is from the IKR or amount to no more than a disagreement  with
    the Judge's findings of fact, which were open to him  on  the  evidence
    before him.  Whilst  the  Judge  did  not  accept  that  basis  of  the
    Claimant's asylum claim, it was clearly open to him to allow the appeal
    on the basis of humanitarian protection and I find no error of  law  in
    his decision so to do, particularly bearing in mind that  the  Claimant
    remains a minor and is from a disputed area of Iraq.

    Decision

20.  I find no material error of law in the decision of First tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp, whose decision to allow the appeal on the  basis  of
    humanitarian protection grounds is upheld.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 18 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
