
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13435/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2019                   |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Mohamed [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Miss H. Aboni, Senior HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M
    K Lawrence, promulgated on 6th February 2019, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 29th January 2019.  In the decision, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Sudan,  and  was  born  on  29th
    January 1991.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    20th November 2018, refusing his claim for asylum and for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  is  a  member  of  the
    "Birgid" tribe.   He  is  a  non-Arab  from  Sudan.   He  has  been  to
    university.  The Sudanese security services have accused him  of  being
    involved in anti-Government activities.  They have arrested him.   They
    have detained him.  They have also tortured and interrogated  him.   He
    cannot return back to Sudan for fear of risk of persecution on  grounds
    of his ethnicity.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed at the  outset  that  this  was  a  case  where  the
    Respondent Secretary of State "accepts, given what the  Appellant  said
    in the latter part of his AIR, that the Appellant is indeed a  national
    of the  Sudan  and  also  of  the  claimed  ethnicity"  (paragraph  9).
    However, the rest of the Appellant's claim was not accepted.

 5. The judge then went on to consider the claim.  It was noted that in his
    witness statement (at paragraph 24) the Appellant has  stated  that  "I
    believe I was treated in this way as I belong to  Birgid".   The  judge
    thought that the reference to the words "I believe" indicated that this
    was only the Appellant's supposition (paragraph 13).   The  judge  also
    observed that  the  Appellant's  claim  had  undergone  a  "fundamental
    change" from how the claim had  originally  been  put  (paragraph  15).
    Having considered the Appellant's claim, the judge was of the view that
    "the entire basis of the claim is a fiction" (paragraph 18).

 6. Thereafter, consideration was given to the country guidance cases,  and
    in particular to the case of IM and AI  (Risks  -  membership  of  Beja
    etc.) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188, in which the Upper  Tribunal  set  up
    the guidance in identifying persons who are at risk on return to Sudan.
     The judge observed that the latest guidance  indicated  that  being  a
    member of a particular ethnicity is not  a  risk  factor  per  se.   In
    particular, the Tribunal had made it clear that "it  is  apparent  that
    not all those falling into a  particular  category  are  at  risk"  (at
    paragraph 203).

 7.  In fact, the Tribunal had gone on to say that:-

         "It is not enough, therefore, to  be  a  journalist  or  a  student
         because not all members of these groups are at risk.  So, too, with
         ethnic or tribal classification.  Not all non-Arabs  are  at  risk;
         nor are all black Africans at risk ..." (see paragraph  23  of  the
         decision).

 8. On that basis, the judge went on to conclude that the  Appellant  could
    not succeed, particularly given that he would  have  no  difficulty  in
    being able to reintegrate himself into Sudanese life on  the  basis  of
    the decision in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 (which was  referred  to  by
    the judge at paragraph 26 of the decision).

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in not giving due
    effect to the spirit of the country guidance cases.   It  was  accepted
    that the Appellant was a  non-Arab  Darfuri.   That  being  so  binding
    authority in the form of the country  guidance  case  of  AA  (non-Arab
    relocation) Sudan CG [2000] UKAIT 00056, applied.  This stated that all
    non-Arab Darfuris are at real persecutory risk  on  return  to  Darfur.
    Indeed, the country guidance case of MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT
    00010 had established  that  those  were  ethnic  non-Arab  Darfuri  in
    origin, regardless of whether they had lived in Darfur or elsewhere  in
    Sudan, would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Khartoum.   That  being  so,
    regardless of whether the Appellant's claim was  a  credible  one,  his
    appeal fell to be allowed.

10. On 13th March 2019, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 1st August 2019, Mr  Howard,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  law
    quite simply because he  had  failed  to  heed  what  was  set  out  at
    paragraph 217 of IM and AI [2016] UKUT 00188, namely, that the previous
    country guidance cases were intact and fell to  be  applied.   On  that
    basis he should have succeeded even if  there  were  doubts  about  his
    credibility.

12. For her part, Miss Aboni submitted that there was no material error  of
    law  at  all.   The  judge  had  given  adequate  consideration   (from
    paragraphs 23 to 25) to the applicable country guidance cases.  He  had
    cited expressly the relevant sentences there to demonstrate why  simply
    being a member of a particular ethnicity or vocation did not any longer
    expose oneself to risk.  That being so there could be no error  of  law
    here.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to
    be set aside.  My reasons are as follows.  My attention  was  taken  to
    paragraph 217 of IM and AI, by Mr Howard.  What this states is that:-

         "Our conclusions ...  leave  this  discreet  area  of  the  earlier
         Country Guidance intact and  our  own  conclusions  speak  of  more
         general risks.  The only relevance of the specific risks  faced  by
         Dafuris is in building up the general picture of  the  government's
         attitude  towards  those  it  perceives  to  be  a  threat  to  its
         stability".

14. This is a case where the  judge  gave  detailed  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's ethnicity.  The judge  then  set  out  to  give  sufficient
    reasons for why he would depart from the country guidance  case  of  IM
    and AI.  He expressly referred to the fact that, "It is not  enough  to
    be a journalist or a student because not all members  of  these  groups
    are at risk" (paragraph 23), this being based upon what was set out  in
    the case of IM and AI itself.  The Appellant in this case  has  been  a
    student.  The judge also referred to the fact  that  ethnic  or  tribal
    classification also was not in itself necessarily determinative.

15. Moreover, the judge gave express attention to the fact that in  IM  and
    AI, the Upper Tribunal considered (at paragraph 218) how Dr Alizadeh of
    the UNHCR had noted that "failed asylum seekers would not  face  severe
    problems upon return, as long as they are not recognized as a threat to
    the state".  This  was  the  particularly  important  question  on  the
    instant facts of this case.  The judge  had  rejected  the  Appellant's
    claim as one  that  was  "a  fiction"  (paragraph  18).   The  question
    therefore as to whether he posed a threat to the  state  was  decidedly
    against him.

16. The plain fact is that the judge here did refer to the country guidance
    cases.  He did cite the relevant authorities.  He did have them in mind
    during the course of the decision making process that engaged them.

17. He set out the evidence in some detail.   He  noted  specifically  that
    there was an obligation to follow country guidance  cases.   Thereafter
    the reasons that he gave to justify departing from the country guidance
    case was entirely sustainable.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019

