
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13251/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 July 2017                        |On 1 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                     M D
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Francesca Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Zaheed sitting at Hatton Cross on 25  January  2017)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    recognise him as a political refugee.  The First-tier Tribunal made  an
    anonymity direction in favour of the appellant, and I  consider  it  is
    appropriate that this direction be maintained for these proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 8 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy granted the appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

       The first ground of application argues that the Judge unfairly fixed
       the appellant with something he had said in his screening interview.
        The Judge is alleged to have failed to have proper  regard  to  the
       explanation provided for  the  inconsistency  with  the  appellant's
       later account.   I am aware that the Judge does not appear  to  have
       considered the Upper Tribunal's guidance in YL (rely on  SEF)  China
       [2004] UKIAT 00145 and for this reason I find this ground to be made
       out.  The other grounds of application relate to possible evidential
       mistakes made by the Judge.  I find they are all arguable.

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a national of Iran, whose date of birth  is  6  August
    1993.  He claims to have  left  the  United  Kingdom  on  16  May  2016
    concealed in a lorry.  He is recorded as having made an application for
    asylum on the same day at London Road Police Station in Glasgow.

 4. As summarised in the subsequent decision letter, his claim was that  he
    was from Ahwaz in Khuzesgan province, and he was  an  Ahwazi.   He  had
    worked in Iran as a labourer.  His family, including  his  parents  and
    siblings, remained in Iran.  At the end of 2014 he had become a  member
    of the Ahwaz Democratic Algadatmon Party ("ADAP").  His uncles,  J  and
    M, were also members of the Party and J was  in  charge  of  his  local
    group.  He claimed that he distributed leaflets for the Party, and that
    he also took photographs at demonstrations,  including  at  a  football
    match where Arabs were arrested.

 5. On 15 August 2015, his uncle J had been arrested whilst  on  a  mission
    for the group.  He was told of this by his uncle M, who then picked him
    up and took him to the house of a relative.  He remained  there,  while
    the relative, Adnan, went to the town to  see  what  he  happened.   He
    reported back that their homes had been cordoned off by the police.   M
    found out that J had been detained and  tortured,  and  had  given  the
    names of everyone in the group.

 6. The appellant left Adnan's house 10 days later, on 26 October 2015, and
    travelled to Oromia, and then crossed the border  to  Turkey  the  next
    day.  They travelled in Mansur's car (Q&A 101).  They arrived in Turkey
    on 29 August 2015, and remained there for 25-28 days.  After that, they
    had taken a dingy boat and crossed the sea to Greece.  As soon as  they
    arrived there, they were seized by the Greek police.  They arrested  M,
    his cousin Q and the agent.  The appellant and another  person  managed
    to run away.  After a few days, he managed  to  contact  the  agent  in
    Turkey, and he arranged for him to meet a  new  agent  in  Greece.   He
    stayed with this agent for a week, and  then  he  left.   He  was  then
    arrested by the police.  They interviewed him and let him go.  He  made
    contact again with the agent, who took him to a village in a  where  he
    remained for 5 months with other asylum seekers.  He had  not  had  any
    contact with his uncle M until he arrived in the UK, and spoke  to  his
    family.  His parents told him that M was in London.  At the time of the
    appellant's asylum interview,  both  M  and  Q  had  been  accepted  as
    refugees by the UK authorities.

 7. On 15 November 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing the appellant's protection claim.  It was not accepted that he
    was a member of ADAP.  In answers in interview about  the  contents  of
    the leaflets which he said he had distributed, he said  that  he  could
    not read them and did not know what they said.  As he claimed  to  have
    been actively involved in the Party, it was reasonable to expect him to
    know what was said on  the  leaflets  that  he  was  handing  out.   In
    addition, it was noted that when  he  was  asked  questions  about  the
    Party, when it was formed, who was the founder, and what the purpose of
    the Party was, his knowledge was vague and was not such that  would  be
    expected of someone who was an active member of the Party.

 8. It was noted that there were two  Ahwaz  political  parties  which  had
    bases in the UK.  There was the Ahwaz Democratic Popular Front ("ADPF")
    which was formed in 1990, and the Democratic Solidarity Party of  Ahwaz
    ("DSPA").  However, the dates when  this  Party  was  formed,  and  its
    founders, remained unclear.  There were no search results for  a  party
    called ADAP, which he claimed was formed in 2003.

 9. He claimed to have attended events in the UK on behalf of ADAP, but  he
    had not submitted any evidence of this.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Zaheed.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, his uncle M, and his  cousin
    Q.  In his witness statement M said that he was an Ahwazi Arab, and  he
    fled Iran on 28 August 2015 with his cousin's son Q,  and  the  son  of
    another cousin of his, the appellant.  He arrived in the UK on 18 March
    2016 and claimed  asylum.   He  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  on  16
    September 2016.  He confirmed that he was a member of DSPA and that  he
    had been politically active in this  group  since  2005.   In  2014  he
    decided to form a new political cell in Iran.  He first  invited  Q  to
    join him, and then a few months later he invited the appellant  and  J,
    the husband of a cousin, to join the group.  He was the leader  of  the
    cell.  On 15 August 2015, he took Q and  J  to  an  area  in  Ahwaz  to
    distribute leaflets.  He returned to the area about one hour  later  to
    pick them up.  He only saw Q waiting for him there.  He said that  they
    had separated to distribute leaflets, and he  had  not  seen  J  again.
    They waited about 20 minutes, but J did not  come.   He  contacted  the
    appellant to get ready and told him that he would come and pick him up.
     The appellant's place was about 20 minutes away by car.  After picking
    up the appellant, they went to the house  of  his  brother,  who  lived
    nearby.  In the morning, he took the appellant and Q to the place of  a
    relative of his called Adnan.  They stayed  with  Adnan  for  about  10
    days.  They were informed that the Iranian authorities had raided their
    houses looking for them.  They fled Iran for their safety.  He had  got
    separated from the appellant and Q in Greece.

11. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his findings of fact  and
    conclusions in paragraph [16] onwards.  He said that, in  reaching  his
    findings, he had taken into account all the  documents  that  had  been
    submitted and considered  all  the  evidence  that  was  given  at  the
    hearing, including the appellant's Counsel skeleton  argument  and  the
    submissions made by both parties.  He said that he had also taken  into
    account the  background  evidence  and  the  case  law  that  had  been
    mentioned by the parties.  At paragraphs [17]-[25], the Judge gave  his
    reasons for reaching the following conclusion at paragraph [26]:

       Taking all the evidence into  account  and  my  adverse  credibility
       findings against the appellant and his witness, I find to the  lower
       standard of proof, that the  appellant  was  not  a  member  of  any
       political party, that his house was not raided and that he is of  no
       interest to the authorities.  I find that there is no risk on return
       to the appellant, and that he is a purely economic migrant  who  has
       travelled through Western Europe in order to seek a better  life  in
       the UK.  I dismiss this asylum appeal.

The Error of Law Hearing

12. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Clarke developed the grounds of appeal that she had advanced in
    the permission application.  Mr Bramble submitted that no error of  law
    was made out.

Discussion

13. The first ground of appeal relates to paragraphs [17]  and  [18].   The
    Judge contrasted the evidence that the appellant had  given  in  cross-
    examination with what he had said in his  initial  contact  and  asylum
    registration form at 4.1.  In the latter, he  said  that  he  had  been
    arrested by the authorities.  Thereafter, he had maintained that he had
    not been arrested by the authorities.  When this inconsistency was  put
    to the appellant in cross-examination he had stated that  he  meant  he
    escaped and they came to his house and he left  the  country.   He  was
    never arrested, but they raided his house.  The  Judge  said  that  the
    appellant's answer about the authorities  raiding  his  house  did  not
    explain the inconsistency in the initial contact form where  he  stated
    that  the  authorities  arrested  him.   He  found  that  this  was  an
    inconsistency which went to the core  of  his  claim  and  damaged  his
    credibility and his claim.

14. As advanced by Ms Clarke, Ground 1 is that the Judge was wrong to treat
    the inconsistency as going to the core of the appellant's claim, as the
    core of the appellant's claim was that  he  escaped  from  arrest.   Mr
    Clarke did not rely on the case of YL in  the  permission  application,
    and she had not brought along a copy of YL to the  hearing  before  me.
    In YL, the Tribunal said at paragraph 19:

       Whenever a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he  is  usually
       made the subject of a screening interview ...  The purpose  of  that
       is to establish the general nature of the claimant's  case  and  the
       Home Office Official can  decide  how  best  to  process  it.   This
       concerns the Country of Origin; means of  travel,  circumstances  of
       arrival in the United Kingdom, preferred language, and other matters
       that might help the Secretary  of  State  to  understand  the  case.
       Asylum seekers are still expected to  tell  the  truth  and  answers
       given in the  screening  interviews  can  be  compared  fairly  with
       answers given later.  However,  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  a
       screening interview is not done to establish in detail the reasons a
       person gives support to a claim for asylum.  It would  not  normally
       be appropriate for the  Secretary  of  State  to  ask  supplementary
       questions or to  entertain  elaborate  answers,  and  an  inaccurate
       summary by an interviewing officer at that stage would be excusable.
        Further, the screening interview may well  be  conducted  when  the
       asylum seeker is tired after a long journey.  These things  have  to
       be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies  between  the   screening
       interview and the later case are evaluated.

15. The case advanced in the permission application was not that the  Judge
    was  precluded  from  comparing  the  answer  given  in  the  screening
    interview with the case  later  put  forward  by  the  appellant.   The
    complaint is a more subtle one: it is that the Judge  allegedly  failed
    to recognise that  the  appellant  had  been  consistent  -  since  the
    screening interview - in maintaining that he  had  escaped  arrest,  as
    distinct from being arrested, and then escaping.   However,  the  Judge
    acknowledges this fact at paragraph [18], where he makes  reference  to
    "his evidence before me and throughout the rest of his  claim  that  he
    was never arrested."

16. In the same screening interview, the  appellant  gave  a  detailed  and
    lucid account of his journey to the UK, and he said that his health was
    good.  So it was not unfair of the Judge to compare the answer which he
    gave in his screening interview with the case which the  appellant  put
    forward later, notwithstanding the fact that the  appellant  first  put
    forward the new case by letter dated 20 July 2016 from  his  solicitors
    who said that their client had identified a number of mistakes  in  his
    screening interview, including at question 4.1, where  they  said  that
    their client wished to clarify that he had stated  that  he  was  never
    arrested in Iran, but that his cell-mate J was  arrested  and  that  he
    fled as a result.

17. Ground 2 relates to paragraphs [19] and [20] of the decision, where the
    Judge contrasted  the  evidence  given  orally  about  the  appellant's
    knowledge of the contents of the leaflets as against what he  had  said
    on this topic in his asylum interview.  The Judge found that there  was
    a clear discrepancy between the appellant in his asylum interview being
    unable to state the contents of the leaflets on the ground that he  was
    unable to read or write Arabic, whereas in his oral  evidence  he  said
    that he was aware of the contents of the leaflets,  as  his  supervisor
    (his uncle M) had told him the contents.

18. The Judge noted that M had given oral evidence that the  appellant  did
    not know the contents of the leaflets, and so  M's  oral  evidence  was
    inconsistent with the oral evidence of the appellant on this topic, and
    he found that such inconsistencies damages both the credibility of  the
    appellant and his uncle.

19. The argument put forward by Ms Clarke is that the Judge was perverse in
    finding that there was an  inconsistency,  in  the  light  of  Q&A  85.
    Having reviewed Q&A 85, I can see nothing perverse in the Judge's  line
    of  reasoning.   On  the  contrary,  the  plain  implication   of   the
    appellant's answer in interview to the question which he  is  asked  is
    that he does not know the contents of the leaflets  because  he  cannot
    read or write Arabic.  If it  were  true  that  their  Arabic  language
    contents had been explained to him by his  uncle,  then  there  was  no
    reason why he could  not  volunteer  this  information  at  the  asylum
    interview.

20. In short, it was not perverse of the Judge to find that the appellant's
    evidence was internally inconsistent, and also  inconsistent  with  the
    oral evidence given by his uncle.

21. Ground 3 relates to paragraph [23], where the Judge noted (and said  it
    was confirmed by the appellant's Counsel in her submissions) that M and
    Q were granted status in Greece. He held that the appellant could have,
    and should have, applied for asylum in Greece, as had M and Q with whom
    he claimed to have travelled.  He did not find it credible that  a  22-
    year-old who was travelling  with  his  uncle  and  cousin  would  have
    separated from them because he was under the control of an  agent.   He
    found that such behaviour engaged section 8 of the Asylum & Immigration
    (Treatment of claims etc) Act 2004.

22. Ms Clarke did not produce her note of  proceedings,  and  there  is  no
    record of the proceedings in my file.  But since both M and Q have been
    granted asylum status  in  the  UK,  it  is  unlikely  that  they  were
    previously granted asylum in Greece.   So,  I  accept  that  the  Judge
    appears to have misunderstood the evidence and/or a submission made  by
    Ms Clarke on this issue.  However, I do not consider that  the  Judge's
    mistake had  a  material  bearing  on  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's behaviour in Greece engaged section 8 of the 2004 Act.   He
    had the opportunity to claim asylum when, on his own  account,  he  was
    arrested by the Greek Police.  Moreover, if he was able to contact  the
    agent in Turkey for  further  instructions,  so  could  his  uncle  and
    cousin.  So, even if there was a temporary  separation,  they  had  the
    means to link up again, either through direct contact between  them  on
    their respective mobile telephones or through using the agent in Turkey
    as a common contact point. So the error is not material.

23. Ground 4 is that the Judge failed to make a finding on  the  supporting
    evidence of Q. Although not cited to me, I have had regard  to  Muse  &
    Others v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10  on  challenges  to
    the adequacy of a judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District  Council  v
    Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court  of  Appeal
    at paragraph 33, Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

24. In the light of this guidance, the Judge was no  obliged  to  refer  to
    every piece of evidence when making his findings.  He  acknowledged  at
    paragraph [15] that Q had given evidence in support of the  appellant's
    account.  Q gave the same evidence as M, but M was the lead witness, as
    he was the leader of the cell.  It is implicit in the Judge's  findings
    that he rejected Q's evidence insofar as he echoed  the  claim  of  his
    uncle M that the appellant had been a fellow member of the cell.  Q was
    not an independent witness. He was a relative  of  the  appellant  who,
    like his uncle M, had a motive to misrepresent the truth  in  order  to
    assist a relative in acquiring status  in  the  UK.   Accordingly,  the
    failure by the Judge to make an express finding on the probative  value
    of Q's evidence does not constitute an error of law.

25. Ground 5 relates to paragraph [24],  where  the  Judge  said  that  the
    photographs of the appellant with his uncle M and other members of  the
    DSPA and letters confirming that he was a member of the DSPA, had  been
    submitted to bolster his asylum claim.  The Judge  also  observed  that
    there were no photographs of the appellant  attending  any  marches  or
    demonstrations, as had been claimed in the letters.

26. Ms Clarke argued in the permission application that,  given  the  time-
    line, the finding that  the  photographs  were  taken  to  bolster  the
    appellant's claim was clearly  wrong.   In  her  oral  submissions,  Ms
    Clarke confirmed that there had been no marches or  demonstrations,  as
    none had been arranged.  She also confirmed that  the  photographs  had
    been taken after the appellant's arrival in the UK.  On these facts, it
    was open to the Judge to find that the photographs  were  self-serving,
    and that they did not constitute reliable  evidence  of  the  appellant
    being a genuine and committed activist for the DSPA.

27. Ground 6 relates to paragraph [25] where the Judge  observed  that  the
    appellant could not even name the political organisation he belonged to
    in his initial contact and asylum registration form,  stating  that  it
    was called the 'Al-Ahwaz Party'.  Although he had seen  a  letter  from
    the appellant's solicitors dated 20 July 2016 seeking  to  rectify  the
    name of the Party, he did not accept that the appellant had  given  the
    original version of the name in error because he did not understand the
    Interpreter.

28. The clarification given in the letter of 20  July  2016  was  that  the
    Party referred to at Q5.5 was the Democratic Solidarity  Party  of  Al-
    Ahwaz (DSPA).  Even if the appellant misunderstood the Interpreter,  it
    was reasonable to expect the appellant to know the name of the Party of
    which he claimed to be an activist.  So, the fact that he did not  give
    the Party its full name, whether DSPA or ADAP, was  reasonably  treated
    by the Judge as undermining his general credibility.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date  29 July 2017


Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

