
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13276/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 13th June 2019 On 7th August 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    MRS J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal to the Upper
       Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin. In a
       decision promulgated on 7th March 2019 the judge dismissed her appeal
       against the respondent's refusal to grant her protection and found no
       breach of a protected human rights.

    2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in January 1993. She
       made a claim for protection on 14 August 2018. She arrived in the
       United Kingdom on 28 April 2015 along with her husband and their
       child. That child was born in May 2016 and whilst in the United
       Kingdom she gave birth to their second child in July 2018. Her
       husband firstly made a claim for protection, with the appellant and
       his child as his dependents. That claim was rejected and he became
       appeal rights exhausted on 15 January 2018.

    3. His claim related to difficulties experienced as a Hindu in Kabul,
       Afghanistan. In the present claim the roles are reversed with the
       appellant basing her claim upon difficulties she has experienced as a
       Hindu with her husband and the fact they now have two children.

    4. In her claim she said she had been living in Kabul with her family
       and then travelled to Russia where she married her husband in January
       2015. He ran into difficulties there and they then moved to the
       United Kingdom. Subsequently, his brother arrived here directly from
       Afghanistan and he was granted protection on appeal. His claim also
       related to the difficulties for Hindus in Afghanistan.

    5. This appellant's claim was refused by the respondent in November
       2018. It was accepted she was from Afghanistan and that she followed
       the Hindu religion. The respondent applied the decision of Ocampo -v-
       SSHD [2006] in which the Court of Appeal applied the guidelines given
       in D -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702. The case held the Devaseelan
       guidelines are relevant where the parties involved are not the same
       but there is a material overlap of evidence.

    6. Judge McCall heard her husband's appeal during which the position of
       this appellant was considered. Reference was made to the country
       guidance of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG
       [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC). The guidance was that that Hindu communities
       in Afghanistan per se do not face a real risk of persecution. Whether
       an individual Hindu was at risk real of persecution upon return was
       fact-sensitive. All the relevant circumstances had to be considered.
       Women are particularly vulnerable in the absence of appropriate
       protection from a male.

    7. Judge McCall referring to this appellant and concluded she did not
       come within the single women category in the guidance because she was
       married. Her statement had not referred to any attacks she personally
       experienced in Afghanistan. The judge found that the family network
       was larger than claimed and they could provide support, including
       finance to pay for the education of the children.

    8. In line with this decision the respondent rejected this appellant's
       claim that she could not leave her home or that her children could
       not receive education and there would be an absence of State
       protection. The respondent noted that during her asylum interview she
       made reference to being threatened and abused when she was 14 of 15
       years of age but there was no evidence of difficulties subsequent.
       The respondent accepted she had experienced harassment but not to the
       level of persecution.



The First tier Tribunal

    9. This appellant's appeal was heard in Manchester on 20 December 2018.
       She was represented by Ms Patel, as she is now. The judge referred to
       the details of her husband's claim as set out in the First-tier
       Tribunal determination. The judge requested a copy of the decision in
       the successful appeal of the individual said to be her husband's
       brother. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant
       Hutchinson in Glasgow. It post-dated the decision of Judge McCall in
       her husband's appeal.

   10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin referred to the two country guidance
       cases of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG
       [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC) and AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG
       [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC). The latter county guidance case concerned
       relocation to Kabul. This appellant originated in Kabul so would not
       be relocating there. The decision was relevant in relation to its
       findings on conditions there. The Upper Tribunal had stated the
       security and humanitarian situation in Kabul was not dissimilar to
       conditions throughout Afghanistan. It was not in general unduly harsh
       for a single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul but the
       particular circumstances of an individual applicant had to be taken
       into account.  A person with a support network or specific
       connections in Kabul was likely to be in a more advantageous position
       on return and this support may counter any particular vulnerability.
       Although the number of security incidents was increasing, the
       proportion of the population directly affected was is tiny. The
       security situation in Kabul was not at such a level as to render
       internal relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.

   11. The judge then referred to the principles set out in Ocampo -v- SSHD
       [2006] and made findings. The judge analysed in detail potential
       differences between her husband's appeal and the appellant's appeal.

   12. The decision in her husband's case was taken as a starting point.
       Judge McCall did not find his claim that his sister had been abducted
       credible. The judge also rejected the evidence that they had married
       in Moscow and lived there from 2012 to 2015 or that he had trouble
       with the Russian Mafia. Judge Devlin commented on this appellant's
       failure to obtain further evidence to call into question these
       findings. The judge considered facts personal to the appellant not
       brought to the attention of the first Tribunal.

   13. The judge then commented in detail about the successful appeal said
       to relate to her husband's brother. The judge questioned the claimed
       relationship. The judge considered whether in fairness the appeal
       should have been adjourned as requested by Counsel to enable the
       appellant's representatives to obtain further proofs. However, the
       judge concluded there had been ample opportunity to address this. In
       the alternative, the finding in his appeal was that he had no family
       in Afghanistan. It did not follow that this appellant had no family
       there.

   14. The judge then went on to consider at paragraph 88 onwards the
       position of the appellant's child, [S], who has speech problems.

   15. At paragraph 103 onwards the judge expressed difficulty with the
       appellant's claim that she and her husband were practising Hindus.
       Whilst the previous judge had made no finding on this there was a
       reference to the absence of evidence of their attending services.

   16. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible and gave a number
       of reasons as set out at paragraph 140 onwards. The judge concluded
       by accepting the appellant and her husband were Afghan nationals and
       of the Hindu faith but otherwise rejected the claim. At paragraph 165
       the judge goes on to detail the country guidance cases and seeks to
       apply them. The judge's conclusions are set out at paragraphs 256
       onwards.



The Upper Tribunal

   17. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
       the judge assessed the appellant's credibility from a westernised
       viewpoint. Furthermore, it was arguable the judge had not considered
       the position of the appellant's youngest child.

   18. In opening Miss Patel advised that the appellant's brother-in-law
       came directly from Afghanistan in October 2017; the appellant and her
       husband already being here. His appeal was heard in 2018, which post-
       dated the decision of Judge McCall in her husband's appeal. She also
       said that the diagnosis of the eldest child speech problems also post
       stated that decision and the youngest child had not been born. Judge
       McCall did not consider the question of children's education.

   19. Ms Patel argued that the judge erred in law in how he treated the
       evidence relating to the appellant's brother-in-law. This is referred
       to paragraph 64 where the judge quotes extracts from the decision of
       Judge Grant Hutchinson. Judge Devlin questioned whether the blood
       relationship had been demonstrated. At that point in the hearing Ms
       Patel requested an adjournment so DNA evidence could be obtained. The
       judge refused to adjourn in that there had been adequate time for the
       direction of the necessary proofs. The judge also commented that the
       relationship did not have to be established by DNA evidence but the
       individual concerned could have attended or at least provide an
       affidavit. Ms Patel argued that short of DNA evidence the court would
       have been likely to reject the evidence of a witness simply saying
       they were related. In the alternative, the judge questioned if he was
       her brother in law how his claim was relevant to her appeal. Miss
       Patel makes the point that Judge Grant Hutchison had found that her
       brother-in-law (and therefore her husband) had no family in
       Afghanistan to turn to for support. Consequently, this was relevant.
       Judge Devlin had made the point that if her husband had no family
       this still did not mean she was without family. However, Ms Patel
       submitted that in the Hindu culture when she married her husband's
       family became hers.

   20. I was referred to paragraph 78. Ms Patel submitted that the judge the
       made a mistake of fact. The judge referred to the brother-in-law's
       wife and made the point that if she had no family like her husband
       that was not relevant to the situation of this appellant unless they
       were sisters.

   21. She then referred me to the judge's conclusion that the appellant had
       not established she and her husband practiced their faith regularly.
       The judge had referred to an out of date letter from the Manchester
       Temple of 24 August 2015. However, there was a much later letter
       dated 24 July 2017 referred to in her husband's appeal. Furthermore,
       at the appellant's substantive interview she said she attended the
       Temple several times a week(Q99).

   22. Ms Patel then moved on to her next point, suggesting that the judge
       did not take her husband's earlier decision as a starting point but
       in effect treated it as conclusive. She referred to the additional
       evidence in this appellant's appeal; the decision in her brother-in-
       law's appeal and the speech issue of the eldest child and the birth
       of a second child.

   23. A further ground advanced was that the judge did not follow the
       country guidance decision of TG and others. She acknowledged that at
       paragraph 165 onwards the judge considers the country guidance
       decision. She argued that he failed to take into account the length
       of time she and the family had now been in the United Kingdom and the
       ongoing deterioration in the position of Hindus. She submitted this
       then linked into the question of education for the children and
       whether the family would have sufficient resources to pay for them.

   24. She also argued the judge did not adequately deal with the
       difficulties she would face going outside in Kabul and attempting to
       practice her religious beliefs. She acknowledged the judge did
       consider these matters but he concluded her treatment was no
       different from that of any other female. She submitted this was not
       the proper approach. She submitted that the appellant was being
       required to hide her true religious feelings by dressing and
       conducting herself as if she were a Muslim woman which was contrary
       to the HJ Iran principle.

   25. She also argued that the treatment the children would receive on
       return would be unjustifiably harsh. She submitted the judge did not
       engage with this, for instance, in relation to their education.

   26. In response, Mr Bates dealt with the appellant's claimed brother-in-
       law. His point was that it was for the appellant to establish her
       claim. What there was about the relationship amounted to a simple
       assertion. The judge at paragraph 68 had noted that there was a
       difference between the two names and he had not been provided with
       any country expert report to explain naming traditions. Paragraph 69
       records the presenting officer had raised this point, highlighting
       the fact the appellant had not produced any independent evidence to
       show the connection. There was nothing in the decision of First-tier
       Judge Grant Hutchinson to make the connection. Mr Bates makes the
       point that DNA evidence was not necessary. Other evidence could have
       been received, for instance, documents from Afghanistan or
       photographs and so forth to show the two together as to demonstrate
       the relationship. Ms Patel had suggested that had an individual
       simply provided a statement and said they were related it was likely
       the respondent would have rejected this. However, the matter was
       being adjudicated by the judge and oral evidence from the individual
       could have been received. Given her argument that such evidence is
       not readily acceptable and it was all the more reason for the
       appellant's representatives to have obtained DNA evidence in
       anticipation of the hearing.

   27. Mr Bates then went on to point out that the judge considered the
       position in the alternative: that he was fact the brother of the
       appellant. The significance of this related to the statement he had
       no family support. Mr Bates suggested Ms Patel is wrong in saying the
       judge erred in fact when referring to her brother-in-law's sister.
       The point being made by the judge was that the finding by First-tier
       Grant Hutchinson that his wife had no family still did not exclude
       this appellant having family. The only way it could was if there was
       a connection established with her family, by her brother-in-law's
       wife being her sister.

   28. Regarding the suggestion that the judge did not follow the country
       guidance decision of TG and others and applied Devaseelan as an
       endpoint rather than starting point. I was referred to the decision
       were the judge specifically said Devaseelan is the starting point.
       The judge then went on to see what evidence beyond that. The judge
       went through the background evidence provided. TG and others did not
       find all Sikhs and Hindus were at risk in Afghanistan.

   29. It had been suggested that the situation had deteriorated since
       country guidance case. Mr Bates said the judge carefully considered
       this at paragraphs 179 onwards and at paragraph 184.The judge
       considered the UNHCR guidelines at paragraph 191. I was referred to
       paragraph 195 of the decision where the judge, having quoted from the
       guidelines, goes on to state that notably they did not make a
       recommendation that protection should be afforded to all Hindus. At
       para 218 the judge had made the point that much of the background
       evidence produced related to Sikhs and he could not necessarily
       transfer that over to the situation of Hindus.

   30. Regarding the appellant's practice of her faith, the judge had
       commented that she claimed it was a 10 minutes' walk to the temple
       yet she was unable to provide any details in relation to the journey.
       The account then change to the temple being simply behind the house.
       The judge had referred to the outdated letter from the temple. Ms
       Patel had relied upon a more up-to-date letter contained in her
       husband's determination. However, the judge had to make a
       determination on the practice of her religion as at the time of
       hearing in 2018. Again, he made the point the burden of proof is upon
       the appellant. The judge went into detail about the appellant's
       ability to practice her religion. At paragraph 101 the judge referred
       to not being satisfied that her son had any significant speech or
       development problems or that treatment would not be available in
       Afghanistan or that his education would thereby be compromised.

   31. Mr Bates emphasised the length of the judge's decision because of all
       the different issues considered in detail.

   32. In response, Ms Patel said that the situation of Sikhs and Hindus
       have always been considered together. They are both minority
       communities in Afghanistan who have experienced difficulties. She
       said that they are associated together, for instance, by sharing the
       same Temples. Regarding the comments by the judge about the brother
       in law's wife, she submitted the judge was speculating in raising the
       possibility of them being sisters. Whilst the judge did not have the
       updated information from the Temple referred to in the decision of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge McCall if that earlier decision that it was
       incumbent upon the judge who also have regard to the evidence led in
       that decision.



Conclusions

   33. It is clear from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin
       that he has taken exceptional care in the preparation of the reasons.
       It does the decision an injustice to simply refer to its length. The
       decision is not simply padded out by extensive recording from case
       law but is a careful analysis of the nuances involved.

   34. This was a difficult appeal for any judge because it called for a
       consideration not only of the claim being made but also the evidence
       in relation to the overlapping decision in an appeal by her husband.
       Furthermore, agility was required because an additional appeal
       decision introduced said to relate to the appellant's brother-in-law.
       The judge had to evaluate the appellant's claim and compare and
       contrast that with the evidence in the earlier appeals. Then the
       judge had to look for any distinguishing features in the claim and
       evidence.

   35. The decision of first-tier Tribunal judge McCall was concerned with
       the claim made by the appellant's husband. His credibility was an
       issue. The judge then heard from the present appellant. The reasons
       given by the judge are detailed. The judge referred to the absence of
       evidence about her husband's time in Moscow and particularly referred
       to the absence of any evidence from the temple in Moscow to confirm
       his presence. At paragraph 36 of that decision the judge refers to
       this appellant claiming to have lost contact with her family and to
       have no support mechanism. The judge commented on discrepancies
       between what this appellant said and what her husband said at
       screening.

   36. Miss Patel has made a number of points seeking to challenge the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin. She has argued that the
       judge did not apply the previous decision as the starting point but
       based his conclusions upon it. I find this is clearly unsustainable.
       The judge has carefully set out the practice to be followed where
       there are related decisions at paragraphs 36 onwards. A number of
       features have been advanced distinguishing the appellant's claim from
       that of her husband. There has been, for instance, the evidence about
       the brother-in-law. The presence of a second child has to be
       considered. The judge in applying the Devaseelan guidelines clearly
       went through what had been considered and what potentially was
       different. The judge has been most careful in setting out the various
       features considered as can be seen at paragraph 53 through to 62. In
       summary therefore, I find no error established on this point.

   37. The next issue in contention related to how the decision in the claim
       the brother-in-law's appeal was dealt with. Again, the judge has been
       most careful in dealing with this issue. This is set out at paragraph
       63 through to paragraph 87. There was no unfairness in the judge
       refusing an adjournment. The burden of proof is upon the appellant
       and her representatives should have known what the relevant proofs
       were. If they were relying upon a decision relating to a third party
       then clearly the proofs should have included establishing a nexus. As
       was pointed out, this did not necessarily need to be by way of a DNA
       test. In the circumstance, the judge was perfectly entitled to refuse
       an application made in the course of the hearing when the point was
       pursued in cross-examination.

   38. Furthermore, the judge went on to consider the position in the
       alternative. Ms Patel has suggested the judge became muddled in doing
       so and engage in speculation in relation to a possible sister. Miss
       Patel has not followed the point the judge has made. Essentially,
       even if this person were related to the appellant through marriage
       then his claim to have no family support did not mean she had no
       family. The reference to this person and his wife having no family
       support would only be relevant if his wife were related to the
       appellant. Whatever may be the cultural practices Ms Patel referred
       to, by marrying her husband the appellant did not lose her own family
       and their potential for support.

   39. I fail to see how it can be suggested the judge did not apply the
       country guidance cases. The judge has clearly had regard to them and
       also to country information subsequent. Again, this is set out in
       considerable detail in the decision. In determining the appeal it is
       clear the judge is focusing upon the appellant's personal
       circumstances and the individual features in the appeal. This is
       precisely the guidance given. Whilst Sikhs and Hindus clearly
       experience discrimination in Afghanistan it does not follow that this
       reaches the level of persecutory treatment for all Sikhs and Hindus.

   40. The judge had regard to the appellant's ability to practice her
       religious beliefs. Relevant to this was the fervour with which she
       embraced her beliefs. Again, it was for the appellant to demonstrate
       this. The judge had given clear reasons for concluding she had not
       demonstrated she practised her religion, either in Afghanistan or
       Russia (see para 103). The judge confirms an awareness that there is
       no requirement for corroboration. However judge is entitled to have
       regard to evidence which might reasonably be produced to support the
       claim. The judge assessed answers and found them inadequate. It is
       unreasonable therefore to criticise the judge in relation to a letter
       produced in the earlier appeal decision of her husband's and referred
       to obliquely.

   41. The final grounds advanced related to paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) and
       the reasonableness of the appellants ability to reintegrate. She has
       spent her lifetime Afghanistan so will a full appreciation of the
       culture. To suggest reintegration is not possible because of how she
       would be treated in the country is really repeating the protection
       claim.

   42. In summary, I find no material error of law in this decision
       established. As stated the judge has been most careful in his
       analysis of the evidence. I find no fault with how the judge dealt
       with the appellant's claim or how he considered the best interests of
       the children. The issue is not whether I would have taken a different
       view of a matter but whether there is a material error. I see nothing
       in the other points raised which detract from the outcome.



Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Devlin. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.   Date 1 August 2019
