
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13325/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2018                         |On 5th February 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr. A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  KS is granted anonymity
      throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to
      the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge Parker promulgated on 9th August 2018, dismissing the
      appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.


   3. The appellant is a Nigerian national.  On 17th February 2016, the
      appellant was granted a visit visa and she arrived in the UK in March
      2016.  She remained in the UK unlawfully when her visit visa expired.
      Her daughter was born in the UK on 10th June 2016.  On 5th June 2017,
      the appellant claimed asylum.    The background to that claim is set
      out at paragraphs [10] to [13] of the decision of the FtT Judge.


   4. The FtT Judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness.
      The FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account that her sister-in-law
      had telephoned the appellant and said that the family will force her
      daughter to undergo FGM on return to Nigeria.  The Judge did not find
      it credible that the appellant did not know whether her niece has
      undergone FGM, or that the appellant knew very little about her ex-
      partner's work or the occupations of other members of his family.  The
      Judge noted that the appellant and her sisters have not been subjected
      to FGM and the appellant's evidence that "it is against the tradition
      of her Yoruba tribe.".  The Judge also noted the evidence of the
      appellant that her family are against FGM.


   5. At paragraphs [43] to [58] of the decision, the FtT Judge considered
      the Article 8 rights of the appellant and her daughter.  He found that
      the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)
      of the Immigration Rules and that there are no exceptional
      circumstances which might warrant the grant of leave to remain outside
      the requirements of the immigration rules.


   6. The appellant's grounds of appeal are set out in grounds of appeal
      settled by KS and dated 16th August 2018.  The appellant makes a
      number of criticisms of the decision of the FtT Judge.  The appellant
      claims that the FtT Judge failed to take account of the fact that the
      interview record relied upon by the respondent was inaccurate. The
      appellant also claims that the FtT Judge erred in coming to the
      conclusion that the appellant and her daughter would not be at risk
      upon return to Nigeria.  The appellant maintains that the risk of her
      daughter being circumcised when she returns is "extremely high", and
      that the appellant herself "might be subjected to honour killing,
      which is rampant all over the world.".  It is said that the Tribunal
      failed to recognise the fact that the appellant and her daughter face
      a severe risk of persecution if returned to Nigeria.  The appellant
      claims that the FtT Judge failed to have regard to the best interests
      of the appellant's daughter, and that the appellant's daughter is at
      imminent risk of being subjected to emotional torture and FGM.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Andrew on 5th September
      2018.  She noted:


         "I have considered very carefully the lengthy grounds.  I find that
         there is an arguable error of law solely because the Judge did not
         consider the child's best interests when coming to his decision.
         The other grounds are nothing more than a disagreement with the
         findings of the Judge, findings open to him on the evidence.  It is
         clear that the Judge found that the Appellant was not credible in
         her claims and that he was entitled to do so."


The hearing of the appeal before me


   8. As the appellant is a litigant in person, I explained to her at the
      outset that I had carefully read the decision of FtT Judge Parker and
      her grounds of appeal.  I explained to the appellant that the hearing
      before me is not a re-hearing of her appeal, and that I would first
      consider whether there is a material error of law in the decision of
      the FtT Judge affecting the outcome of her appeal.  I explained to the
      appellant that if I find there to be an error of law in the decision
      of the FtT Judge, I would go on to remake the decision.


   9. The appellant submitted that the FtT Judge did not consider the best
      interests of the appellant's daughter and the Judge erred in his
      decision by rejecting the claim that the appellant's daughter is at
      risk of FGM. The Judge failed to consider what impact FGM would have
      upon the appellant's daughter and the need to protect her from being
      subjected to FGM.  The appellant submits that the Judge did not have
      proper regard to the immigration history of the appellant, and did not
      have sufficient regard to the fact that the appellant had visited the
      United Kingdom on a number of occasions in the past, and always
      returned to Nigeria after a short stay. The appellant submits that
      there was no need for her to remain in the United Kingdom on this
      occasion, and that if she had not received a call from her sister-in-
      law, informing her that her daughter would be subjected to FGM, she
      would not have remained and claimed asylum. The appellant stressed
      that she had a good life in Nigeria, with a good job, and that she
      wishes to protect her child. The appellant submitted that although FGM
      is unlawful in Nigeria, the authorities fail to prosecute, and the
      appellant could not live elsewhere in Nigeria. The appellant submits
      that FGM is carried out by the Yoruba tribe, and the Judge was wrong
      to note at paragraph [22] of the decision, that FGM is against the
      tradition of the Yoruba tribe.


  10. In reply, Mr Tan relied upon the rule 24 response filed by the
      respondent and dated 10th October 2018.  He accepts that the FtT Judge
      does not appear to have had regard to the duty under s55 Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, but submits that is immaterial
      to the outcome of the appeal.  He submits that the appellant's
      daughter is only two years old. The appellant has only been in UK
      since 2016 and both the applicant and her daughter are Nigerian
      nationals. It is trite law that the best interests of a child is to be
      with his or her parents; in this case with her mother. He submits that
      a proper consideration of the best interests of the child as a primary
      consideration can only point in one direction.  On the findings made
      by the Judge, the best interests of the child are served by her
      remaining in the care of her mother and returning to Nigeria with her
      mother.


Discussion


  11. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in
      Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."


  12. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


         "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal is determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  makes  sense,
         having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


  13. It is in that context that I have considered the grounds of appeal and
      the submissions that have been advanced by the appellant.  The core of
      the appellant's account was not particularly complex. It is set out at
      paragraphs [10] to [11] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  The
      assessment of risk upon return and credibility, is always a highly
      fact sensitive task.  The FtT Judge did not find the appellant to be a
      credible witness and rejected her account of events.  It was for the
      Judge to consider the ingredients of the story, and the story as a
      whole, by reference to all the evidence available to the Tribunal.  It
      was for the Tribunal to make its own findings on whether, and to what
      extent, the appellant's account is credible.  Here, the FtT Judge
      considered the evidence relied upon by the appellant, including the
      affidavits from the appellant's sister-in-law and from her ex-
      partner's family.  It was for the Tribunal to make its own findings on
      whether, and to what extent, the appellant's account is credible. In
      my judgement the FtT Judge carefully weighed up the evidence, made an
      adverse credibility finding and rejected the appellant's account of
      events.


  14. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,
      "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate
      reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give
      reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which the
      Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.
      Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every
      argument or every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal
      has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on
      which the argument could properly have been rejected, it should be
      assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient
      that the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.  The Court of
      Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for error of law on
      the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable in the
      Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.
      A finding that is "perverse" embraces findings that are irrational or
      unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact that are
      wholly unsupported by the evidence.


  15. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Andrew upon the sole
      ground that there is an arguable error of law because the Judge did
      not consider the child's best interests when coming to his decision.
      Mr Tan accepts, rightly in my judgement, that there is no reference to
      s55 and the best interests of the applicant's daughter in the
      decision.  The issue for me is whether that is material to the outcome
      of the appeal.


  16. Th FtT Judge gave reasons why he did not accept that the appellant's
      daughter would be at risk of FGM if returned to Nigeria.  In the
      alternative, the Judge went on to consider whether there is a
      sufficiency of protection available to the appellant.  Furthermore,
      the Judge also considered whether it is in any event, reasonable to
      expect the appellant to relocate and whether it would be unduly harsh
      to expect her to do so.  For the reasons set out at paragraphs [36] to
      [38] of the decision, the FtT Judge found that there is sufficiency of
      protection available to the appellant and that it would not be unduly
      harsh to expect the appellant and her daughter to relocate.


  17. There is now a body of case law addressing the significance of the
      best interests of children affected by a decision of this nature.  I
      take into account the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)
      -v- SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  Lady Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC:
      which states that "in all actions concerning children, whether
      undertaken by ... courts of law, administrative authorities or
      legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
      consideration." Article 3 is now embodied in s55 of 2009 Act which
      provides that, in relation, among other things, to immigration, asylum
      or nationality, the Secretary of State must make arrangements for
      ensuring that those functions are discharged having regard to the need
      to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the United
      Kingdom.


  18.  In  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
      appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal in considering  the
      case law in relation to decisions affecting children stated;


         "13. It is not the case that the  best  interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:


             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.


             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.


             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.


             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.


             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well being of society amply justifies removal in such
             cases."


  19. In EV (Philippines) and Others  v  SSHD   [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  the
      appellants were a family from the Philippines  whose  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  had  been  rejected.
      The FtT found that, although it was in the children's  best  interests
      to continue their education in the UK, removal would be  proportionate
      to the legitimate aim  of  immigration  control.  The  Upper  Tribunal
      upheld that decision. The Court of Appeal, in dismissing the  family's
      appeal,  issued  guidance  on  how  tribunals  were  to  approach  the
      proportionality  exercise  where  it  had  concluded  that  continuing
      education in the UK would be in the best interests of the children:


         "32. There is a danger in this field of moving  from  looseness  of
         terms to semantics.  At the same time there could  be said  to be a
         tension  between (a) treating the best interests of the child  as a
         primary  consideration  which  could   be  outweighed   by   others
         provided that  no other  consideration was treated   as  inherently
         more  significant; and  (b)  treating the  child's   best interests
          as a consideration which  must   rank   higher  than   any   other
         which  could   nevertheless  be  outweighed  by  others.     It  is
         material, however, to note that Lord Kerr, as he made   clear,  was
         dealing  with a case of children who  were  British  citizens   and
          where   there  were  very  powerful other factors - see [41] below
         -in favour of not removing them ('the best interests of  the  child
         clearly favour a certain course'/ 'the  outcome of  cases  such  as
         the present').   He also agreed with the  judgment  of  Lady  Hale.
         In those circumstance we should, in my judgment, be guided  by  the
         formulation which she adopted.


         33.  More important for present  purposes  is  to  know   how   the
         tribunal should approach the  proportionality exercise  if it   has
         determined that  the  best interests of the child  or children  are
         that  they  should  continue  with   their  education  in  England.
         Whether or not it is in the  interests of a child  to continue  his
            or    her    education   in    England  may    depend   on  what
         assumptions one makes as to what  happens to the  parents.    There
         can be cases where it is in the child's  best interests  to  remain
         in education in the UK, even though one or  both  parents  did  not
         remain  here.  In the present case,  however, I  take   the   FTT's
         finding   to  be  that  it  was  in  the   best  interests  of  the
         children to continue their education in England with  both  parents
         living here.  That assumes that both parents  are  here.   But  the
         best interests of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to
         the child alone without reference to the  immigration  history   or
         status of either  parent.


         34.  In determining whether or not, in a case such  as the present,
         the need  for immigration control  outweighs the best interests  of
         the children, it is necessary  to determine the relative   strength
         of the factors which  make it in their  best  interests  to  remain
         here; and  also to take account  of  any  factors  that  point  the
         other way.


         35.  A decision as to what  is in the best  interests  of  children
         will depend on a number  of factors  such  as (a) their   age;  (b)
         the  length of time that  they have been  here; (c) how long   they
         have been  in  education;  (c)  what   stage  their  education  has
         reached;    (d)  to  what   extent   they   have   become distanced
         from  the  country to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return;
         (e) how  renewable their connection with it may  be;  (f)  to  what
         extent  they will have linguistic, medical  or other   difficulties
         in adapting to life in that  country;  and   (g)  the   extent   to
         which  the  course  proposed will   interfere  with   their  family
         life or their rights  (if they have any) as British citizens.


         36.  In a sense the tribunal is concerned with   how   emphatic  an
         answer falls to be given  to the  question:  is  it  in  the   best
         interests of the child to remain? The longer  the  child  has  been
           here,   the   more  advanced  (or  critical)  the  stage  of  his
         education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,  and
         the more  deleterious the consequences of his return,  the  greater
         the weight that falls into one side   of  the  scales.   If  it  is
         overwhelmingly in the child's best interests  that  he  should  not
         return, the need to maintain immigration control may well  not  tip
         the balance.   By contrast if it is in the child's  best  interests
         to remain, but  only  on balance  (with   some   factors   pointing
         the other  way), the result may be the opposite.


         37.  In the balance on the  other  side  there  falls  to  be taken
          into  account  the strong weight  to be given   to  the  need   to
         maintain immigration control in pursuit  of  the   economic   well-
         being of the  country  and   the  fact   that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
         applicants have  no entitlement to remain.  The immigration history
         of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if they  are  overstayers,
         or have acted deceitfully."


  20. Although the applicant's daughter was born in the UK, she is a
      Nigerian national and there can be no doubt that as a two-year old,
      her best interests are met by remaining with her mother.  Indeed, I
      cannot see that any evidence was put before the FtT Judge to suggest
      otherwise.    Where the appellant is expected to be, is plainly
      relevant.  Absent evidence to the contrary, it will normally be
      reasonable for a child, to be with his or her parents.  Here, the
      appellant is the primary carer of her daughter, and there is nothing
      in the evidence to suggest that the best interests of the appellant's
      daughter are served by anything other than remaining with her mother.


  21. The appellant's daughter has no separate claim to remain in the United
      Kingdom.  Any assessment of the best interests of a child must be made
      on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real world. If a
      parent has no right to remain, that is the background against which
      the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be
      whether it is  reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent
      with no right to remain.  The appellant refers to the decision of the
      Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania).  On the facts of ZH, it was not
      reasonable to expect the children to follow their mother to Tanzania,
      not least because the family would be separated and the children would
      be deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which they were
      citizens.  That is a long way from the facts of this case. Here, the
      FtT Judge rejected the appellant's account that the appellant's
      daughter will be subjected to FGM upon return to Nigeria, or that the
      appellant and her daughter are at risk upon return.  Neither the
      appellant nor her daughter are British citizen. None has the right to
      remain in this country. If the mother is removed, her daughter has no
      independent right to remain. If the appellant is removed, then it is
      entirely reasonable to expect her daughter to return to Nigeria with
      her.


  22.  In my judgment, although the FtT Judge did not consider the best
      interests of the appellant's daughter, that is immaterial to the
      outcome of the appeal.  On the findings made by the FtT Judge, as Mr
      Tan submits, a consideration of the best interests of the child could
      only point in one direction.   On any proper view, it is in the best
      interests of the appellant's daughter to remain in the care of the
      appellant.  The Judge found that the appellant and her daughter are
      not at risk upon return to Nigeria.  The appellant and her daughter
      could in any event internally relocate for the reasons set out in the
      decision of FtT Judge Parker.  In my judgement there is no material
      error of law in the decision of the FtT Judge capable of affecting the
      outcome of the appeal.


  23. It follows that I dismiss the appeal, and the decision of FtT Judge
      Parker shall stand.


Notice of Decision


  24. The decision of FtT Judge Parker is not infected by the making of a
      material error of law and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.


  25. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          28th December 2018

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD


I have dismissed appeal.  In any event, no fee was paid and there can be no
fee award.


Signed                                  Date     28th December 2018

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




