
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA 13511 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2017                        |On 26 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                              Mirkhalillah [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Although this appeal touches on the welfare of  children  I  see  no
       reason to find that publicity might cause them harm and so I do  not
       make any order restricting publication. The First-tier Tribunal  may
       take a different view when all of the relevant evidence is  included
       in a Decision and Reasons.

    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing an appeal brought by the appellant against a decision  of
       the respondent refusing him international protection and/or leave to
       remain on human rights grounds.

    3. Permission was granted on a limited basis by a different  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge who said:

  "It is, however, arguable that the Judge fell into error  in  considering
  the situation of the  children;  particularly  failing  to  consider  the
  evidence from their school and nursery.  Ground 3 alone is arguable."

    4. The reference to "ground 3" is a reference to grounds prepared by Mr
       Bradshaw dated 11 April 2017 and the ground extends  from  paragraph
       11 through to and including paragraph 20 of those grounds.   I  mean
       them no disrespect when I say the short point is that the judge  did
       not deal properly with the interests of  the  appellant's  children.
       In particular he did not make any finding about the children's  best
       interests and neither did he  give  a  proper  explanation  for  any
       finding that may have been made that it was  unduly  harsh  for  the
       children to manage without  their  father  in  the  United  Kingdom.
       Although the appellant is a "foreign criminal" he was  sentenced  to
       two years' imprisonment and so the "over and  above"  provisions  of
       Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  do
       not apply in his case.

    5. Additional  evidence  was  served  on  the  Tribunal  on  which  the
       appellant wishes to rely.

    6. Mr Bradshaw asked that in  the  event  of  an  error  of  law  being
       established the case be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal because
       he anticipated he would be instructed to call oral evidence which he
       was not in a position to do today.

    7. The parties had spoken before the hearing and Ms Aboni was  able  to
       say that she had considered the position and agreed with Mr Bradshaw
       that the consideration of  the  case  concerning  the  children  was
       inadequate and the  case  had  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for re-determination solely on the points covered in ground
       3.   This  is  not  a  case  to  be  re-determined  on  asylum   and
       humanitarian protection grounds.  The case concerns  the  rights  of
       the children and whether they have been  considered  adequately.   I
       find they have not in the existing decision and the  decision  needs
       to be made again.

    8. It follows that I find the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  I
       set aside its decision and I direct that the points identified above
       be determined again by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The appeal is allowed to extent  explained  above.  The  appeal  has  to  be
determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 September 2017              |








