
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13107/2016
                                                               HU/01150/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 April 2017                      |On 01 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     AG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None.  The appellant appeared in person.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on [ ] 1986.  He entered the
    United Kingdom on 29 September 2012 on a six month student visa.  On 18
    May 2015 the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on Article 8 grounds which included an assertion that he  would
    face  discrimination  in  Algeria  because  he  is  homosexual.    That
    application was refused by the respondent on 30 December  2015.  On  26
    January 2016 the appellant was served with a  notice  of  liability  to
    removal as an overstayer.  On 27 April 2016 he made an  appointment  to
    claim asylum and on 13 May 2016 he formally claimed asylum  based  upon
    his  sexuality.   On  30  December  2015  the  respondent  refused  his
    application for asylum.  The appellant appealed against those decisions
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 3. In  a  decision  dated  2  February  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson dismissed the appellant's asylum and Article 8 appeals.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant would be able to  relocate
    within Algeria and would not therefore be at risk of persecution.   The
    Tribunal found that the appellant, as  accepted,  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there   were   no
    exceptional or compelling circumstances to justify a grant of leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. On 16 February 2017 the appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The grounds of appeal are;
    i) there is an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
    the assessment of the reasonableness of internal relocation, and ii) in
    the assessment of Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by failing to depart
    from the findings in OO  (Gay  Men)  CG  [2016]  UKUT  65  (IAC).   The
    decision in OO is wrong in law as  it  is  entirely  contrary  to  Lord
    Hope's  findings  in  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31  at  [31]   and   is
    unsustainable.  It is further asserted that the judge  failed  to  give
    any or adequate reasons to why he considered  the  background  evidence
    post-OO was not sufficiently persuasive to justify a departure from the
    findings in OO.  In respect of ground 2 it is asserted that based  upon
    his findings of fact with regard to the appellant's  relationship  with
    his partner, a Portuguese national, it was inconsistent for  the  judge
    to find that there were no exceptional or compelling  circumstances  to
    justify a grant of leave to the appellant under Article 8  outside  the
    Rules.  It was asserted that the judge failed to take into account  the
    factors set out at page 9 of the skeleton argument.

 5. On 14 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted the appellant
    permission to appeal.  The grant of permission sets  out  at  paragraph
    [5] that there is an arguable error of law in respect of Article 8.  At
    paragraph [3] of the grant  of  permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan indicates that the judge  has  given  satisfactory  reasons  for
    arriving at  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  in
    Algeria.

 6. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response.  The respondent  asserts  that
    permission was granted only on ground 2, that is the Article  8  issue.
    It is submitted that the grounds do not address the acceptance that the
    appellant's article 8 claim was very much dependant on the facts of his
    protection claim.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 7. As a preliminary issue I considered the grant of permission and whether
    or not permission had been restricted specifically to ground 2,  namely
    the Article 8 issue.  I consider that the grant of permission  was  not
    so restricted. Whilst it is clear that First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan
    considered that the judge had given satisfactory reasons for concluding
    that the appellant could relocate in Algeria,  there  was  no  specific
    refusal of permission to appeal on that ground.  I therefore  proceeded
    on the basis that both grounds of appeal were  to  be  pursued  at  the
    hearing.  As the appellant was not represented Ms  Isherwood  proceeded
    to address me first to give him the opportunity to  hear  in  full  the
    respondent's response to the grounds of appeal that had been submitted.



 8. Ms Isherwood indicated that  there  was  an  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision at paragraph [63].  However, she indicated this was
    not a material error of law.  At paragraph [63] the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge set out that there had been no challenge to the fact that S,  the
    appellant's Portuguese partner, was exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She referred to the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  at
    paragraphs 30 and 31 where it  was  set  out  quite  clearly  that  the
    Secretary of State had not accepted that the  appellant's  partner  was
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 9. She submitted that  the  judge  assessed  this  case  by  applying  the
    appropriate case law  and  found  that  the  appellant  could  relocate
    internally within Algeria.  The judge follows the template set  by  the
    witness statement and the skeleton argument.  The judge at paragraph 54
    applies OO (Algeria) to the facts of this case.   With  regard  to  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal that OO (Algeria) was incorrectly decided
    she submitted that there is a different emphasis in HJ (Iran) where the
    court was looking at whether a person is living openly as a gay  person
    as a matter of choice.  She referred to paragraphs [163] in  OO,  [167]
    and [168] and submitted that it is clear from  the  decision  that  the
    finding was that gay men can live  openly  in  Algeria.   At  paragraph
    [168] it refers  to  a  choice.   With  regard  to  the  evidence  that
    postdated the decision in OO she referred  to  paragraph  [59]  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  where  the  judge  acknowledged  that
    evidence and that he had taken it into consideration.  With  regard  to
    sufficiency of reasons she submitted that it  was  sufficient  for  the
    judge to set out that he did not find that evidence to be  sufficiently
    persuasive to depart from the case of  OO.   No  further  reasons  were
    required to be given.  She referred to the  report  at  A59  which  the
    appellant indicated postdated the country guidance decision in  OO  and
    indicated that it clearly was compiled before the decision in OO.   The
    document at A81 was the penal code which is referred to  in  OO.   With
    regard to the ground that the judge did not consider the evidence as to
    the father's reach in Algeria she submitted that  the  judge  sets  out
    what that evidence was and gives a very clear indication that  she  has
    not accepted that evidence as to the extent of the father's reach.  The
    judge was entitled to do so.

10. With regard to Article 8 she submitted that it is not sufficient to say
    that the appellant was entitled to further reasons.  The appellant  has
    not put forward any compelling circumstances that the appeal should  be
    allowed under Article 8.  In essence this case is  that  the  appellant
    simply wants to remain in the United Kingdom with a  non  UK  national.
    Essentially, this is a question  of  choice  of  where  to  live.   She
    submitted that there was no alternative  finding  that  could  be  made
    given the lack of evidence of any compelling reasons in this case.

11. Mr G relied on the grounds  of  appeal  submitted  in  support  of  his
    appeal.  He said that he and his partner could not be in a relationship
    in Algeria because they could not live together  as  a  gay  couple  as
    there is discrimination and violence.  He indicated  that  his  partner
    had been granted a residence card now and that he himself had  made  an
    EEA application to remain in the United Kingdom for a residence  permit
    as the partner of an EEA national.

Discussion

12. With regard to the first  ground  of  appeal  the  judge  recorded  the
    appellant's submissions that OO had been wrongly decided  at  paragraph
    [59].  The judge set out:

         "59. ... In her  submissions  and  skeleton  argument,  Ms  Chapman
             sought to argue that the decision in OO is wrongly decided, in
             terms of the risk to gay men in Algeria and in  terms  of  the
             viability of internal relocation, bearing in mind the findings
             of the Supreme Court in its judgment in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC
             31.  Further, in support  of  such  contention,  she  drew  my
             attention to certain additional, and more up-to-date,  country
             material which,  she  indicated,  was  not  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal when it decided that country  guidance  decision.   I
             confirm that I have read such material but do not find  it  to
             be sufficiently persuasive to justify  a  departure  from  the
             findings made in OO.  Consequently, and for the reasons I have
             indicated, I conclude that it has not  been  established  that
             the appellant would be at risk of persecution, should he  seek
             to relocate within Algeria, even though I accept that he would
             like to live his lifestyle as a gay man reasonably openly.   I
             consider that there  exists,  based  upon  the  facts  of  the
             appellant's case, a sufficiency of protection."

13. A country guidance case is to be treated as an authoritative finding on
    the country guidance issue identified in the determination.  Unless  it
    has been expressly superseded or replaced by any later country guidance
    decision or is inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the
    Tribunal,  such  a  country  guidance  case  is  authoritative  in  any
    subsequent appeal so far as that appeal relates to the country guidance
    issue in question and depends upon the same or similar  evidence.   The
    starting point for the First-tier Tribunal is that the country guidance
    in OO is binding upon it.  The appellant argues that it is inconsistent
    with the case of HJ (Iran) which is also binding  upon  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  HJ (Iran)  is  a  Supreme  Court  decision  and  would  take
    precedence.  The judge was not persuaded by the  appellant's  arguments
    which were set out in  the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It has not been suggested that the decision in OO  has  been
    appealed or granted permission to appeal.

14. The Upper Tribunal in OO specifically had regard  to  the  case  of  HJ
    (Iran) when formulating and considering the evidence before it  and  in
    coming to the conclusions that it did.



  15. In OO the Upper Tribunal held (headnote):


         1. Although the Algerian Criminal Code makes  homosexual  behaviour
         unlawful, the authorities do not seek  to  prosecute  gay  men  and
         there is no real risk of prosecution,  even  when  the  authorities
         become aware of such behaviour. In the very few cases  where  there
         has been a prosecution for homosexual  behaviour,  there  has  been
         some other feature that has given  rise  to  the  prosecution.  The
         state does not actively seek out gay men in order to take any  form
         of action against them,  either  by  means  of  prosecution  or  by
         subjecting gay men to other forms of persecutory ill-treatment.


         2. Sharia law is not applied  against  gay  men  in  Algeria.   The
         criminal law is entirely secular and discloses no manifestation, at
         all, of Sharia law in its application.


         3. The only risk of ill-treatment at a level to become  persecution
         likely to be encountered by a gay man in Algeria is at the hands of
         his own family, after they have discovered that he is gay. There is
         no  reliable  evidence  such  as  to  establish  that  a  gay  man,
         identified as such, faces a real risk of persecutory  ill-treatment
         from persons outside his own family...

         5. Where a gay man has to flee his family home to avoid persecution
         from family members, in his place of relocation he will attract  no
         real risk of persecution  because,  generally,  he  will  not  live
         openly as a gay man. As the evidence does  not  establish  that  he
         will face a real risk of persecution if subsequently  suspected  to
         be a gay man, his decision to live discreetly and  to  conceal  his
         sexual orientation is driven by respect  for  social  mores  and  a
         desire to avoid attracting disapproval of a type  that  falls  well
         below the threshold of persecution.

16. In HJ Iran at paragraph 35 the Supreme Court held:

      (b) The next stage is to examine  a  group  of  questions  which  are
      directed to what his situation will be on return. This  part  of  the
      inquiry is directed to what will  happen  in  the  future.  The  Home
      Office's Country of Origin report will provide the background.  There
      will be little difficulty in holding that in countries such  as  Iran
      and Cameroon  gays  or  persons  who  are  believed  to  be  gay  are
      persecuted and that persecution is something that may  reasonably  be
      feared...

      (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant  will  in  fact
      conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is to consider
      why he will do so. If this will  simply  be  in  response  to  social
      pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of  his  own  choosing
      and not because of a fear of persecution, his claim for  asylum  must
      be rejected. But if the reason why he will resort to  concealment  is
      that he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be persecuted, it will
      be necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.

17. The Upper Tribunal in OO came to a different conclusion. The only  risk
    of persecution would be from members of the family. The other  findings
    in OO, set out above regarding the manner in which an  appellant  would
    choose to live, must be considered in light of  that  initial  finding.
    There is no conflict between OO and HJ (Iran).

18. Although it is incumbent upon a judge to give reasons for the findings,
    with regard to the evidence that the appellant submitted  that  it  was
    asserted postdated the decision in OO, the judge has given  an  express
    and clear indication that he has taken into account all  that  evidence
    but was unpersuaded by it.  As indicated by Ms Isherwood, some of  that
    evidence did not in any event postdate the decision  in  OO.   To  give
    specific reasons as to why that evidence was not persuasive in  essence
    would require the judge to demonstrate a negative.  I consider that  it
    was sufficient for the judge to give an indication that that  evidence,
    which would have to be very cogent  to  depart  from  such  a  recently
    decided country guidance case, did not persuade him.



19.  The judge took into account the appellant's claim to fear his father's
    'reach' throughout Algeria. The judge found' "there  is  no  persuasive
    evidence before me, first, that his father has the influence throughout
    Algeria as claimed by the appellant..." There was  no  evidence  before
    the judge of any specific difficulties that the appellant would face in
    re-locating to another area of Algeria. The House of Lords in Januzi  v
    SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 at [67] stated that "It is necessary to  stress  the
    rigorous nature of the test for unreasonableness or  undue  harshness".
    That threshold was approved at [41] of SSHD v  AH  (Sudan)  and  others
    [2007] UKHL 49, elaborated on at [42], thus:

            "... the Refugee Convention, as I have sought  to  explain,  is
           really intended only to protect those threatened  with  specific
           forms of persecution. It is not a general humanitarian  measure.
           For these respondents, persecution is no longer  a  risk.  Given
           that they can now safely be returned home, only proof that their
           lives on return would be quite simply intolerable compared  even
           to the problems and deprivations of  so  many  of  their  fellow
           countrymen would entitle  them  to  refugee  status.  Compassion
           alone cannot justify the grant of asylum."

20. The judge was entitled to conclude, given the high threshold  required,
    that it was reasonable for the appellant to re-locate.

21. With regard to the Article 8 ground of appeal the judge has dealt  with
    this very shortly.  However, the judge  has  set  out  in  considerable
    detail throughout the decision all the  evidence  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's circumstances.  The judge  has  made  essentially  positive
    credibility findings with regard to the appellant's evidence.  However,
    the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  as
    accepted at the hearing. Following SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387, the settled approach to the proportionality exercise, is that  the
    inability of the  appellant  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  is  the
    starting point and something which attracts  significant  weight.  When
    conducting an assessment outside the  Immigration  Rules  the  Tribunal
    must conduct this assessment  through  the  prism  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Against the significant weight falling on  the  public  interest
    side  of  the  balance,  the  appellant  needs   to   show   compelling
    circumstances. Additionally in this case neither the appellant nor  his
    partner are British Citizens. Although S is  exercising  treaty  rights
    and is entitled to reside in the UK those rights arise as a  result  of
    his EEA citizenship. There was nothing that the judge considered to  be
    compelling to suggest that would justify a grant of leave  outside  the
    Rules.

22. There was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.
    The appeals of the appellant are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed. The decisions of the Secretary of State stand.









Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 21 May 2107


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw












