
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/13433/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 April 2019                      |On 17 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MILINAPRAGEH [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Wass of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on [~] 1984,  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 16 November 2018, refusing
    to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  M.  R.   Oliver  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in a decision promulgated on  17  January  2019.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien who stated that
    it is arguable that  the  Judge  made  factual  errors  concerning  the
    evidence and failed to apply the relevant country guidance case  of  GJ
    and others (post - civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319.

 3. At the hearing it was agreed by the  parties  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law in the decision for  the  reasons  given  by  the
    permission Judge and that the appeal be sent  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing.

 4. I have considered the decision and agree that there has been a material
    error of law in the decision as the Judge did not consider the  country
    guidance case and  did  not  take  into  account  recent  events  which
    arguably could have rekindled the authorities' interest in him.

 5. Therefore, as it stands the decision is not safe and findings  of  fact
    need to be made on the evidence in the country guidance case of GJ  and
    others.

 6. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge apart from First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M.  R.
    Oliver for the appeal to be heard de novo.



Decision

Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................

Ms S Chana  Dated 14th day of April 2019

