
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/13431/2016
                                                               PA/13432/2016
                                                               PA/13433/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2017                          |On 18 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     KC
                                     SK
                                     KK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms P. Solanki, Counsel instructed by ASK Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boylan Kemp, promulgated on 19 May 2017,  in  which  she
    refused the Appellants' appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.   References
    to the "Appellant" are to the first Appellant, the  lead  appellant  in
    this appeal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The first ground refers to paragraph 25 of the  Judge's  decision.
         At paragraph 7 of the affidavit of the Appellant's mother-in-law at
         page 72 of the Appellant's Bundle 2 (AB2) reference is made to  the
         questioning of the Appellant's brother whilst he was staying at the
         Appellant's mother-in-law.


         The second ground challenges the Judge's treatment at paragraph  28
         of her decision of a 2014 letter from the Appellant's mother.   The
         ground correctly asserts the Judge failed to take into account  the
         explanation for the failure to produce that  letter  are  given  at
         paragraph 18 on page 5 of the Appellant's Bundle 1 (AB1).


         The third  ground  complains  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  the
         inconsistencies upon which she relied at paragraph 29.   These  are
         generically referred to but not with  any  specific  references  to
         those parts of the  evidence  which  the  Judge  found  to  display
         inconsistencies.  The Judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  adversely
         noting the lack of documents before the Tribunal if  the  Appellant
         who is well familiar with procedures in the Tribunal and is advised
         by experienced solicitors does not produce  the  relevant  evidence
         and no reference is made to it in  his  mother-in-law's  affidavit.
         However, there is at least one letter  from  the  mother-in-law  at
         page 29 of AB1.


         The next ground refers to paragraph 30 of the Judge's decision.  It
         complains the Judge failed to take account of paragraph 17  of  the
         Appellant's statement at page 4 of AB1.  The claims of the  mother-
         in-law in her letter at page 29 of AB1 do not  support  the  claims
         about association with the TGTE.


         Finally, the grounds challenge the Judge's treatment of the medical
         evidence of suicide risk.  The Judge considered at paragraph 36  of
         her decision the position at the date of the hearing  but  arguably
         erred in not considering what the position would subsequently be in
         the event the appeal was dismissed, the Appellant was detained  and
         removed.


         Looking at the grounds overall, I find they identify  a  number  of
         arguable errors of law  such  that  permission  to  appeal  on  all
         grounds is granted."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I stated  that  I  found  the  decision
    involved the making of material errors of law and that my full  reasons
    would follow.


Error of Law


Ground 1 - failure to consider relevant evidence and lack of reasoning


 5. In paragraph 25 the judge states:


         "Dealing first with the evidence of Mr. S, I found his  explanation
         of  not  wanting  to  tell  the  appellant  of  the  incident   for
         approximately three months due to fear despite having  returned  to
         the UK on the 3 May 2015 to not be a reasonable or plausible one as
         he was not in any danger himself, he is a French national  who  had
         no need to return to Sri Lanka, and the authorities there would not
         have been aware that the appellant had been informed of  this  fact
         by him.  I also note that no mention of this encounter is  set  out
         in the mother-in-law's affidavit dated 4 October 2015, which I find
         to be strange considering what an important event that  would  have
         been.  Overall, I did not find the witness' evidence on this matter
         to be credible and therefore I have given  it  little  weight  when
         reaching my decision."


 6. I find that the Appellant's mother-in-law had  specifically  stated  in
    her affidavit "CID and Police questioned Mr. S when he was  staying  at
    our house after having arrived in Sri Lanka to attend  the  funeral  of
    his mother."  I find that the Judge has  erred  when  she  states  that
    there is no mention of the encounter by the mother-in-law.  I find that
    this is a significant omission.  I further find,  in  relation  to  the
    explanation by Mr. S for the delay, that he had set out in his  witness
    statement a detailed account, and to reject his account on the basis of
    the delay in informing  the  Appellant,  given  that  his  account  was
    corroborated  by  the  Appellant's  mother-in-law's  evidence,  without
    giving further reasons, is an error.  Taken together, they have led  to
    the Judge dismissing Mr. S's evidence without  giving  proper  reasons,
    and she has made an error of fact in relation to  the  evidence  before
    her.


 7. At paragraph 29 the Judge states:


         "I accept that there may have been  a  degree  of  misunderstanding
         initially as to whether the appellant was  being  questioned  about
         his mother or mother-in-law.   However,  Mr  Swaby  endeavoured  to
         clarify this in his questioning and overall I am satisfied that the
         appellant understood what was being  asked  of  him,  despite  Miss
         Seehra's half-hearted attempt to raise a query over his fitness  to
         be a witness; a matter which in any event I  did  not  find  to  be
         supported by the medical evidence provided.  I  do,  however,  find
         that there are insufficiently explained inconsistencies in his  own
         evidence, and in the evidence of his wife and his mother-in-law  as
         to how many times the authorities visited his mother-in-law's  home
         which undermines the credibility of the evidence on this point.   I
         also find the fact that the appellant has failed to produced  (sic)
         letters he has allegedly received from his mother-in-law, and which
         would support his asylum claim, to undermine the credibility of his
         account on this matter, and in doing so I go further and find  that
         these letters simply do not exist."


 8.  I  find  that  the  Judge  while  giving  general  reasons   for   the
    inconsistencies, has not  specified  what  evidence  was  inconsistent.
    Given that it concerns a matter as significant as the  visits  made  by
    the authorities to his mother-in-law's house, it is  necessary  to  set
    out clear reasons for why the Judge rejected this evidence on the basis
    of these inconsistencies.  This is especially the case given the  Judge
    has  recognised  that  there  were  some   misunderstandings   due   to
    interpretation.  I find that this failure to give reasons is  an  error
    of law.


 9. Further, while stating that the medical  evidence  did  not  support  a
    finding that the Appellant was not fit to give evidence,  there  is  no
    consideration throughout the decision of the guidance  in  relation  to
    vulnerable witnesses - Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:
    Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.    This
    guidance does not set the bar as high as fitness to give evidence,  but
    relates to the treatment of the evidence of those who  are  vulnerable,
    and this vulnerability can be due to mental  health  issues.   However,
    there is no consideration of the medical  evidence  with  reference  to
    this guidance.  The summary of the medical evidence at  [33]  and  [34]
    indicates that the Appellant suffers from depression, anxiety and PTSD,
    which is accepted by the Judge.  In the face of this finding,  to  fail
    to consider the application of the guidance to the evidence before  her
    is a material error of law.


Ground 2 Failure to consider relevant country guidance and other evidence


10. In relation to the failure to take into account the  country  guidance,
    the grounds correctly assert at [11] and [12] that the Judge failed  to
    take into account the evidence relating to the  ability  to  leave  Sri
    Lanka, as addressed in GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  The skeleton  argument  before  the  Judge
    referred to paragraphs [170] and [275] which state  that  "having  left
    Sri Lanka without difficulty was not probative of a lack of interest in
    an individual".  This  is  not  applied  to  the  Judge's  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's travel to and from Sri Lanka at [30] of the
    decision.  I find that this is an error of law.


11. I find that these errors affect the credibility findings, which  cannot
    stand, and therefore given that I have found that the decision involves
    these material errors of law, there is no need for me to  consider  the
    other grounds of appeal.


12. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have found that the credibility findings cannot
    stand, and therefore given the nature and extent  of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


13. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.


14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 15 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
