
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13604/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2019                             |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                  mr t m i
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lodge
    promulgated on 13 February 2019.  As an anonymity  direction  was  been
    made in the First-tier Tribunal, I too make one.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 3 March 2001. He  appeals  a
    decision of 20 November 2018 whereby the Secretary of State refused  to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection.

3.   The Secretary of State's reasons for refusal were set out in a  refusal
    letter dated 20 November 2016, in particular paragraph 124 which  reads
    as follows.

     "As outlined above under 'Feasibility of Return' it is considered  that
         you would be returned to Kirkuk, a city that  you  have  previously
         lived in.  As the country policy states, although Kirkuk previously
         fell under 15c, the conditions within  Kirkuk  do  no  longer  fall
         under the scope of the Article 15c of the Qualification Directive."

4.   The Appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds, on humanitarian protection grounds and on human  rights
    grounds.

5.   On 20 March 2019 permission to  appeal  the  decision  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on two  particular  grounds.
    Mr Mohzam, for the appellant, did not seek to  argue  the  appeal  more
    expansively, notwithstanding the other matters raised in the grounds on
    which permission was not expressly refused

6.   The first ground is that the judge's finding as to whether Kirkuk is  a
    contested area for the purposes was paragraph 15c was not supported  by
    adequate reasons; the second is that the judge was wrong to find that a
    CSID card could be obtained from the Iraqi Embassy in London.

7.   I can deal with  the  factual  substance  of  the  decision  relatively
    shortly. Notwithstanding the appellant's relative youth (rising  18  at
    the date  of  the  hearing),  for  which  the  judge  made  appropriate
    allowance [21], he was not found to be a credible witness [20]. As  the
    judge records [23-29], the appellant has given  a  number  of  mutually
    contradictory versions as to how he came by  a  CSID  card.  The  judge
    concludes that the CSID card produced to  the  UK  authorities  by  the
    appellant is counterfeit [29], and  (in  consequence)  the  appellant's
    original CSID is at home in Kirkuk with his family [46].  Further,  the
    judge rejected the appellant's contention that his  mother  and  sister
    are dead [36]. The judge did not accept the appellant's claim  that  he
    had been targeted by ISIS when living with his uncle  in  Hajiawa  [38-
    45]. On the judge's factual findings,  the  appellant  had  advanced  a
    concocted story regarding the basis to his asylum claim [45]. There  is
    no challenge in the grounds of appeal to any of these findings.

     Ground 1: Kirkuk as a contested area
8.   In the decision, the judge states: "There  is  no  15(c)  risk  at  the
    present time in Kirkuk" [50].

9.   Mr Mohzam took me to AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC).
    Paragraph 1 of section A of the Country Guidance reads:

            A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE
            QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

             1. There is at present a state of internal armed  conflict  in
                certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government   security
                forces, militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group
                known as ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict in  the
                so-called "contested areas", comprising the governorates of
                Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah  Al-
                din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there   are
                substantial  grounds  for  believing  that   any   civilian
                returned there, solely on account of his  or  her  presence
                there,  faces  a  real   risk   of   being   subjected   to
                indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within
                the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
                (emphasis added)

10.  This passage was approved and adopted without revision  when  the  case
    reached the Court of Appeal, reported as AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944. Mr Mohzam's submission, as
    I understood it, was to the  effect  that  judge  failed  to  give  any
    reasons for departing from this Country Guidance.

11.  I remind myself of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Practice  Direction,
    paragraph 12.2 of which  states  that  unless  it  has  been  expressly
    superseded or is inconsistent  with  other  authority  binding  on  the
    tribunal, Country Guidance (duly marked as such by the designation  CG)
    should be followed unless that tribunal is persuaded that it  does  not
    apply to the case in question. To borrow from Stanley Burnton LJ in  SG
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    940, at 47: "tribunal judges are  required  to  take  Country  Guidance
    determinations into account, and to  follow  them  unless  very  strong
    grounds, supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying their not
    doing so".

12.  The judge's reference to there being no 15(c) risk at the present  time
    in Kirkuk is admittedly somewhat brief [50]. But  it  does  not  appear
    from the decision to have been in contention as  between  the  parties.
    The refusal letter (paragraph 124 of which  I  have  set  out  in  full
    above) recites at paragraph 122  the  relevant  part  of  AA  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.
    Immediately  afterwards,  at  paragraph  123  of  the  refusal   letter
    continues:

         "123.    Iraq country policy and  information  note:  security  and
             humanitarian situation - March 2017 states:
                  3.2.2    However the situation  has  changed  since  then.
                  Parts of Anbar that Daesh no longer controls  or  contests
                  (including  the  Fallujah,  Heet  and  Ramadi  districts),
                  Diyala, Kirkuk (except Hawija and the  surrounding  areas)
                  and Salah al-Din no longer meet the threshold  of  Article
                  15c. Ninewah and most of Anbar, however, still  meets  the
                  threshold of Article 15c."


13.  Although not cited to me by either representative,  I  have  regard  to
    The Queen (on the Application of QA) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2017] EWHC 2417, a decision of Sir Ross  Cranston,  sitting
    as a Judge of the High Court, especially the following:


         "[63]    As far as the position in Kirkuk  is  concerned,  and  the
         requirement for the claimant to return there to obtain a CSID, the
         Secretary of State was entitled to take the realities on the ground
         there into account. Kirkuk is no longer a contested  area.  In  my
         view, country guidance  cases  must  give  way  to  the  realities,
         a point recognised by the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at para 47."

14.  At times I did not  find  Mr  Mohzam's  submissions  entirely  easy  to
    follow and, whilst I cannot be entirely certain,  the  context  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision seems to be premised on  the  undisputed
    altered reality on the  ground,  recognised  in  QA.  Mr  Mohzam,  (who
    appeared also in the First-tier Tribunal) did not  submit  to  me  that
    there was material before the judge to suggest that the altered reality
    had not endured. Nothing to this  effect  appears  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, nor did Mr Mohzam refer me in the course of his submissions  to
    material which had been before the judge pointing the other  way  which
    might have been overlooked.

15.  Even if I have misunderstood and there had been a  genuine  joinder  of
    issue as between the appellant and the respondent as to the  conditions
    in Kirkuk, and the engagement of 15(c), the worst that can be  said  of
    the judge's disposal of the  matter  is  that  it  was  brief  and  not
    supported by reasons. It might have been more helpful to have cited the
    Iraq Country Policy and Information Note of  March  2017,  and  perhaps
    also the judgment of Sir Ross Cranston in QA. But if the judge did fall
    into error by his brevity, it would not be appropriate to set aside the
    decision because it would inevitably be  remade  in  exactly  the  same
    manner. Any shortcoming on the art of the judge was immaterial  to  the
    outcome and this ground of appeal therefore fails.

     Obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London
16.  The second  ground  of  appeal  advanced  Mr  Mohzam  concerns  judge's
    finding that the appellant could obtain a CSID from the  Iraqi  Embassy
    in London.

17.  Ms Isherwood, for the respondent, referred me  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision of AA (Article 15(c) Iraq) CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  This
    substantial and exhaustive decision has a section expressly devoted  to
    'Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK'. It  recites  the  expert  evidence
    upon which the judges relied, and ties  the  various  strands  together
    with a concluding paragraph (177) which reads:

         "177.     In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an  Iraqi
         national living in the UK to obtain a  CSID  through  the  consular
         section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to
         produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and  page
         number for their family registration details." (Emphasis added).

18.  In his careful decision, the judge found that the appellant would  need
    to provide the page number and volume details, and further  found  that
    he could obtain  this  information  from  his  uncle  or  parents.  The
    relevant section reads:

     "49.     With regard to the feasibility of  his  return  I  have  dealt
         with it to some extent above.  He has, on my findings access  to  a
         CSID card.  He previously had one in Iraq.  He could apply  to  the
         Iraqi embassy in London, he will need to provide  the  page  number
         and volume details, he could obtain these from his uncle or parents
         [...]
         "50. In any event, if the respondent has  conceded  the  father  is
         dead, the appellant has a mother sister and uncle at the very least
         in Iraq who can meet him at the airport and assist  him  to  obtain
         the required documents to facilitate his journey to Kirkuk.   There
         is no 15(c) risk at the present time in Kirkuk."

19.  These factual findings are not challenged. The Grounds of  Appeal  made
    reference to AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212
    (IAC) and AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944. Mr Mohzam did not direct me  to  any  particular  passage
    within  either.  I  can  find  nothing  in  these   authorities   which
    contradicts or countermands the expert evidence, accepted by the  Court
    of  Appeal  in  AA  (Article  15(c)  Iraq)   (above)   concerning   the
    circumstances in which a CSID might be obtained from the Iraqi  embassy
    in London.

20.  There is no error of  law  in  the  judge's  approach  and  conclusions
    regarding obtaining a CSID and this second ground of  appeal  therefore
    also fails.


Notice of Decision

This appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  is
affirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
