
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13087/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Hearing at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business               |On 30 December 2020           |
|On 10 December 2020                          |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr J Gajjar instructed by SMA solicitors
For the respondent: Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.    The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan.   He  appealed  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      refusing his claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under  the
      ECHR.  In a  decision  sent  on  10  September  2020,  Judge  Buckwell
      dismissed his appeal on all grounds.


   2. The appellant appealed, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.   In  a
      decision sent on 3 July 2020, UTJ Coker concluded that Judge  Buckwell
      had erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal  and  set  aside
      the decision, in order that it could be re-make in respect  of  Art  3
      and 8 of the ECHR.


   3. The appeal was listed for a CMR Hearing on 10 December 2020 at Cardiff
      Civil Justice Centre.  I was based in court at the  Cardiff  CJC.   Mr
      Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, joined the hearing by
      Skype for Business.  Mr Gajjar, who represented the appellant,  joined
      by telephone only.

   4. Following discussion with the representatives, it  was  accepted  that
      the judge had not  made  any  relevant  findings  in  respect  of  the
      outstanding issue under Art 3, namely relocation to Kabul.  There were
      no findings in respect of the appellant's evidence which would need to
      be given afresh, together with expert medical evidence in relation  to
      his mental health and background evidence about Kabul.  It was  agreed
      that in the light of the nature and extent of fact-finding  which  was
      needed to re-make the decision, it was appropriate to remit the appeal
      to the First-tier Tribunal to re-make the decision in respect of Art 3
      and 8 of the ECHR.

   5. It was further agreed that a number of findings (and decisions)  would
      be preserved:

        a. That the s.72 certificate was upheld (paras 97-99);
        b. The appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claims  stood
           dismissed (paras 97-99); and
        c. The appellant would be at real risk of serious harm in his  home
           area from his family (para 101).

   6. Consequently, the outstanding issues which had to be decided were:


        a. Art 3 (limited to internal relocation to Kabal); and
        b. Art 8.


   7. Mr Gajjar indicated that it was the appellant's intention to serve  on
      the Secretary  of  State  in  advance  of  the  FtT  hearing  evidence
      concerning the appellant's relationship with a British citizen partner
      (who is pregnant).


   8. In order to do so, and to obtain up-to-date medical  evidence  on  the
      appellant's mental health, Mr Gajjar invited me  to  direct  that  the
      appeal not be listed for 6-8 weeks.  With Mr Howells'  concurrence,  I
      agreed that to direct that the appeal not  be  re-listed  in  the  FtT
      before the week commencing 15 February 2021.


Decision


   9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Buckwell) was set aside
      by UTJ Coker in her decision sent on 3 July 2020.


  10. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
      decision in respect of Art 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR  in  accordance  with
      paragraphs 5 and 6 above.

  11. The appeal to be remitted to the Taylor House Hearing Centre  and  not
      to be listed before week beginning 15 February  2021  before  a  judge
      other than Judge Buckwell.



                               Signed


                               Andrew Grubb


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               10, December 2020
