
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13801/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th April 2019                    |On 25th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                   LCNPMA
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Basharat, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
    protection on 30 November 2018.  The Appellant's appeal  against  this
    was dismissed by Judge Maka following a hearing on 16 January 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Ford on 2 January 2019 in the
    following terms;

         "The Appellant sought an adjournment arguing that  he  was  waiting
         for essential documents to be delivered from Sri Lanka.  While  the
         Appellant's representative may be open to criticism  for  behaviour
         including not seeking the documents  earlier,  instructing  Counsel
         without  ensuring  that  she  had  complete  papers  and  generally
         delaying proceedings, the issue was  whether  the  refusal  of  the
         adjournment arguably prejudiced the Appellant.  It is arguable that
         in refusing the adjournment request the Tribunal may have erred  in
         law."

 3. The other grounds seeking permission were not deemed to be arguable  by
    Judge Ford.  The only matter therefore before me  is  the  question  of
    adjournment.

 4. Judge Maka considered the question of adjournment from paragraphs 7  to
    19 of the decision and having noted the various submissions  both  ways
    determined as follows;

         "15. I indicated having regard to the Procedure Rules including the
             overriding objective, my discretion and having regard  to  the
             fairness of the proceedings, I would not grant an adjournment.
              I determined no good reason for  an  adjournment  application
             had been made.  The Appellant had instructed  solicitors  back
             in 2017.  At a number of places in  his  asylum  interview  he
             referred to documents.  Indeed his solicitors said on 26  July
             2017 (D1) that a warrant was shown to his parents in  December
             2016.  This was in a letter  to  the  Home  Office  after  the
             screening  interview.   I  was  not   told   the   Appellant's
             solicitors were inexperienced in dealing with Sri Lankan cases
             or were unaware of the issues typically in  these  appeals  or
             the need to produce supporting documents.

         16.  There is no mention the Appellant was awaiting documents  from
             Sri Lanka in his grounds of  appeal.   I  determined  no  good
             reason had been given why contact had not been made with a Sri
             Lankan lawyer for the best part of a year and a  half  or  why
             the Appellant previously said he could not obtain anything  as
             he  had  been  disowned  but  was  able  to  do  so  now.   No
             explanation, why an arrest warrant mentioned in the  screening
             interview,  had  not  been  provided  since  July  2017.   The
             Appellant knew other people beyond his  family  and  had  many
             friends in Sri Lanka.  I was given no explanation why  Counsel
             could not have been instructed earlier or  a  conference  held
             after refusal on 30 November 2018.  I do not accept the notice
             of hearing sent on 12 December 2018  was  not  received  until
             after the New Year.  Even if  I  am  wrong  on  this  and  the
             Appellant received it late, his Solicitors did  not  say  they
             did not receive it.

         17.  ... I am satisfied the Appellant has had ample opportunity  to
             seek an adjournment of proceedings well in advance of  today's
             hearing, especially since he  has  had  solicitors  on  record
             acting for him since 2017.

         18.   I  considered  the  fairness  of  my  decision  against   the
             complexity of the issues, the proportionality of the case  and
             the resources of all  parties  including  the  Tribunal.   The
             Appellant is paying privately.  He has already  seen  Counsel,
             who half drafted his witness statement in  conference.   There
             was no certainty the documents (if any) would come  and  when.
             I had nothing before me, which said 3 weeks despite  Counsel's
             best endeavours.  Even the written application said  6  weeks.
             Even if the documents did come, it was  unclear  whether  they
             would then need  to  be  translated  and/or  verified  by  the
             Appellant and then  again  independently  by  the  Respondent.
             This would add additional costs and delay especially if  there
             was an issue with the validity of the documents.  There was no
             reason if I put the  matter  back  today,  Counsel  could  not
             complete the Appellant's witness statements after  taking  his
             instructions.  As  far  as  the  documents  were  concerned  I
             indicated  I  would  accept  whatever  was  submitted  on  the
             Appellant's behalf.  Even if documents were  not  there,  this
             would not stop me from accepting the  Appellant's  case  if  I
             were to find him to be credible."

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Jones essentially argued that  the  refusal
    of the adjournment was a matter that was open to the judge and did  not
    lead to arguable unfairness for the reasons given in  the  decision  by
    the judge. Ms Basharat argued that it did.

 6. The procedure rules are contained in the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014,  Rule  4.   The
    adjournment guidance is contained in the  Presidential  Guidance,  Note
    number 1 of 2014 and in particular from [7] to [9].

 7. Judge Maka considered the various factors in the appeal. It boils  down
    to on the one hand more time being needed because evidence  is  outside
    the Appellant's control, as against on the other hand not adjourning at
    the earliest opportunity and adequate time having already been given to
    prepare the appeal.

 8. I accept that criticism can be made of the Appellant's  representatives
    in this case.  However, the Appellant's representatives are not the one
    who fear persecution upon return to Sri Lanka.

 9. There was plainly adequate time of some 18 months for the Appellant and
    his representatives to get the documentation necessary to  support  his
    appeal.  However, in my judgement it  would  have  been  only  fair  to
    adjourn  the  proceedings  because  there  were   documents   allegedly
    available in a short period of time that could assist the  Tribunal  in
    discharging its duties.

10. In those circumstances I am satisfied that there was a  material  error
    of law in not adjourning the proceedings and that bearing in mind  what
    both representatives have said, that goes to the heart of  the  appeal.
    I therefore set aside the decision and remit the matter to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. The matter will be heard at Hatton
    Cross but not by Judge  Maka.  Any  consequential  directions  will  be
    issued by the First-tier Tribunal in due course.  It should be  obvious
    that the documentation that is said to  be  crucial  must  be  supplied
    expeditiously without waiting for a hearing date.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

11. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019




Fee/Costs

I make no fee or costs award as the matter is ongoing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 April 2019
