








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13845/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |             Decision and Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 17 January 2019               |             On: 06 February 2019        |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                  Mr N. F.
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, counsel, instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1991. He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge R Sullivan who, in a decision promulgated  on  9  November  2018
      dismissed his appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  13
      December 2017 to refuse his protection claim.

   2. She stated at [33] that having reviewed all of the  documents  in  the
      context of the evidence as a whole, she was not  satisfied:  (a)  that
      the police report provides reliable evidence that threats were made to
      the appellant in Afghanistan; (b)  that  the  threatening  letter  was
      genuinely written by a Taliban representative to  the  appellant;  and
      (c) and that the Facebook posts are  reliable  evidence  of  a  threat
      being made to him.

   3. She had earlier had regard to a report by Mr J H Zadeh  regarding  the
      asserted original threat letter  by  the  Taliban.  His  evidence  was
      produced from pages 27-39 of the appellant's bundle. She found at [32]
      that having considered the threatening letter in the  context  of  the
      evidence as a whole, including Mr Zadeh's report,  she  was  satisfied
      that it has the appearance of a Taliban threat  letter.  However,  she
      was not satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to say that it is in
      fact a genuine Taliban threat letter.

   4. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
      noted that the grounds complained that the appellant had  provided  to
      the  respondent  a  hospital  receipt  in  respect  of  his  brother's
      treatment in Kabul and a letter or form  provided  to  him  by  Border
      Force Control on entry to the UK, and that had  those  documents  been
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, a different outcome  in  respect
      of credibility may have ensued. It is arguable that they  should  have
      been before the First-tier Tribunal. She directed that the  respondent
      must ensure that they are available for the error of law hearing.

   5. Judge Davidge found that the remainder of the grounds appeared to have
      little merit, including the challenge to Judge  Sullivan's  criticisms
      of the expert on the basis that it was for the Tribunal to adjourn and
      insist that the expert be  called  to  see  if  he  could  answer  the
      difficulties identified in the report. She stated  that  this  ignored
      the fact that it was for the appellant to  decide  what  witnesses  to
      bring forward and the Judge  is  bound  to  make  a  decision  on  the
      evidence as it is presented. Nor did the criticisms  of  the  findings
      concerning the appellant's chronology appear to overcome the essential
      difficulty in the timeline identified.

   6. Mr Walsh, who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, adopted the grounds of appeal settled by other  counsel.  He
      submitted that the Judge made various factual errors  in  relation  to
      the evidence before her.

   7. In particular, she  stated  in  a  lengthy  paragraph  [21]  that  she
      considered the application of s.8 of the 2004 Act  to  the  case.  She
      concluded that there is  behaviour  to  which  that  section  applies,
      namely the appellant's failure to claim asylum on entry to the  UK  on
      19 March 2016. She noted that his explanation was that  he  did  claim
      asylum there but was sent away by the immigration officer when he  was
      approached at the airport. The claim was not supported by  documentary
      or witness evidence.

   8. Further, she stated that in his oral evidence,  he  described  dealing
      with at least two different immigration officials at the  airport.  He
      was questioned about his problems in Afghanistan. He said  they  noted
      that his visa was still valid. He was asked if  he  had  somewhere  to
      live and when he said that he did he was told to go on his way and  to
      claim asylum in Croydon. He  said  that  he  waited  a  further  month
      because he had never claimed asylum before and he  did  not  know  the
      regulations and was traumatised and not mentally fit to claim asylum.

   9. Judge Sullivan considered this  explanation  in  the  context  of  the
      evidence as a whole but did not find it credible. She stated  at  [21]
      that she knew from her work in this jurisdiction that  formal  records
      are made of those interviewed by immigration officials at the  airport
      and no such record has been filed in evidence.

  10. Nor did she find that it was credible  that  two  different  officials
      would have chosen to ignore a claim for asylum when such importance is
      attached to an applicant claiming at the first opportunity. It is  not
      credible that an intelligent, well educated man  like  the  appellant,
      who had lived in the UK for some three  and  a  half  years,  who  had
      studied for a BA and a Masters degree in Business Studies and who knew
      enough to  claim  asylum  at  the  point  of  entry,  would  not  have
      appreciated the importance of making a timely claim in Croydon.

  11. As part of her section 8 assessment she also stated that the appellant
      provided a medical report dated 1 September 2016. The doctor said that
      the appellant was too unwell to claim asylum between 19 and  24  March
      2016 but as he did not go to the  doctor's  until  24  March  2016  it
      appeared to her that the report must be based on the  appellant's  own
      account and is thus not independent confirmation of the position [21].

  12. She thus found that the appellant's delay in  claiming  asylum  is  to
      some extent damaging to his credibility. That is one factor she stated
      she must take into account when deciding the appeal.

  13. Mr Walsh contended that  in  fact  the  appellant  had  submitted  the
      "Border Force Letter" from Heathrow Airport, namely an IS 81 dated  19
      March 2016 showing that he submitted to inquiry at the airport for the
      purpose of claiming asylum. He would not  have  this  document  if  he
      simply entered the UK on his valid student visa.

  14. The appellant was asked at his screening interview whether he has  any
      documents or other evidence relevant to his claim. He stated in  reply
      to that question at paragraph 6.2 of the screening interview, page  A8
      of the respondent's bundle, that he was submitting documents  relevant
      to his claim that day, namely, the threat letter he  received  with  a
      translation; his application to the Police Commissioner in Afghanistan
      with a translation; a report from the hospital with translation and  a
      threat from Facebook from the Taliban.  It is recorded at 6.2 that the
      'above  documents  placed  on  file'.  Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  the
      respondent should have brought this to the attention of the First-tier
      Tribunal.

  15. The appellant produced the Home Office form IS 81. The purpose of  the
      form is to inform him that the Border Force Officer  intends  to  make
      further inquiries, or there are  other  formalities  to  be  completed
      before he can pass through immigration control.

  16. The appellant's full name is recorded in the document. He was notified
      that he is liable to be examined/further examined by  the  Immigration
      Officer or another Border Force immigration officer. He  was  informed
      that he is liable to be detained under Paragraph 16(1)(A) of  Schedule
      2 of the Immigration Act 1971, pending completion of  his  examination
      and pending a decision whether to cancel his leave to enter.  Further,
      it is noted that the officer also retained his passport, identity card
      or travel document.

  17. The document is signed by the Immigration Officer on 18 March 2016. It
      is noted that the "passenger" arrived on 18 March 2016 at  21:30  from
      Istanbul. He is an Afghan national. His date of  birth  is  1  January
      1991. The form was issued at 21:31. The appellant's  Turkish  Airlines
      boarding pass relating to that date was also produced.

  18. Mr Walsh submitted  that  the  respondent  should  have  provided  the
      Tribunal with the hospital record which was on file. It  was  recorded
      in the screening interview that  the  appellant  in  fact  produced  a
      hospital report with translation. The letter was not produced.

  19. Mr Walsh referred to  Judge  Sullivan's  concern  that  there  was  no
      explanation given for the delay from 19 March 2016 until 20 April 2016
      in claiming asylum.  He submitted  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact
      telephoned the Home Office at Croydon on 24 March 2016 and was given a
      reference number - namely, no: 24904 - for an appointment with Croydon
      on 20 April 2016. The respondent accordingly must  have  a  record  of
      that and it could not therefore have  been  properly  maintained  that
      there was a delay of a month in claiming asylum.  The  respondent  was
      requested  in  paragraph  2(b)  of  the  grounds  of  appeal   seeking
      permission to appeal, to supply the Tribunal '...with evidence of  the
      appellant's telephone claim on 24 March 2016'.

  20. Mr Walsh  accordingly  submitted  that  the  Judge  did  not  properly
      appraise the evidence of delay. There was evidence that he  approached
      the officer at the airport. The IS 81 tends to support that assertion.
      It is thus not correct to state that there  was  no  evidence  of  the
      explanation for the delay apart from the  appellant's  own  assertion.
      The respondent was in possession of a document evidencing his claim.

  21. Further, the Judge noted at [21] that there was no hospital record  of
      his brother's stay in hospital following  the  family  being  attacked
      when travelling in a car from Pul e Kumari in Kabul [36b]. In fact, at
      paragraph 6.2 of the screening interview it is recorded that a  report
      from the hospital with translation was submitted by the appellant  and
      is on file. The respondent should have provided the Tribunal with that
      hospital record which was on file.  Mr  Walsh  referred  to  paragraph
      16(1A) of Schedule 2, Part 1,  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  which
      provides that a person whose leave to enter has been  suspended  under
      paragraph 2A may be detained under the  authority  of  an  immigration
      officer pending completion of his examination under that paragraph and
      a decision on whether to cancel his leave to enter.

  22. Mr  Walsh  accordingly  submitted  that  a  substantial  part  of  the
      reasoning at [21] was based on incorrect information.   The  documents
      should have been placed before the Judge. This amounts  to  procedural
      unfairness in the circumstances.

  23. Further, Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  the  appellant  claimed  that  he
      telephoned the respondent five days later and got an  appointment  for
      asylum for 20  April  2016.  In  that  respect,  he  referred  to  the
      appellant's own witness statement which was  before  the  Tribunal  at
      A11, paragraph 12. The appellant stated that the respondent failed  to
      acknowledge that on his return to the UK on 19 March 2016 he  did  ask
      for asylum at Heathrow Airport but was advised by the officer that  as
      he still had a visa, he could live with his aunt and go  to  the  Home
      Office in Croydon and claim asylum at any time that he wanted.

  24. He stated that he did not claim asylum straight after arriving in  the
      UK as he was ill and suffering mentally because of the events that had
      taken place in Afghanistan. He saw his  GP  and  told  him  about  his
      inability to sleep and his mental problems. As a result of his  mental
      state, he claimed asylum on the date that he did.

  25. Mr Walsh referred  to  IS  76  Additional  Grounds,  produced  at  the
      hearing. He also referred to page 87 of the bundle containing a letter
      dated 1 September 2016 from Dr Lloyd, the appellant's GP which  stated
      that the appellant consulted them on 24 March 2016 and  was  diagnosed
      with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. This was confirmed and treated by
      their local psychologist. Dr Lloyd concluded  the  letter  and  stated
      that '...This letter is to confirm his  illness.  He  was  too  unwell
      between 19th and 24th March 2016 to apply for asylum'.

  26. Mr Walsh also referred to the additional grounds that were produced to
      the Tribunal, in which the appellant stated that five days  after  his
      arrival in the UK, namely on 24 March 2016, he received a threat  from
      the Taliban via Facebook at 5.49am. He then applied to Croydon on that
      day, after he had been to see his GP. He went to his GP as he had been
      unable to sleep and was suffering from headaches and pain all over his
      body.

  27. Mr Walsh referred to Ground 3 of the grounds of appeal.  He  submitted
      that there was no proper basis on which to find that Mr Zadeh was  not
      an expert on the authentication of documents said to emanate from  the
      police and Taliban. The Judge did  not  give  him  an  opportunity  to
      respond to that criticism.

  28. He submitted that the comparative samples produced by by Mr Zadeh were
      relevant. The Judge referred to this at [30]. This had been dealt with
      in paragraph 28, at page 33 of the appellant's bundle. Mr Zadeh stated
      that he had two sets of comparative samples, namely, hard copy samples
      and electronic samples. He also stated that he has continually handled
      Afghani documents since 1994. He has had sight  of  more  than  10,000
      original Afghani documents. The document, following a full examination
      of the  original  threat  letter  produced  at  page  33  matched  his
      comparative samples. In the translation at E2, it is  stated  that  it
      has been stamped by the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan and  signed  by
      the head of Baghlan's Central Intelligence. The name of the  signatory
      is given.

  29. At [31] of the decision, Judge Sullivan stated that  according  to  Mr
      Zadeh, there is no name beside the signature. She contrasted that with
      the translation at E1 which  clearly  shows  a  name  under  the  word
      "signed". She cannot explain  that  discrepancy.  Mr  Walsh  submitted
      however that there was in fact no discrepancy. He  submitted  that  in
      fact, the signature is contained in the original at E1.  That  finding
      was 'also procedurally unfair'.

  30. Mr Walsh further submitted that there was no  significant  discrepancy
      in the appellant's chronology as found by the Judge at [36(c)].

  31. He referred to the appellant's asylum interview - Q40.  The  appellant
      was asked what he did after receiving the Taliban letter. He  said  in
      reply that they were all  actually  scared  and  all  the  family  was
      disappointed and scared. ".... I  had just given information and  help
      to young people, it had only been one or two days since I came  and  I
      hadn't  been  anywhere."  The  appellant  answered  the  questions  in
      English. The Judge took from that that the letter was one or two  days
      after he returned on 19 February.

  32. Mr  Walsh  noted  that  the  appellant  was  not  satisfied  with  the
      translation in the interview and had sent in his  amended  transcript.
      These were  produced  in  the  appellant's  bundle,  together  with  a
      translation certificate from pages 19-24. The translator  stated  that
      the appellant said "we were actually scared and  all  the  family,  my
      father, my mum,  my  brothers  and  sisters  were  all  actually  very
      disappointed and scared, because I was there to just give  information
      and help people (young people) and actually, just like one or two days
      I was home. I didn't go anywhere."

  33. Mr Walsh submitted that it is easy to understand why the  Judge  might
      have made this mistake. He noted that after his asylum interview,  the
      appellant went over the tapes and  submitted  his  corrections,  which
      were set out  at  C1  of  the  respondent's  bundle.  These  were  the
      appellant's own corrections; there is no correction to question 40  at
      C7. However, the  Judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the  professional
      translation which was subsequently produced at A20.

  34. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  error
      regarding s.8 of the 2004 Act is not material. This was  a  peripheral
      issue. The Judge stated that this was one factor that  must  be  taken
      into account.

  35. Nor is her statement at [36(b)] that there is no copy of any  hospital
      record of the appellant's brother's stay in hospital.  The  Judge  has
      given reasons in the previous paragraphs regarding that issue  and  in
      particular at [35]. She  found  several  aspects  of  the  appellant's
      account unlikely.

  36. As to the grounds concerning the expert report produced by  Mr  Zadeh,
      they amount to a disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings.  She  has
      looked at the report in detail. She was not happy with the  report  in
      certain respects.

  37. Her interpretation at [31] was open to her. At E1, there  is  no  name
      besides the signature itself. At E2, there is a name shown  under  the
      word "signed."  In  any  event,  there  were  sound  reasons  for  not
      accepting the expert's report.

  38. Finally, paragraph [36(c)], which dealt with the answer to question 40
      of the asylum interview, amounts to a question of  interpretation.  It
      might reasonably be interpreted both ways including the interpretation
      the Judge placed on it. The transcript was in English.  This  too  did
      not amount to a material error of law.

  39. In summary, he submitted that the Judge has clearly set  out  why  the
      appellant would not be at risk.

  40. In reply, Mr Walsh contended with regard  to  question  40,  that  the
      interpretation may be open to the Judge had she had proper  regard  to
      the transcripts produced. However, she did not have regard to it.

  41. With regard to  the  expert  report,  her  findings  relating  to  his
      expertise are irrational.

  42. As to s.8, the respondent in the refusal letter at  paragraph  33  did
      not contend that the appellant failed to claim  asylum  in  time.  The
      issue raised by the respondent was that he did not give  a  reasonable
      explanation as to why he did not claim asylum at the port of entry. It
      was the Judge who "ran  with  that"  at  [21].  It  is  a  substantial
      paragraph. It cannot simply be ignored.

  43. He noted that the documents which were not  produced  at  the  hearing
      have still not been produced. The respondent still has documents about
      the appellant's brother's medical report.

      Assessment

  44.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  has  undertaken   a   detailed
      assessment.  Mr Avery has submitted that the errors  which  have  been
      identified were not material. She stated at the outset  at  [19]  that
      she has not considered any one aspect of this matter in  priority  to,
      or isolation from, another.

  45. Mr Walsh has however submitted that she has in fact given  a  detailed
      consideration regarding the application of s.8  of  the  2004  Act  at
      [21]. Moreover, the issue of delay in this case was not ever raised by
      the respondent.

  46. The Judge found that the appellant had not  provided  any  documentary
      evidence supporting his claim that he tried to  claim  asylum  at  the
      airport but was sent away by the Immigration Officer [21]. She  stated
      that from her work in this jurisdiction, formal records  are  made  by
      immigration officers of those who are interviewed at the  airport.  No
      such record had been filed in evidence. She concluded that it was  not
      credible that two different officials would have chosen  to  ignore  a
      claim for asylum when such importance  is  attached  to  an  applicant
      claiming at the first opportunity.

  47. However, as already noted, the Home Office form IS 81 was not produced
      at the hearing. It has now been produced. I have set out its terms  in
      some detail. The appellant was  informed  that  he  is  liable  to  be
      examined by an immigration  officer;  he  is  liable  to  be  detained
      pending completion of his examination and pending  a  decision  as  to
      whether to cancel his existing leave to enter, the immigration officer
      has also retained his passport.  It  is  noted  that  the  "passenger"
      arrived on the 18 March 2016 at 21.30. The form is stated to have been
      issued at 21.31. It is accordingly evident that the appellant was  not
      interviewed.

  48. The Judge also noted at [21] that the appellant's  delay  in  claiming
      asylum is to some extent damaging to his credibility. She stated  that
      the appellant stated that he waited a further  month  because  he  had
      never claimed asylum before.

  49. It was not evident that the appellant had delayed in claiming  asylum.
      There was clearly not a delay for a month before he claimed asylum.  A
      date was arranged shortly after  his  arrival  to  make  a  claim  for
      asylum. The appellant telephoned the Home  Office  at  Croydon  on  24
      March 2016, several days after he arrived, and was given  a  reference
      for an appointment in Croydon on 20 April 2016. He produced the letter
      from his GP dated 1 September 2016. He claimed in his evidence that he
      in fact went to see his GP and told him he could  not  sleep  and  had
      mental problems. It was as a result of his mental state, as  noted  by
      his GP, that he claimed asylum on the date that he did.

  50. It is also evident that the appellant submitted documentation  at  the
      time of his screening interview. The documents that  he  produced  are
      identified at paragraph 6.2. This included  the  Border  Force  letter
      from Heathrow Airport, the threat letter  and  translation,  a  report
      from the hospital with the translation, and  a  threat  from  Facebook
      from the Taliban.

  51. The report  relating  to  the  appellant's  brother  was  not  however
      produced at the hearing.

  52. The appellant produced the "one stop notice" issued to him under s.120
      of the 2002 Act on 20  April  2016.  He  also  produced  a  five  page
      response in which he confirmed that he produced  the  hospital  report
      with the translation at his screening interview.

  53. He also produced a translation  from  Afmart  Itab  of  his  interview
      record. His response to question 40 of the interview  is  set  out  at
      page 20 of the bundle. He also produced  at  C1  of  the  respondent's
      bundle corrections of the interview dated 20 September 2016  which  he
      stated he prepared on his own. He did not however amend his answer  in
      those set of corrections.

  54. The Judge stated at [36(c)] that no correction was made by the  person
      who transcribed the interview for the appellant at Annex C7.  However,
      that annex contains corrections of the interview that he said  he  has
      prepared.

  55. Nor did the Judge have regard to the appellant's evidence with  regard
      to question 40 of his interview.  He stated  in  paragraph  5  of  his
      witness statement at pages 4-5 of the bundle, that he was  asked  what
      he did after receiving the letter. He said it was "just  like  one  or
      two days I was home, I  did  not  go  anywhere."  He  noted  that  his
      response  had  been  confirmed  by  the   'transcriptionist   in   the
      transcript'.

  56. I have considered Mr Avery's  submissions  that  the  errors  are  not
      material in the circumstances.

  57. However, it is evident that he was not interviewed at the  airport  on
      arrival. He was been provided with a form by the Border Force  Control
      Immigration Officers in the UK. He  was  told  that  he  should  claim
      asylum at Croydon. Unfortunately, that document was  not  produced  to
      the Judge.

  58. Further, he had produced a hospital record at his screening interview,
      regarding his brother's treatment in  Kabul.  That  document  was  not
      produced.  It  has  still  not  been  produced.  There  has  been   no
      explanation as to why the documents which were placed in the file when
      he was interviewed - 6.2 - were not been produced  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.

  59. Although Mr Avery submitted that there was enough evidence before  the
      Judge to substantiate her ultimate conclusion that the  appellant  had
      not made out his asylum claim, I cannot  conclude  that  had  all  the
      necessary documents been produced and made available to the Judge, and
      if there had not been a  misapprehension  about  some  of  the  facts,
      including the translation regarding the  asylum  interview,  that  she
      would  inevitably  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion  as  to   the
      appellant's credibility.

  60. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the
      decision. It was agreed that in those circumstances, a fresh  decision
      would have to be made by another Judge.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. It is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made
      by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                             Date 23 January 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer






