
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13491/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th September 2017                |On 02nd November 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                    [J I]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant's appeal against refusal of his protection claim  was
         dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross ("the  judge")  in  a
         decision promulgated on 4th July 2017.  The appellant claimed to be
         at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
         appellant had been ill-treated there and had mental ill-health.  He
         took into account a report  prepared  by  a  country  expert.   The
         judge's overall conclusion was that the appellant's claim  was  not
         made out and that his involvement with the LTTE and  commitment  to
         their cause was negligible.  So far as  ill-health  was  concerned,
         the judge found that there was no evidence that appropriate medical
         treatment would not be available in Sri Lanka.  His depression PTSD
         could be treated there.  The appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds
         and human rights grounds.


      2. In the grounds,  it  is  contended  that  the  adverse  credibility
         findings  were  inadequately  reasoned.   The   appellant   was   a
         vulnerable witness and the extent of his ill-health and trauma were
         apparent  in  a  psychiatric  report.   The  judge's  reasons   for
         rejecting the appellant's core account  were  insufficient  in  the
         light of the evidence  and  the  fact  that  he  was  unrepresented
         throughout  his  asylum  application,  including  at  a   screening
         interview and two substantive interviews.  In a second ground,  the
         judge's dismissal of the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  under
         Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention was criticised.  It
         was accepted that the appellant was  severely  traumatised  in  Sri
         Lanka.   He  faced  the  prospect  of  being  handed  over  to  the
         authorities there in circumstances where he would have  no  support
         from family members  and  where  it  was  unlikely  that  necessary
         psychiatric support and assistance would be available.  The judge's
         finding  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  appropriate   medical
         treatment would be unavailable was not sustainable.  The judge also
         found that the appellant would have an opportunity to  be  reunited
         with his family but this could not be reconciled with his  evidence
         that he had not had contact with his wife  and  child  since  being
         separated from them in Sri Lanka in 2009.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  on
         26th July 2017.

      4.  Mr  Moriarty  said  that  there   were   two   distinct   grounds.
         Underpinning both was  acceptance  before  the  Tribunal  that  the
         appellant had been tortured in Sri Lanka and detained by  the  army
         there.  The Secretary of  State  accepted  that  ill-treatment  had
         taken place.

      5. So far as the first ground  was  concerned,  the  appellant  was  a
         vulnerable witness.  Medical evidence was the key to assessing  his
         circumstances.  He was unrepresented throughout the asylum  process
         and he highlighted, at a relatively early stage, that  he  had  not
         revealed everything about his case  during  the  first  substantive
         interview because the interviewing officer  was  female.   After  a
         substantial delay, he was interviewed once more  but,  again  by  a
         female  officer.   The  accepted  mistreatment  in  the  past   and
         consequent psychological illness were relevant to the assessment of
         credibility.

      6. So far as the second ground was  concerned,  there  was  inadequate
         reasoning in relation to Article 3  and  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, in the light of the  agreed  facts.   The  Upper
         Tribunal found in the country guidance case  of  GJ,  at  paragraph
         456, that inadequate  facilities  for  treating  mental  ill-health
         existed in Sri Lanka.  That guidance, taken with Dr Bell's  report,
         should have underpinned the  Tribunal's  assessment.   The  judge's
         finding that there was nothing to  show  that  treatment  would  be
         unavailable was flawed.  In any event, Dr Bell's opinion  was  that
         even if treatment were available, the appellant would  not  benefit
         from it because of his fear of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The
         judge had not engaged with this aspect. So far  as  Article  8  was
         concerned, the case put to the judge was that significant obstacles
         to return and reintegration were present.   The  appellant  had  no
         network of support and the Secretary of State accepted that he  had
         been traumatised.  His wife and children were separated from him in
         2009 there was no evidence of  contact  since  then.   The  judge's
         finding that there were no compelling circumstances appeared not to
         have taken this evidence properly into account.

      7. Mr Duffy said  that  the  Secretary  of  State  might  accept  that
         credibility had not been dealt with as  it  should  have  been,  in
         relation to the first  ground  but  this  was  not  material.   The
         appellant was swept up and ill-treated at the end of the war in Sri
         Lanka but this did not show continuing interest in him on the  part
         of the authorities.   It  was  difficult  to  see  how  a  rational
         assessment could lead to a conclusion that he would be perceived as
         a person posing a risk to the integrity of the unitary state in Sri
         Lanka.

      8. So far as the second ground was concerned, the relevant authorities
         included J [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y and Z  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362,
         concerning suicide risk.  Even though the threshold in N might  not
         be met, the Article 3 threshold might be reached in a case where  a
         risk of suicide was present.  The difficulty with the decision  was
         that the finding  that  there  was  no  such  risk  was  not  fully
         reasoned.

      9. In a brief response, Mr  Moriarty  said  that  if  the  appellant's
         account were accepted, he would fall  within  the  risk  categories
         identified in GJ.  He was released through payment of a  bribe  and
         so the Sri Lankan authorities had not yet finished  with  him.   So
         far as the second ground was concerned, even if J were put  to  one
         side,  the  absence  of  appropriate  facilities   to   treat   the
         appellant's mental ill-health was relevant to an assessment of  the
         obstacles to reintegration on return.

Conclusion on an Error of Law

     10. The decision has been carefully prepared, as one might expect  from
         the very experienced judge who heard the appeal. However, paragraph
         28 of the decision includes a finding that there  was  no  evidence
         that appropriate medical treatment would not be available  for  the
         appellant in Sri Lanka, to treating his depression and PTSD.   That
         finding cannot be reconciled with paragraph  456  of  the  guidance
         given by the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others  and  the  psychiatric
         evidence before the Tribunal, including Dr Bell's  report.   Taking
         the  country  guidance  and  the  report  together,  more  detailed
         reasoning would be required to explain the inference that access to
         treatment would be available.  The extent of the appellant's mental
         ill-health, not in issue before the judge, was such  that  guidance
         given by the Court  of  Appeal  in  J  and  Y  and  Z  fell  to  be
         considered, in relation to the risk the appellant  would  self-harm
         or seek to kill himself.  I  accept  the  submission  made  on  his
         behalf that the country evidence regarding medical and  psychiatric
         facilities in Sri Lanka bears on the extent to which there are very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration there.

     11. Overall, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside,
         as containing a material error of law.  It will be  remade  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House by a judge  other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge D Ross.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  will  be
         remade at Taylor  House,  before  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge D Ross,  on  the  first  available  date.   A  Tamil
         interpreter will be required.  None of the findings of fact will be
         preserved and the hearing will be de novo.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction may amount to a contempt of court.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

