
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 29 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                           HER HONOUR JUDGE STACEY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                    M J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of
       any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
       court. We make this order because the appellant claims that he is a
       refugee and so is entitled to privacy.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against a decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision to
       refuse him international protection.

    3. The grounds are extensive and were settled by Mr Michael West of
       Counsel.  Mr Bramble, for the Secretary, of State had had an
       opportunity of considering the grounds and had indicated to Mr Karim
       before the hearing that he saw that there were difficulties with the
       Decision and Reasons.

    4. The short point is that the Decision is essentially unsatisfactory
       and there are two things that leap out by way of illustration.

    5. The first is at paragraph 29(iv) where the judge criticises the
       appellant for giving "inconsistent answers" and says in terms that
       the appellant had described himself as having "no prior involvement
       with politics (question 151) and had never had a paid role in the
       BNP".  This was then said to be contradicted by his own evidence
       where he had said he had given time to the BNP.  This is a
       potentially good point but it is based on a complete misreading of
       the evidence.  What the appellant said, notwithstanding the use of
       quotation marks in the judge's decision, is that he had not been
       involved at a national level. That is an entirely different point
       and is no reason whatsoever to disbelieve the appellant.

    6. The second is at paragraph 39 where there is reference to documents
       being found unsatisfactory. The judge says, "the documents produced
       would be difficult to verify [so] that I am unable to accept the
       documents are credible."  The judge is perfectly entitled to find
       documents unhelpful and unreliable but the mere fact that they are
       difficult to verify is not of itself mean that the judge was
       "unable" to accept that they are not credible.  The finding has to
       be made in the round on all material available.  It may be that the
       documents are unreliable but they are not unreliable for the reason
       given by the judge.

    7. We emphasise that these errors are illustrative of a decision which
       is essentially unsatisfactory and we have to set aside the decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal for error of law.  Both parties agreed
       that this has to be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal for full
       findings to be made.  No findings have been preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. We set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
and we direct that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 November 2019               |



