

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/13455/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th October 2019                     |On 6th November 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     MH
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Khan of Buckingham Legal Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated on 2 July 2019, in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 22 December 2016  and  22  October  2018  was
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 1  January  1972,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance as  a  visitor
    to 30 November 2010.  The  Appellant  was  encountered  by  immigration
    officers on 12  January  2011  and  identified  as  an  overstayer  and
    released on reporting conditions which he did  not  comply  with.   The
    Appellant was similarly encountered in 2014, following which he made an
    unsuccessful application for an EEA Residence Card.  The Appellant  was
    next encountered on 19 June  2016,  arrested  and  detained,  following
    which he claimed asylum on 19 June 2016.  The basis of the  Appellant's
    asylum claim was that he was at risk on return  to  Pakistan  from  his
    brother-in-law who had threatened  him  in  relation  to  his  arranged
    marriage.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    claim did not fall within the Refugee Convention and in any  event,  it
    was not accepted that the Appellant would be at risk on return from his
    brother-in-law.  The claim was inconsistent and contradictory  as  well
    as lacking in detail such that it was not accepted  as  credible.   The
    Appellant's credibility had also been damaged by the delay in  claiming
    asylum pursuant to section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants etc) Act 2004.   For  essentially  the  same  reasons  the
    Appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection,  nor  would  his
    removal be a breach of Articles 2 and/or 3 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 4. The Respondent further refused the human rights claim on the basis that
    the Appellant did not have a partner or child in the United Kingdom and
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  was  not
    met.  There were no exceptional circumstances or any other reasons  for
    a grant of leave to remain.

 5. Judge Cockrill dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 2 July
    2019 on all grounds.  At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, it
    was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he did not fall within the
    Refugee Convention, instead  relying  on  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.  There was medical evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant was not  fit  to  give  oral  evidence  for
    mental health reasons such that the appeal was determined on the  basis
    of written evidence and submissions only.

 6. In relation to the Appellant's claim,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant was unhappy in his arranged marriage, which was  one
    of the promptings as to why he chose to come to the United Kingdom  and
    that there may be some truth in his claim to have had difficulties with
    his brother-in-law.  However, it was not considered to be credible that
    the Appellant's brother-in-law would pursue the Appellant from city  to
    city in Pakistan with a view to causing him harm and that aspect of the
    claim was found to be exaggerated.   The  assessment  made  as  to  the
    potential risk from the Appellant's brother-in-law is that  it  "really
    is minimal" and references are then made  to  Pakistan  being  a  large
    extremely  populous  country  and  it  not  being  accepted  that   one
    individual would take it upon himself to pursue the  Appellant  and  to
    cause him harm.  On the basis of these findings,  the  Appellant  could
    safely return  to  Pakistan.   The  Appellant's  credibility  was  also
    damaged by the delay in his claim for asylum.

 7. The Appellant's mental health is considered specifically in  paragraphs
    33 and 34 of the decision, with a summary given of the  report  from  a
    psychiatrist and the finding that the Appellant's circumstances do  not
    meet the very high test set out for a breach of Article  3  in  medical
    cases, in particular where risks arising removal could be  managed  and
    where health services exist in Pakistan.

 8. Finally, the First-tier Tribunal concludes that there is no  breach  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  on  health  or
    private life grounds as there would not be very  significant  obstacles
    to  his  reintegration  into  Pakistan  and  taking  into  account  the
    Appellant's precarious immigration status  and  the  other  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in making inconsistent findings as  to
    risk on return having found as a fact that  the  Appellant  was  in  an
    unhappy marriage and had difficulties with his  brother-in-law.   There
    is a failure to have regard to the prevalence  of  honour  killings  in
    Pakistan as context for the claimed risk.  Secondly,  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law in making inadequate findings  as
    to precisely what part of the Appellant's case was  believed  found  to
    have  been  exaggerated.   Finally,  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    materially  erred  in  law  in  disregarding  the  expertise   of   the
    psychiatrist and failing to consider whether internal relocation was  a
    reasonable option in light of the Appellant's mental health problems.

10. At the oral hearing, submissions were made by Ms Khan on behalf of  the
    Appellant  on  the  two  main  issues,  first  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility and second the assessment of  medical  evidence
    as  to  the  Appellant's  mental  health  problems.   In  relation   to
    credibility, it  was  admitted  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not
    entirely implausible and it was unsatisfactory in paragraph 31 for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to have made findings of fact in the negative as  a
    binary question on this issue.  It was submitted that there were a lack
    of reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal  for  why  the  Appellant's
    brother-in-law would want to pursue him, however reasons were given  by
    the Appellant in his written statement and the Judge made no assessment
    of his brother-in-law's ability to find the Appellant in Pakistan.  The
    way that the decision is phrased in  paragraph  31  suggests  that  the
    Appellant's brother-in-law would only not want to pursue the  Appellant
    because of the size of  the  population  in  Pakistan,  which  at  best
    conflates two separate issues.

11. On the second issue, it  was  submitted  that  there  had  been  an  in
    adequate assessment of the medical evidence available before the First-
    tier Tribunal and that the Judge  erred  in  considering  whether  harm
    would actually occur rather than the risk of such  harm.   The  medical
    evidence was not considered in the round  as  part  of  the  claim  for
    humanitarian protection and overall it was submitted that there had not
    been a proper or adequate consideration of Articles 3 and/or 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Lindsay submitted in  relation  to  the
    assessment of credibility that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to
    disbelieve the Appellant having had the benefit of all of the  evidence
    available to it.  Further, that an adequate assessment  of  credibility
    had been made,  with  findings  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant would be pursued across Pakistan by  his  brother-in-law  and
    the risk to him on return would be minimal such that  he  could  safely
    return.  The fact that low-level tension  between  family  members  had
    been accepted does not assist and is not uncommon but there was lack of
    evidence of any willingness or ability to pursue the Appellant.

13. In relation specifically to the Appellant's brother-in-law's ability to
    pursue him in Pakistan, there was only limited evidence in paragraph 29
    to 33 of the Appellant's written statement on  this  point,  which  was
    fully considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  clear  reasons  were
    given.  There was nothing in the evidence available  to  indicate  that
    either the Appellant's brother-in-law or any  of  his  associates  were
    capable of locating the Appellant across Pakistan and  nothing  further
    in the skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant to support  such  a
    claim.  In these circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to
    do with the point relatively shortly.

14. On the second issue, it was submitted that  prior  to  the  Appellant's
    arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2008/2009,  he   was   able   to
    independently relocate within Pakistan and had not specifically  relied
    on any obstacles to reintegration or relocation on return  now.   There
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant would
    be unable to access healthcare in Pakistan, which is available there.

15. Further, it was submitted  that  there  were  real  problems  with  the
    medical report  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  given  contradictions
    contained within it as to the Appellant's  prognosis  with  appropriate
    treatment, a lack of reasons for why the Appellant was said not be able
    to cope on return and no reasons as to  why  the  Appellant  could  not
    access treatment in Pakistan when he has been able  to  do  so  in  the
    United Kingdom.

16. In addition, the report does not comply with the Immigration and Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
    Directions, section 10 as it does not contain  the  required  statement
    about the author's duty to the Tribunal, nor the  prescribed  statement
    of truth and fails to include any express consideration of facts  which
    may detract from the Appellant's claim or self-reporting  of  symptoms.
    In such circumstances,  the  report  cannot  be  considered  as  expert
    evidence, which significantly reduces the weight which can be  attached
    to it.

17. Overall, Mr Lindsay submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  given
    sufficient reasons to find that the Appellant would  not  face  a  real
    risk of persecution  on  return  to  Pakistan  and  even  if  expressly
    considered, his case could not succeed on the evidence on the basis  of
    the decision in J v Home Secretary [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the first ground of appeal, as  to  how  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dealt with the Appellant's credibility and risk on  return  to
    Pakistan, it is necessary to  consider  in  more  detail  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal upon which the findings were made.

 2. The evidence before the First-tier Appellant as  to  the  claimed  risk
    from his brother-in-law was contained almost  entirely  in  his  asylum
    interview and written statement dated 27 May 2019.  That  evidence  was
    relatively thin and lacking in detail.  He stated that in Pakistan,  he
    was beaten up by his brother-in-law on two or three occasions  and  his
    leg was burned.  There is no other detail at all  of  these  incidents.
    He further states that having relocated to Karachi, he was  located  by
    his brother-in-law after three months, who punched him and returned him
    to the home area, threatening him during a journey which  lasted  about
    20 hours.  The Appellant states that  he  also  tried  to  relocate  to
    Multon and Lahore, for one  and  two  months  respectively  before  his
    brother-in-law located him,  threatened  him  and  beat  him  up.   The
    Appellant approached the police in Pakistan on  one  occasion,  but  no
    action was taken and the following day he was beaten up again for going
    to the police by his brother-in-law.  The  Appellant  states  that  his
    brother-in-law would be able to find him anywhere in  Pakistan  because
    he had connections to robbers, thieves and  local  representatives  for
    parties who were powerful people.

 3. The Appellant fears that his brother-in-law would always  try  to  find
    him and torture him because the fact that he  had  left  his  wife  was
    embarrassing for the family who faced added pressure of  the  community
    raising  questions  about  the  relationship.   In  around  2014,   the
    Appellant's brother-in-law called his mobile in the United Kingdom  and
    threatened his then partner to kill her and the Appellant.

 4. The medical report about the Appellant provides even less detail as  to
    the Appellant's claimed  experiences  in  Pakistan,  merely  containing
    repeated  references  to  traumatic  times  in  that  country  and  one
    reference to being kidnapped and held for 2 to 3 days in Pakistan which
    is not consistent with information given him his  asylum  interview  or
    written statement.

 5. On the basis of the very limited evidence available to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I find that adequate findings were made on his  claimed  risk
    on return to Pakistan and adequate reasons given  for  those  findings.
    The fact that the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  Appellant  was
    unhappy in his arranged marriage and may have had difficulties with his
    brother-in-law, is not inconsistent with  the  finding  that  any  risk
    posed by the latter was minimal.  In paragraph 31 an express finding is
    made that beyond those  matters,  the  Appellant  has  exaggerated  his
    claim, specifically the claim that his brother-in-law would pursue  him
    throughout Pakistan with a view to causing him harm and that there  was
    considerable exaggeration  of  the  threat  posed  by  the  Appellant's
    brother-in-law.

 6. Although to some extent  the  findings  in  paragraph  31  appeared  to
    conflate the two  issues  of  whether  the  Appellant's  brother-in-law
    first, had the desire to track him throughout  Pakistan  to  cause  him
    harm, and secondly, the means by which to locate  him  and  do  so;  it
    cannot be read in context as a finding that there is no desire to  harm
    the Appellant because of the large and  populous  nature  of  Pakistan.
    Paragraph 31 of the decision, against  the  findings  in  paragraph  30
    referred to above, can only reasonably be read as concluding  that  the
    Appellant's brother-in-law only poses a minimal risk to the  Appellant.
    This is in part because, having found that there may be some  truth  in
    difficulties between these individuals, it was not sufficiently serious
    that  the  Appellant's  brother-in-law  would  pursue   the   Appellant
    throughout Pakistan to cause him harm.  In any event, there was a  lack
    of any detailed evidence as to  the  means  by  which  the  Appellant's
    brother-in-law could in fact track  him  down  throughout  Pakistan  on
    return now, several years after he left  the  country  and  five  years
    since the Appellant claims to have been threatened by him.

 7. In these circumstances I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility,  which  also
    appropriately relied upon the delay of around six years before a  claim
    for asylum was made, despite the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  fled
    Pakistan to escape persecution in 2010.  Sufficiently detailed findings
    and reasons are given, reflecting the nature and extent of the evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In relation to the second issue, the assessment  of  medical  evidence,
    although not directly relied upon in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I find force in the submissions on behalf of  the  Respondent
    as to the shortcomings of the psychiatric report relied upon which self-
    evidently on its face does not comply with the Practice  Direction  for
    such reports.  In any event, it is clear from paragraphs 33 and  34  of
    the  decision  that  the  report  has  been  given  some  weight,  with
    acceptance of the clinical analysis that  the  Appellant  is  suffering
    from anxiety, fearfulness, PTSD and  a  depressive  disorder  and  that
    recommendations have been made for treatment but that at that time, the
    Appellant was not in receipt of any anti-psychotic medication.

 9. In paragraph 33 of the decision,  the  differing  descriptions  in  the
    psychiatric report as to suicide and self-harm or risk are noted and in
    paragraph 34 the doctors belief that the Appellant will not be able  to
    cope on return to Pakistan is expressly  not  relied  upon  within  the
    overall assessment.  When considering the medical report itself, it  is
    notable that no detailed assessment is made of the  Appellant's  likely
    situation on return to Pakistan and no reasons at all are given  as  to
    why he would be at risk of re-victimisation by others in Pakistan,  why
    he would be defined as a vulnerable male and why he would not  be  able
    to cope with unspecified challenges in Pakistan.  Further,  no  reasons
    are given as to why the Appellant would be unable to  access  treatment
    available on return to Pakistan.  There  is  a  distinct  lack  of  any
    detailed assessment of  risk  of  suicide,  with  various  inconsistent
    references to a high risk of self-harm, fleeting suicidal ideation  and
    escalation to a risk of attempted suicide, as well as a conclusion of a
    current risk of committing suicide.

10.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  attached  appropriate  weight  to  the
    psychiatric  report  and  has  reached  findings  on  it  and  on   the
    Appellant's mental health which were open to it to make on the evidence
    available, which  contained  significant  shortcomings  as  highlighted
    above.  Together with the findings that the Appellant does not face any
    objective fear of persecution  on  return  to  Pakistan  and  the  high
    threshold for breach of Articles 3 and/or 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights on medical and in particular mental health  grounds;  I
    find no error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  this
    regard, which is one which was open to it on the evidence available.

11. I find  no  separate  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules  as
    to whether there would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's
    reintegration into Pakistan.  No specific factors were relied  upon  by
    the Appellant as to any obstacles to reintegration  and  as  above,  no
    reasons at all given as to why he would be  unable  to  access  medical
    treatment in Pakistan.  There is no unlawful failure by the  First-tier
    Tribunal to not take into account the Appellant's  mental  health  when
    considering  reintegration  and  Article  8  more  generally,  to   the
    contrary, adequate reasons are given for  the  findings  which  clearly
    take this into account in paragraph 35 of the decision.

12. For these reasons, there is no error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal  on  all  grounds
    and that decision is therefore confirmed.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         1st November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

