
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/13474/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2018                             |On 25 June 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     AW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes and Mr I Palmer, instructed by Barnes
Harrild &     Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, who was born on 4 June  1990,  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.
    Since the age of 3, he  lived  in  the  Kurdish  Region  of  Iraq.   In
    November 2015, the  appellant  left  Iraq,  travelling  via  Turkey  to
    Greece, and then on to France.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in May
    2016, in the back of a lorry.

 2. Following his detection in the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.

 3. At paragraph 10 of his statement dated 14 September 2016, the appellant
    said that the reason for this claim was he had received  death  threats
    from the family of a girl with whom he had fallen in love in  the  KRI.
    The family of the girl objected to her relationship with the appellant.
     The appellant said that he and the girl then ran  away  together  but,
    eventually, her family found the couple and  killed  the  girl  in  the
    house she and the appellant were sharing.  The owner of the house  then
    arranged for the appellant to leave Iraq, with  the  assistance  of  an
    agent.

 4. The respondent did not believe this story. Neither did  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, on appeal. Both the respondent and the Judge  concluded
    that the appellant could safely return to the KRI in Iraq. Having heard
    the appellant give evidence, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  "did  not
    find him overall to  be  a  credible  witness"  (paragraph  65  of  the
    decision).  The judge's  reasons  for  not  believing  the  appellant's
    account of events in the KRI are set out in paragraphs 66 to 82 of  the
    judge's decision.  They are cogent and  have  not  been  challenged  in
    these proceedings.

 5. In the light of these findings, the judge agreed  with  the  respondent
    that it would not be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under
    the 1951 Refugee Convention to return the appellant to the KRI.

 6. Although the appellant had said  in  his  written  statement  that  his
    reason for claiming asylum was his fear  of  the  family  of  his  late
    girlfriend, the appellant had also said this:-

         "6.  I lived in Jolamerig with my mother ... and my brother ...  My
             brother is 28 years old.  My father was killed in 1993 when  I
             was three years old.  My father was a  KDPI  member,  and  was
             killed by the  Iranian  authorities  for  his  anti-government
             activities."

 7. So far as this assertion was concerned, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found as follows:-

         "83. I did not accept the Appellant's claim  that  his  father  had
             previously been involved with the KKPR (sic).  I  again  found
             that the Appellant's account lacked credibility and I noted he
             had produced no evidence in support of it."

 8. The judge did not say anything more in his decision about this  matter.
    He determined the appeal entirely by reference to the fact that, on the
    facts found, the respondent would not be  in  breach  of  his  relevant
    obligations by returning the appellant to Iraq.  The judge  accordingly
    dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

 9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  two  grounds.
    The first was that the First-tier Tribunal Judge-:

         "... has not determined the appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  a
         return to Iran.  This is unlawful.  The appellant is a  citizen  of
         Iran and not of Iraq and it was a fundamental aspect of  his  claim
         that he could not be returned to his country of  nationality.   The
         appellant had claimed risk on return to Iran on the  basis  of  his
         father's previous involvement in  a  Kurdish  separatist  political
         organisation and as a Kurdish failed asylum seeker and it is  plain
         that Judge Blake had to determine this central issue."

10. Ground 2 contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  given  no
    reasons at all why the appellant's account of his father's  involvement
    with a Kurdish separatist political  organisation  lacked  credibility.
    It was also submitted under this ground that the judge  had  not  given
    reasons why the appellant could be returned to  Iraq  safely.   It  was
    said that this conclusion was contrary to the evidence given on  behalf
    of the appellant by a country expert, Professor Bluth.

11. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  13
    October 2017 on both grounds.



B. The Refugee Convention

12. Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Refugee Convention defines  a  refugee  as  a
    person who:-

         "... owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons
         of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing  to  such
         fear, is unwilling to return to it."

13. Also of relevance to the appellant's submissions are Article  1(E)  and
    (F):-

         "E.  This Convention shall not apply to a person who is  recognized
             by the competent authorities of the country in  which  he  has
             taken residence as having the rights and obligations which are
             attached to the possession of nationality of that country.

         F.   The provisions of this  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:-

             (a)  he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a
                  crime against humanity, as defined  in  the  international
                  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of  such
                  crimes;

             (b)  he has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside
                  the country of refuge  prior  to  his  admission  to  that
                  country as a refugee;

             (c)  he has been guilty of acts contrary to the  purposes  and
                  principles of the United Nations."

14.  Articles 32 and  33  of  the  Convention  will  also  feature  in  the
    discussion which follows:-

         "Article 32 Expulsion

         1.   The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee  lawfully  in
             their territory save on grounds of national security or public
             order.

         2.   The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance  of
             a decision reached in accordance  with  due  process  of  law.
             Except where compelling reasons of national security otherwise
             require, the refugee shall be allowed to clear himself, and to
             appeal to and be represented for the purpose before  competent
             authority or a person or persons  specially  designed  by  the
             competent authority.

         3.   The Contracting States shall allow such a refugee a reasonable
             period within which  to  seek  legal  admission  into  another
             country.  The Contracting States reserve the  right  to  apply
             during that period such internal measures  as  they  may  deem
             necessary.

         Article 33 Prohibition of expulsion or return ("refoulement")

         1.   No Contracting State shall  expel  or  return  ("refouler")  a
             refugee  in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the   frontiers   of
             territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened  on
             account of his race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion.

         2.   The benefit of the present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
             claimed by a refugee whom there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
             regarding as a danger to the security of the country in  which
             he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of  a
             particularly  serious  crime,  constitute  a  danger  to   the
             community of that country."




C. Appeal against refusal of protection claim

15. Sections 82 and 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    so far as relevant, provides as follows:-

         "82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal

             (1)  A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -

                  (a)  the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                      protection claim made by P,

                  ...

             (3)  For the purposes of this Part -

                  (a)  a 'protection claim' is a  claim  made  by  a  person
                      ('P') that removal of P from the United Kingdom -

                      (i)  would breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
                           under the Refugee Convention, or

                      (ii) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection.

                  (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the  Secretary  of
                      State makes one or more of the following decisions -

                      (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
                           the Refugee Convention;

                      (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection:

                      ...

         84.  Grounds of appeal

             (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal  of  protection
                  claim) must be brought on one or  more  of  the  following
                  grounds -

                  (a)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention;

                  (b)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;

                  (c)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
                      Act 1998 (public authority not  to  act  contrary  to
                      Human Rights Convention)."




    D. Determining refugee status: domestic law

16. The Asylum and  Immigration  (treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004
    contains provisions whereby the respondent may or in some circumstances
    shall certify  certain  claims,  in  cases  of  removal  to  particular
    countries. The effect of  certification  is,  broadly,  to  preclude  a
    person from appealing on Refugee Convention grounds (and in some cases,
    human rights grounds) from  within  the  United  Kingdom.  The  present
    appeal is, necessarily, not of this kind.

17. According to the skeleton argument of Mr Symes and Mr Palmer, which  Mr
    Symes elaborated in oral argument, the appellant's "central submission"
    is that "the  UK's  core  and  central  obligation  under  the  Refugee
    Convention is to determine refugee  status  under  Article  1A(2)".  Mr
    Symes says the starred decision of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  in
    the case of Dag (Nationality - Country of Habitual  Residence  -  TRNC)
    Cyprus* CG [2001] 00002 is  "effectively  binding  precedent"  that  "a
    person's refugee status has to be assessed by reference to the  country
    or countries of which he is a national".

18. We shall have more to say  in  due  course  about  the  position  under
    European law.  However, so far as concerns the  interpretation  of  the
    2002 Act in the domestic context, we have no hesitation in rejecting Mr
    Symes' submissions.

19. A reading of Dag makes it abundantly clear that it  is  not  a  binding
    precedent for the proposition that the First-tier Tribunal  deciding  a
    protection appeal (or any of its predecessors  deciding  appeals  under
    previous legislation) has  to  determine  a  person's  refugee  status.
    Paragraph 2 of Dag explains that it was a "starred" (that  is  to  say,
    binding) determination only in respect of "legal questions  arising  in
    appeals by individuals claiming to  be,  or  who  are  alleged  to  be,
    nationals of the Turkish  Republic  of  Northern  Cyprus".   The  legal
    questions in issue are set out at paragraph 50  of  the  determination.
    They begin with the finding that Northern Cyprus  "is  not  capable  of
    being the country of a person's nationality for the purposes of Article
    1A(2) of the Convention".

20. In any event, the fact that a  person's  refugee  status  falls  to  be
    assessed by reference to the country or countries of which that  person
    is a national (or which was the country of formal  habitual  residence,
    in the case of a stateless person) does not in any  sense  mean  it  is
    necessary for the Tribunal, in determining a protection appeal, to make
    a finding as to whether  a  person  is  or  is  not  at  real  risk  of
    persecution in that country.

21. The only grounds  upon  which  an  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    protection claim can be brought are that the  removal  of  P  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
    Refugee Convention or its obligations in relation to  persons  eligible
    for a grant of humanitarian protection; or it would be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (section 84(1)).  So far as  the
    Refugee Convention is concerned, the key obligation is to be  found  in
    Article 33, which  contains  the  prohibition  on  "refoulement"  of  a
    refugee to the frontiers of  territories  where  his  or  her  life  or
    freedom would be threatened on account of  one  or  more  of  the  five
    reasons set out Article 1A(2).

22.  In order to make a protection appeal effective, so far as it  concerns
    the Refugee Convention, the respondent must  identify  the  country  to
    which it is proposed to remove P.  This  identification  will  normally
    occur in the written decision, refusing the claim.  If the letter  does
    not say, in terms, that the respondent intends  to  remove  P  to  that
    country, it will be sufficient if the letter identifies the country  to
    which P may safely return, since that will provide the necessary focus.
     In a paradigm case, the country identified will be the country of  P's
    nationality (or, if stateless,  the  country  of  P's  former  habitual
    residence).  In such a case, in order to decide whether removal to that
    country would violate Article 33, the Tribunal is required to determine
    whether P meets the definition of a refugee in  Article  1A(2)  of  the
    1951 Convention.  The Tribunal's finding on that issue will amount,  in
    practice, to a "status determination".

23. Where, however, the respondent indicates that he intends to remove P to
    a country of which P is not a national, there is no  legal  requirement
    under the 2002 Act for the Tribunal to make a finding as to  whether  P
    is or is not a refugee, vis-�-vis some other  country.   Leaving  aside
    the interplay between EU  law  and  the  immigration  rules  (which  we
    address later), as a matter of purely domestic law,  P  cannot  require
    the Tribunal (or the respondent) to make a finding as to P's status  or
    otherwise as a refugee, where that finding is not relevant  to  whether
    P's removal would violate Article 33.

24. What we have said is,  however,  subject  to  the  following  important
    exception.  As we have  seen,  Article  32  provides  that  contracting
    states are not to expel a refugee who is "lawfully in  their  territory
    save on grounds of national security or public order".  What  is  meant
    by "lawfully" in this context was considered by the Supreme Court in ST
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC  12.
    The Court held that "the word 'lawfully' in Article 32(1) must be taken
    to refer to what is to be treated as lawful according to  the  domestic
    laws of the contracting state"  (Lord  Hope,  paragraphs  40  and  49).
    Accordingly, a person, such as the present appellant, who  entered  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully  and  who  has  never  had  leave  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 is not entitled to the protection of  Article  32,
    whether or not he might be a  refugee.   If  the  appellant  were  here
    lawfully, then - leaving aside the issue of national security or public
    order - it would be necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether  he
    is a refugee.  This would be so, regardless of the country to which the
    respondent proposed to return him.




    E. Determining refugee status: European Union law

25. We turn to the position under European Union  law.   The  Qualification
    Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC 29 April 2004) continues  to  bind  the
    United Kingdom, which opted out of the new version that came into force
    in other EU States in December 2013.

26.  For  our  purposes,  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Qualification
    Directive are as follows:-

         "Article 13

         Granting of refugee status

         Member States  shall  grant  refugee  status  to  a  third  country
         national or a stateless person,  who  qualifies  as  a  refugee  in
         accordance with Chapters II and III.

         ...

         Article 24

         Residence permits

         1.   As soon as possible  after  their  status  has  been  granted,
             Member States shall issue to beneficiaries of refugee status a
             residence permit which must be valid for at least three  years
             and renewable unless compelling reasons of  national  security
             or public order otherwise require, and  without  prejudice  to
             Article 21(3).

             Without prejudice to Article 23(1), the residence permit to be
             issued to the family members of the beneficiaries  of  refugee
             status may be valid for less than three years and renewable.

         2.   As soon as possible after the status has been granted,  Member
             States shall issue to beneficiaries of  subsidiary  protection
             status a residence permit which must be valid for at least one
             year and  renewable,  unless  compelling  reasons  of  natural
             security or public order otherwise require."

27. Mr Symes submits that Article 13 "requires the grant of refugee  status
    to a person who satisfies the conditions in Chapters II and III; i.e. a
    person who satisfies the definition of refugee  and  is  not  excluded,
    must be given refugee status".

28. There is, however, an exception, which  Mr  Symes  recognises.   It  is
    contained  in  the  Asylum  Procedures  Directive  (Council   Directive
    2005/85/EC of 1 December 2005).  Again, the United  Kingdom  has  opted
    out of the recast Directive, which became operative for other EU States
    on 31 July 2015. The 2005 Directive therefore continues to  govern  the
    position in this country.

29. In his submissions, Mr Clarke puts  particular  emphasis  upon  recital
    (22) of the Procedures Directive.  In our view, he is right to  do  so.
    The recital provides as follows:-

         "(22)    Member States  should  examine  all  applications  on  the
             substance, i.e.  assess  whether  the  applicant  in  question
             qualifies as a refugee in accordance  with  Council  Directive
             2004/83/EC of 29 April  2004  on  minimum  standards  for  the
             qualification and  status  of  third  nationals  or  stateless
             persons  as  refugees  or  as  persons  who   otherwise   need
             international protection and the  content  of  the  protection
             granted,  except  where   the   present   Directive   provides
             otherwise, in particular where it can  be  reasonably  assumed
             that another country  would  do  the  examination  or  provide
             sufficient protection.  In particular,  Member  States  should
             not  be  obliged  to  assess  the  substance  of   an   asylum
             application where a first country of asylum  has  granted  the
             applicant refugee status or  otherwise  sufficient  protection
             and the applicant will be re-admitted to this country."

30. Also of relevance is recital (23):-

         "(23)    Member States should also not be  obliged  to  assess  the
             substance of an asylum application where the applicant, due to
             a connection to a third country as defined  by  national  law,
             can reasonably be expected to seek protection  in  that  third
             country.  Member States should only proceed on the basis where
             this particular applicant would be safe in the  third  country
             concerned.   In  order  to  avoid   secondary   movements   of
             applicants,  common  principles  for  the   consideration   or
             designation by Member States of third countries as safe should
             be established."

31. Article 25 of the Procedures Directive identifies the  cases  in  which
    Member States are not required to determine whether an applicant  meets
    the definition of a refugee:

         " Article 25

         Inadmissible applications

         1. In addition to cases in which an application is not examined  in
         accordance with regulation (EC) No. 343/2003, Member States are not
         required to examine whether the applicant qualifies as a refugee in
         accordance  with  Directive  2004/83/EC  where  an  application  is
         considered inadmissible pursuant to this Article.

         2.  Member  States  may  consider  an  application  for  asylum  as
         inadmissible pursuant to the Article if:

             (a) another Member State has granted refugee status;

             (b) a country which is not a Member State is considered  as  a
             first country of asylum for the applicant, pursuant to Article
             26;

             (c) a country which is not a Member State is considered  as  a
             safe third country for the applicant, pursuant to Article 27;

             (d) the applicant is allowed to remain  in  the  Member  State
             concerned on some other grounds and as a result of this he/she
             has been  granted  a  status  equivalent  to  the  rights  and
             benefits  of  the  refugee  status  by  virtue  of   Directive
             2004/83/EC;

             (e) the applicant is allowed to remain in the territory of the
             Member State concerned on some  other  grounds  which  protect
             him/her against refoulement pending the outcome of a procedure
             for the determination of status pursuant to point (d);

             (f) the applicant has lodged an identical application after  a
             final decision;

             (g) a dependant of the applicant lodges an application,  after
             he/she has in accordance with Article 6(3) consented  to  have
             his/her case be part of an application made on his/her behalf,
             and there are no facts relating to the dependant's  situation,
             which justify a separate application."

32. Articles 26 and 27  deal  respectively  with  the  concepts  of  "first
    country of asylum" and "safe third country":-

        "Article 26

        The concept of first country of asylum

         A country can be considered to be a first country of asylum  for  a
         particular applicant for asylum if:

         (a)  he/she has been recognised in that country as  a  refugee  and
             he/she can still avail himself/herself of that protection, or

         (b)  he/she otherwise enjoys sufficient protection in that country,
             including benefiting from the principle of non-refoulement;

             provided that he/she will be re-admitted to that country.

             In applying the concept of first  country  of  asylum  to  the
             particular circumstances of an  applicant  for  asylum  Member
             States may take into account Article 27(1).

         Article 27

         The safe third country concept

         1.   Member States may apply the safe third  country  concept  only
             where the competent authorities are satisfied  that  a  person
             seeking  asylum  will  be  treated  in  accordance  with   the
             following principles in the third country concerned:

             (a)  life and liberty are not threatened on account  of  race,
                  religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
                  group or political opinion;

             (b)  the principle of non-refoulement in accordance  with  the
                  Geneva Convention is respected;

             (c)  the prohibition of removal, in violation of the right  to
                  freedom from  torture  and  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading
                  treatment as laid down in international law, is respected;
                  and

             (d)  the possibility exists to request refugee status and,  if
                  found to be a refugee, to receive protection in accordance
                  with the Geneva Convention.

         2.   The application of the safe third  country  concept  shall  be
             subject to rules laid down in national legislation, including:

             (a) rules requiring a connection between  the  person  seeking
                  asylum and the third country concerned  on  the  basis  of
                  which it would be reasonable for that person to go to that
                  country;

             (b)   rules  on  the  methodology  by  which   the   competent
                  authorities satisfy themselves that the safe third country
                  concept may be applied to a particular  country  or  to  a
                  particular applicant.  Such methodology shall include case-
                  by-case consideration of the safety of the country  for  a
                  particular  applicant  and/or  national   designation   of
                  countries considered to be generally safe;

             (c)  rules in accordance with international law,  allowing  an
                  individual  examination  of  whether  the  third   country
                  concerned is safe for a particular applicant  which  as  a
                  minimum, shall  permit  the  applicant  to  challenge  the
                  application of the  safe  third  country  concept  on  the
                  grounds that he/she would be subjected to  torture,  cruel
                  and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

         3.   When implementing a decision solely  based  on  this  Article,
             Member States shall:

             (a)  inform the applicant accordingly; and

             (b)  provide him/her with a document informing the authorities
                  of the third country, in the  language  of  that  country,
                  that the application has not been examined in substance.

         4.   Where the third country does  not  permit  the  applicant  for
             asylum to enter its territory, Member States shall ensure that
             access to a procedure is given in accordance  with  the  basic
             principles and guarantees described in Chapter II.

         5.   Member States shall inform the Commission periodically of  the
             countries to which this concept is applied in accordance  with
             the provisions of this Article."




    F. Related immigration rules

33. The respondent has made immigration rules, which are designed  to  give
    effect to Articles 25 to 27.  The rules apply to applications  made  on
    or after 24 November 2016.  The  applicant  made  his  application  for
    asylum very shortly before that date.  The rules are, however, of  more
    general relevance, given that they represent the respondent's  domestic
    articulation of what he considers  to  be  his  obligations  under  the
    Procedures Directive:-

         "Inadmissibility of non-EU applications for asylum

         345A.    An asylum claim will be declared inadmissible and will not
               be  substantively  considered  if  the  Secretary  of  State
               determines that one of the following conditions are met:

               (i)    another Member State has granted refugee status;

               (ii)   a country which is not a Member State  is  considered
                    to be a first  country  of  asylum  for  the  applicant,
                    according to the requirements of paragraph 345B;

               (iii)  a country which is not a Member State  is  considered
                    to be a safe third country for the applicant,  according
                    to the requirements of paragraph 345C and 345D;

               (iv)   the applicant is allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
                    Kingdom on some other grounds and as a  result  of  this
                    has been granted a status equivalent to the  rights  and
                    benefits of refugee status;

               (v)    the applicant is allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
                    Kingdom on some other grounds which protect them against
                    refoulement pending  the  outcome  of  a  procedure  for
                    determining their status in accordance with (iii) above.

         First Country of Asylum

         345B.    A country is a first country of asylum, for  a  particular
               applicant if:

               (i)    the applicant has been recognised in that country  as
                    a refugee and they can still avail  themselves  of  that
                    protection; or

               (ii)   the applicant otherwise enjoys sufficient  protection
                    in that country; including benefiting from the principle
                    of non-refoulement; and

               (iii)  the applicant will be readmitted to that  country  in
                    either case.

         Safe Third Country

         345C.    A country  is  a  safe  third  country  for  a  particular
               applicant if:

               (i)     the  applicant's  life  and  liberty  will  not   be
                    threatened on account of  race,  religion,  nationality,
                    membership of a particular  social  group  or  political
                    opinion in that country;

               (ii)   the principle of non-refoulement will be respected in
                    that country in accordance with the Refugee Convention;

               (iii)  the prohibition of removal, in violation of the right
                    to freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or  degrading
                    treatment  as  laid  down  in  international   law,   is
                    respected in that country;

               (iv)   the possibility exists to request refugee status and,
                    if found to be  a  refugee,  to  receive  protection  in
                    accordance with the Refugee Convention in that country;

               (v)    there is a sufficient degree  of  connection  between
                    the person seeking asylum and that country on the  basis
                    of which it would be reasonable for them  to  go  there;
                    and

               (vi)   the applicant will be admitted to that country.

         Safe Third Country connectivity

         345D.    In order to determine whether  it  is  reasonable  for  an
               individual  to  be  removed  to  a  safe  third  country  in
               accordance with paragraph 345C(v), the  Secretary  of  State
               may have regard to, but is not limited to:

               (i)    any  time  the  applicant  has  spent  in  the  third
                    country;

               (ii)   any relationship with persons in  the  third  country
                    which may include:

                    a. nationals of the third country;

                    b. non-citizens who are habitually resident in the third
                        country;

                    c. family members seeking status in the third country;

               (iii)  family lineage, regardless of  whether  close  family
                    are present in the third country; or

               (iv)   any cultural or ethnic connections."




   G. Adjudicating status recognition issues in protection appeals

34. We have already explained how, looking at the legislation in the purely
    domestic context, the country to which the respondent intends to return
    P is an essential element in determining the nature and  scope  of  P's
    appeal against the refusal of a protection claim, where P is not in the
    United Kingdom lawfully and so Article 32  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    does not apply.

35. In the EU law context, Article 25 of the Procedures Directive (now also
    effectively contained in  paragraph  345A  of  the  Rules),  read  with
    Articles  26  and  27,  determines  the  circumstances  in  which   the
    respondent can refuse to engage with the question of  whether  P  meets
    the definition of a refugee in Article 1A(2) of  the  1951  Convention.
    How do these Articles and (now) their related immigration rules work?

36. To take one example, if the respondent were to conclude that P  can  be
    sent to country A but country A makes no provision for granting refugee
    status, then, as a matter of EU law and (now) the  associated  domestic
    immigration  rules,  the  respondent  could  not  lawfully  refuse   to
    determine whether P is, or is not, a refugee by reference to country B,
    P's country of nationality. Article  24(1)(d)  and  paragraph  345C(iv)
    preclude country A from being a  safe  third  country.  The  Procedures
    Directive  will  not,  therefore,  excuse  the  respondent   from   his
    obligation under the Qualification Directive to determine whether P  is
    a refugee. This is so, regardless of the fact that  there  is  no  risk
    that country A would refoule P in breach of Article 33 of  the  Refugee
    Convention, and regardless of whether  P  is  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in terms of Article 32 of that  Convention.  For  applications
    made  today,  the  immigration  rules  would,  likewise,  require   the
    respondent to decide P's refugee status.

37.  How, though, can P's rights under  these  instruments  be  effectively
    guaranteed, if P's case is that the respondent wrongly determined them,
    on the particular facts? Before us, both parties appeared to adopt  the
    position that P can do so as part of a protection appeal under  section
    82 of the 2002 Act. It is, nevertheless, necessary to  examine  whether
    this is right.

38. We remind ourselves of what section 84 provides. An appeal against  the
    refusal of a protection claim must be brought on one  or  more  of  the
    grounds specified in subsection  (1).  As  we  have  already  noted  at
    paragraph 21 above, in order to ensure that  a  section  82  appeal  is
    effective and that Parliament's will in enacting that provision is  not
    thwarted, the respondent must specify a country or territory to which P
    is to be removed. That becomes the focus of the appeal, by reference to
    which the grounds are tested.

39. Let us now return to the example in paragraph 35 above. The  respondent
    specifies country A as the place of P's proposed return. The respondent
    considers that Country A is a safe third country, within the meaning of
    Article 27/paragraph 345D. The respondent therefore refuses  to  decide
    whether P is a refugee, by reference  to  country  B,  P's  country  of
    nationality.

40.  In such  a  scenario,  P  could  judicially  review  the  respondent's
    decision to remove P to country A. P would request mandatory relief  to
    compel the respondent to determine whether P meets the definition of  a
    refugee.  If  P  were  successful  in  the  judicial  review,  but  the
    respondent then concludes P is not a refugee, P would  be  able  appeal
    under section 82 against what would, in that event, be the  refusal  of
    P's protection claim. The ground under section 84 would be that removal
    to country B would violate Article 33 of the Refugee Convention.

41. Are the section 84 grounds capable of encompassing the whole of what we
    have described in paragraph 39, so  as  to  make  the  judicial  review
    unnecessary? We consider that they are.

42. P's case would be that removal to country B must be the  focus  of  the
    section 82 appeal because the respondent is legally unable to  rely  on
    country A as a safe third country.

43. In such a  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  should  be  as
    follows:

     (1) to decide if, on the facts, the  respondent  can  lawfully  invoke
    Article 25, with reference to Article 27; i.e.  is  country  A  a  safe
    third country for P?

     (2) if yes, then neither the respondent nor the Tribunal  is  required
    to determine P's refugee status (assuming Article 32 does not apply);

     (3) if no, then the focus must be on country B and the  Tribunal  must
    decide whether P's removal to country B would violate Article 33 of the
    Refugee Convention.

44.  The same process would apply where the issue is proposed return to the
    first country of asylum (Article 26/paragraph 345B), rather than a safe
    third country. As we shall see, this is, in  fact,  the  issue  in  the
    present appeal.

45. We consider that this  approach  is  compatible  with  the  wording  of
    sections 82 and 84 and accords with  Parliament's  intention,  when  it
    enacted those provisions in their current form. P's grounds would  have
    made it plain to the respondent what case the latter has to meet before
    the Tribunal. In most cases, it should be possible for the Tribunal  to
    make findings on both the safe third country issue and,  if  necessary,
    the country of nationality issue,  following  a  single  hearing.  Both
    sides would be on notice and therefore should be prepared to deal  with
    both issues.

46. We have seen that, where Article 32 of the  Refugee  Convention  is  in
    play, the respondent will be required to determine P's refugee  status,
    since to expel a refugee who is  lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    contrary to the Convention, absent  grounds  of  national  security  or
    public order (paragraph 23 above). It seems to us that,  where  Article
    32 applies, the effect of sections 82 and 84 is to require  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to determine P's status or otherwise as a  refugee,  even
    if the respondent intends to remove P to a country of first asylum or a
    safe  third  country,  within  Article  26  or  27  of  the  Procedures
    Directive.

47.  We can now focus on the parties'  submissions  regarding  EU  law.  Mr
    Symes submitted that Article 26 (first country of  asylum)  has  to  be
    read as encompassing Article 27.  We do not agree.

48. The key distinction between Article 26 (the concept of first country of
    asylum) and Article 27 (the safe third country concept),  is  that  the
    first country of asylum has to be a  country  where  P  has  previously
    lived.  In contrast, a safe third country is not one (or  need  not  be
    one) where P has  previously  lived.   This  point  is  made  plain  by
    recitals (22) & (23) to the Procedures Directive.  It also emerges from
    the reference in Article 26 to P being "re-admitted to  that  country",
    whereas Article 27 refers to rules in national legislation requiring  a
    connection between P and the third country "on the basis  of  which  it
    would be reasonable for that person to go to that country".  This point
    is reinforced by paragraph 345C of the immigration  rules,  where  sub-
    paragraph (vi) requires that "the applicant will be  admitted  to  that
    country" (our emphases).

49. Although the final sentence of Article 26 says that Member States  "may
    take into account Article 27(1)"  in  applying  the  concept  of  first
    country of asylum to the particular circumstances of an applicant, that
    is a power, not a duty.  It does not find expression in the immigration
    rules which govern applications made on or after 24 November 2016.




H. Deciding the present appeal

50. We can now return to the particular facts of the appellant's  case.  It
    does not appear that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  referred  to
    Articles 25 to 27 of the Procedures Directive  or,  indeed,  given  any
    other relevant assistance.  We are, however, satisfied that he did  not
    make any material error of law in concluding that the  appellant  could
    safely be returned to the IKR.

51. On the facts found, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  required  to
    address the issue of whether the appellant  met  the  definition  of  a
    refugee; in  other  words,  he  was  not  required  to  make  a  status
    determination in respect of the appellant. This was because  the  judge
    found that the appellant could safely return to the IKR part  of  Iraq.
    Therefore, although the judge did not refer to it, Article  26  applied
    to the facts of the case.

52. In order to decide whether the judge was entitled to make that  finding
    of fact, it is necessary to have regard to the country guidance, as  it
    was in force at the  time  of  the  judge's  decision.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was required  to  follow  the  country  guidance  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC),  subject  to  the
    amendment made by the Court of Appeal in that case and subject  to  the
    case before him dealing with the same or  similar  evidence  (which  it
    did).

53. The Upper Tribunal in AA found, as  part  of  its  guidance,  that  the
    respondent "will only return P to the IKR if P originates from the  IKR
    and P's identity has been "pre-cleared" with the IKR authorities.   The
    authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an expired  or  current
    passport or laisser pass�".  The IKR was also found  to  be  "virtually
    violence free".

54. The appellant plainly did "originate" from the IKR for the purposes  of
    the country guidance.  He had lived there virtually the entirety of his
    life.  The country guidance was clear that the appellant  could  expect
    "sufficient protection" in the IKR part of Iraq.  The  appellant  would
    be returned to Erbil by air.  Even Professor Bluth's report, upon which
    the appellant relied, makes it clear (at 5.2.5) that there is  no  real
    risk of the appellant being removed from the IKR to Iran.

55. The country guidance, together with the facts that  the  appellant  had
    lived as a Kurd in Iraq for almost all his life, and  that  his  mother
    and sibling were still there, showed to the  requisite  standard  that,
    for the purposes of Article 26, the appellant would be  re-admitted  to
    the IKR.  The fact that he would need to be pre-cleared does not affect
    this issue.

56. As against this, paragraph 5.2.6 of  Professor  Bluth's  report  merely
    asserts that the appellant "is not able to  acquire  the  documentation
    that is needed for him to be returned".   No  adequate  explanation  is
    given for the bald assertion.

57. For these reasons, there is no material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusion that the  appellant  could  be  returned  to  Iraq,  without
    violating   the   respondent's    international    obligations.    Iraq
    (specifically the IKR) was the legal focus of the appeal.

58.  It was, accordingly, unnecessary for the judge to make a finding about
    whether the appellant was at real risk of persecution, if  returned  to
    Iran.  Indeed, for the reasons we have already explained, it would have
    been wrong for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to have purported to  make
    a refugee status determination in respect  of  the  appellant.  On  the
    basis of his findings of fact and in the light of  the  extant  country
    guidance, the respondent was  not  required  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant was a  refugee  by  reference  to  Iran  as  his  country  of
    nationality.

59. That disposes of the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

60. In any event, we do not find there is merit in the challenge in  ground
    2 to the judge's adverse  credibility  finding  regarding  the  account
    given by the appellant of his father in Iran.  As we have already said,
    the judge  gave  legally  sustainable  reasons  (which  have  not  been
    challenged) for finding that the account of a relationship with a young
    woman - and its consequences - lacked credibility.  That  account  was,
    we remind ourselves, the expressly stated reason why the appellant said
    he had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.  Having been found not  to
    be a witness  of  truth  in  respect  of  that  important  matter,  the
    appellant failed to show why he should be  regarded  as  a  witness  of
    truth in respect of any other aspect of  his  account.  The  judge  was
    therefore entitled to say that the  appellant  needed  to  adduce  some
    evidence, beyond his own word, if his account of what had  happened  in
    Iran was to be believed. Accordingly, even if the judge had been  under
    an obligation to deal with the issue of Iran, his  conclusion  on  that
    issue was sound.

61. We are conscious that the factual position regarding return to the  IKR
    may have changed since the judge's decision. In particular, any  return
    may not be direct by air to Erbil but via Baghdad. The  scheme  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 is, however, such  that  the
    Upper Tribunal cannot engage with any  change  in  the  factual  matrix
    unless it finds that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and should be set aside. For the  reasons
    we have given, we do not find the First-tier Tribunal judge's  decision
    involved the making of any such error. Accordingly,  if  the  appellant
    wishes to advance a case by  reference  to  new  facts,  he  must  make
    appropriate submissions to the respondent.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain an  error  of
law, such as to require the decision to be set aside.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               Signed                     Date: 22 June
                                   2018






                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

