
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13116/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 17 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Navaratnaraja [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, of Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 1 February 2019 dismissed the  appeal  of  Navaratnaraja
    [K] against a decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  9  November
    2018 to refuse to grant asylum but allowed his appeal on  human  rights
    grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR.
2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer  to  him  as  the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will refer to  Navaratnaraja
    [K] as the appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.
3.   The  appellant  entered  Britain  on  23  April  2007  and  attended  a
    screening interview the following day and a full asylum interview on  4
    May 2007.  When his claim was refused in November 2018 he had therefore
    been in Britain for eleven years.  The Secretary  of  State  considered
    that the appellant was caught by the provisions of Article 1F(e) of the
    Refugee Convention and also found that he did not qualify for leave  to
    remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.
4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and submissions  from  both
    parties  and  in  paragraphs  29  onwards  set  out  his  findings  and
    conclusions.  He found that the appellant's evidence, both oral and  in
    the asylum interview, was ambivalent as to what assistance  he  had  or
    had not given to the LTTE and stated:-

         "Even applying the lower standard of proof, I have  not  found  his
         evidence to be sufficiently consistent for me to reach a  different
         conclusion from that of the respondent, namely that  the  appellant
         is excluded from protection for a Convention reason due to  Article
         1F(e).".

     He then went on to write:-

         "For the same reasons I am not persuaded that the appellant  should
         succeed in respect of a claim for humanitarian protection,  because
         there are no reasons to conclude that he is at risk on return - not
         least after the length of time which has elapsed since the  alleged
         events which may place him at risk - and will not be able  to  seek
         the protection of the authorities."

5.   The judge however went on in paragraph 37 to write:-

         "However, I am persuaded that the appellant  should  succeed  under
         Article 8 ECHR, because of the length of time he has been in the UK
         and the fact that he is now married to another Sri Lankan (since  6
         September 2009), albeit that neither of them has status  to  be  in
         the UK, and he will have developed a private life  in  the  UK.   I
         have full regard to Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 that little weight should be given to someone's
         private life when their status in the UK has been  precarious,  but
         that is not to say that no weight should be given to the length  of
         time which he has been in the UK.  No explanation was given by  the
         respondent as to why the decision had taken so long to provide  and
         I am persuaded that the weight given  to  the  public  interest  in
         controlling immigration should be  give  less  weight  due  to  the
         length of time the appellant has been in the UK.".

6.   The judge therefore allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.
7.   The Secretary of State appealed that decision stating firstly that  the
    judge when considering the Article 8 rights  of  the  appellant  should
    have taken into account  when  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision the fact that it had been found that the  appellant  had  been
    involved in the commission of crimes against humanity.   Moreover,  the
    grounds argued that no exceptional circumstances  had  been  shown  and
    that the judge had erred in his  application  of  the  House  of  Lords
    decision in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41.  It was claimed that the
    judge had erred in stating that he placed weight on the fact  that  the
    appellant had a  wife  in  Britain  when  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious.  Permission was granted on 26 April 2019.
8.   On 11 March 2019 Resident Judge Zucker served notice under Rule  35  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 stating  that  he  considered  there  was  a  clear
    material error of law in the determination and that it was  appropriate
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier.  He  stated  that
    any representations to the contrary  should  be  made  within  fourteen
    days.  Within the fourteen day period a lengthy reply was served.  This
    first stated that the Tribunal should place weight on the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, the First-tier being an expert  Tribunal,  and
    there was no requirement for the judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    set out a formulaic approach to Article 8 of the ECHR.   Secondly,  the
    reply argued that the judge was correct to place weight  on  the  delay
    referring  to  the  judgment  in  EB  (Kosovo)  helpfully  setting  out
    paragraphs 13 through 16 thereof in the reply.
9.   At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Mr Singer stated that clearly the judge had taken into account the fact
    that the appellant was excluded under Article  1F  and  therefore  must
    have had that in mind when he still allowed the appeal on human  rights
    grounds because of the delay.  He stated that there was  some  guidance
    that indicated that after six years a grant of leave to remain would be
    appropriate.  He stated that  the  judge  clearly  had  looked  at  all
    relevant facts as a whole.  The respondent knew why  he  had  lost  and
    that was the  primary  requirement  of  the  judge  when  drafting  the
    determination.
10.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of the judge in his approach to Article 8 of the ECHR.  The reality  is
    that it is for a judge to carry out  a  proportionality  exercise  when
    considering the issue of an appellant's rights under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  The judge merely states that although he was taking Section 117B
    into account, the fact that it was stated therein  that  little  weight
    should be placed on a private life built up when an  appellant  had  no
    leave to remain, did not mean that no weight should be placed  thereon.
    That assertion, of course, is correct but it does not mean  that  delay
    itself  should  be  considered  to  be  sufficient  for  the  grant  of
    permission.  It is indeed clear from the determination in  EB  (Kosovo)
    that the effect of delay can lead to an appellant being able  to  build
    up a substantial private life in Britain and  that  that  private  life
    should be taken into consideration when a decision is made  to  remove.
    That is the effect of delay which  should  be  considered  by  a  judge
    rather than a mere mathematical exercise.
11.  It is the case that the issue of proportionality requires the  weighing
    up of a number of factors.  No factors other than delay were  cited  by
    the judge.  He does not detail in any way the private  life  which  the
    appellant might have built up here and he does not  take  into  account
    the fact that the appellant has never had leave to remain here.  It  is
    not merely that his leave has been precarious, but  that  he  has  only
    been able to remain pending the decision  on  the  asylum  claim.   The
    judge does refer to the fact that the  appellant  is  married  but  the
    appellant's wife does not have status and the reality is that there  is
    nothing to indicate from the findings of the judge that they could  not
    return to Sri Lanka and carry on their family life there.
12.  I can only conclude that the decision of the judge to grant the  appeal
    on human rights grounds was a clear error of law and  I  therefore  set
    aside that decision.
13.  I note that there are no grounds  of  appeal  challenging  the  judge's
    decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  Article  1F  and  under  the
    humanitarian  protection  provisions  and  Article  3.    I   consider,
    notwithstanding that there has been no cross-appeal that  the  decision
    of the judge on both these issues lacks appropriate  reasoning.   I  do
    not consider it sufficient for the judge to say that there  is  nothing
    to unseat the conclusion of the respondent.
14.  I therefore remit this appeal for hearing afresh on  all  grounds.   It
    will be for the judge in the First-tier to make findings  of  fact  and
    therefore make clear and reasoned conclusions as to whether or not  the
    Secretary of State was correct to find that the appellant was caught by
    the provisions of Section 1F, to consider also  in  the  light  of  his
    findings of fact what the appellant would face on return and whether or
    not the appellant's rights under Article 3 would be  infringed  by  his
    removal, and of course  also  to  properly  assess  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Notice of Decision

     The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that
    this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing  on
    all grounds.

Directions

   1. The hearing will take place at Taylor House.

   2. Tamil interpreter.

   3. Three hours.

   4. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: [pic]                           Date: 4 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
