

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13864/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 May 2017                      |On 18 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     E T
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)



Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was ordered at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms A. Radford, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  11  October
    2016 to refuse a protection  claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aujla
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 24 January 2017.

2.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. Rule 40(3) provides exceptions to the rule if the  parties
    have consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.

3.    Both parties were in agreement that the  decision  disclosed  material
    errors of law that were  sufficient  to  set  aside  the  decision.  In
    summary:

       i) The judge misunderstood the chronology of events and the evidence
          given  by  the  appellant  at  the  hearing.  In  particular,  he
          misunderstood the appellant's evidence regarding when her  mother
          was  arrested  [44].  This  underpinned  further  errors  in  the
          assessment of evidence that supported her claim to  be  of  Oromo
          ethnicity, such as her ID card [39].

      ii) The judge made a material mistake of fact by  placing  weight  on
          the fact that the appellant did not speak Oromiffa when  publicly
          available  evidence  contained  in   the   respondent's   Country
          Information and Guidance Note on Ethiopia: Oromos and the  'Oromo
          protests' (December 2016) states that the Oromo are  the  largest
          ethnic group in Ethiopia (paragraph 4.2.1-2) who speak a range of
          languages (paragraph 4.4.1-4). The point was not  raised  by  the
          respondent so the appellant could not anticipate  that  this  was
          going to be an issue. The judge's finding that the fact that  she
          did not speak Oromiffa was, taken alone, sufficient to bring  her
          claim to be Oromo "under suspicion"  was  therefore  based  on  a
          material error of fact [40].

     iii) The judge failed to consider material evidence from Dr Berri, the
          Chairman of the OLF Committee in the UK. Dr Berri stated that  it
          was not unusual for Oromo people who were  brought  up  in  Addis
          Ababa not to speak the Oromo language. In the  alternative,  when
          he did  come  to  consider  the  evidence,  the  judge  erred  in
          rejecting the letter because he had "serious concerns  about  her
          credibility" [49]. He failed to  take  a  holistic  view  of  the
          evidence as part of an overall credibility assessment.

4.    Both parties agreed that the decision involved the making of  material
    errors of law and that it should be set aside. It was agreed  that  the
    appropriate course of action was  to  remit  the  appeal  for  a  fresh
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law

The decision is set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date    16 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








