
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13161/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th July 2019                    |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                    Mr r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Miszkiel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 20th July 1986 is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant had made application for  asylum  on  5th  June  2017.   That
    application was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  31st  October  2018.
    Thereafter the Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Skehan sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on
    28th February 2019.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds.  Application for permission to  appeal  was  made  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and refused on 17th April 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal  on  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  repeated  and
    permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal.  On 25th  June  2019  the
    Respondent sent notice of opposition to the appeal.  It was noted  that
    the grant of permission purported that the matter of  concern  was  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding on the question of the  Appellant's
    ethnicity where it was said  that  the  Appellant  had  been  given  no
    opportunity to deal with that matter.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3.  Ms  Miszkiel  essentially  adopted  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and   in
    submissions that the Appellant's sur place activities alone were enough
    to provide him with a well-founded fear of persecution if  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.  It was submitted that no point was  raised  either  by  the
    Respondent or the judge concerning the  Appellant's  ethnicity  at  the
    hearing.  It was said that it should have been  put  to  the  Appellant
    whether he was a Tamil or not and that was an error that led  to  error
    in the manner in which it was considered whether he was a member of the
    TGTE.  It was submitted that one of the demonstrations attended by  the
    Appellant was a highly publicised event and that  having  accepted  the
    Appellant attended the judge failed to assess the risk  of  persecution
    because of that attendance.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Firstly, it was submitted that the Appellant's Tamil ethnicity  or  not
    was  not  relevant.   The  Appellant  had  not  relied  upon  his  past
    circumstances but  had  only  looked  and  focused  on  his  sur  place
    activities.   The  judge  had  looked  at  the  Appellant's   potential
    involvement with the TGTE quite separate to the issue of ethnicity  and
    had rejected the Appellant's membership of the TGTE and indeed  it  was
    submitted that no challenge to that had been made  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The case of GJ did not reveal that being a Tamil alone  was  a
    risk factor.  I refer to the screening  interview  conducted  with  the
    Appellant.  It was finally said by Ms Miszkiel that it  was  irrelevant
    whether the Appellant was a member of  the  TGTE  he  would  simply  be
    questioned on the basis of his attendance at the demonstrations.

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submission and evidence in this case.  I now provide that decision with
    my reasons.  I record the factors Ms Miszkiel indicated  that  she  was
    neither Counsel at the appeal hearing nor the author of the Grounds  of
    Appeal.

 6. This is an unusual case where frankly  the  Appellant  has  not  helped
    himself.  The Appellant had claimed asylum in June 2017  on  the  basis
    that he had been involved  with  the  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka  undertaking
    illegal work for them.  He further claimed to have  been  arrested  and
    tortured by the Sri Lankan CID.  He said that he had been placed  on  a
    wanted list because of his involvement with the LTTE and his father had
    paid a bribe for his release.

 7. The Respondent in  a  lengthy  refusal  letter  had  not  accepted  the
    Appellant's account.  They  had  provided  reasons  for  rejecting  his
    claims that were clearly explained and understandable.  The only aspect
    of the Appellant's claim that was accepted without reservation was  his
    nationality (paragraph 40 refusal letter).

 8. The onus of proving asylum cases is upon  the  Appellant  albeit  to  a
    lower standard of proof than that applies within civil cases.   However
    at  the  Appellant's  appeal  hearing  despite  being  represented   by
    solicitors and Counsel the Appellant wished to rely only upon  his  sur
    place activities in the UK.  He did not  wish  to  rely  upon  or  give
    evidence about any of the matters that he claimed  had  caused  him  to
    leave Sri Lanka in the first instance and claim asylum in the UK.

 9. The judge quite correctly noted at paragraph 16  that  the  Appellant's
    credibility was in question.  Indeed it is noted in the summary of  the
    refusal letter outlined by the judge at paragraphs 8 to 15 and referred
    to above, essentially, the  respondent  rejected  all  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's claim for reasons given save his nationality.

10. The judge properly reminded the Appellant's Counsel about  this  matter
    and he noted his comments to Counsel at paragraph 15.  He has  recorded
    Counsel's response as being that she had  no  submissions  to  make  in
    respect of credibility issues raised by the Respondent  but  considered
    there was sufficient information  before  the  Tribunal  to  grant  the
    appeal.   That  is  an  unusual  approach  taken   by   the   Appellant
    particularly given the burden of  proof,  the  substantial  credibility
    issues raised and how credibility generally may affect his  account  of
    sur place activities and how his history of conduct in Sri Lanka may or
    may not affect risk on return.

11. The judge was entitled to look firstly at the  question  of  ethnicity.
    Ethnicity had not been  accepted  by  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter.  If the Appellant and Counsel did not want to discuss  anything
    other than sur place activities that  was  their  choice  but  did  not
    prevent the judge from considering that issue.  As noted by  him  there
    was a lack of clarity as to his ethnicity within  the  Appellant's  own
    screening form.  In the interview record he had referred to himself  as
    a Muslim when questioned why he helped the LTTE rather  than  the  fact
    that he was Tamil.   (Noted by the Respondent at paragraph  23  refusal
    letter).  Significantly the judge had noted at paragraph  17  that  the
    Appellant now, when describing his association with the  TGTE  appeared
    to identify as a Tamil and provided no explanations for his  change  of
    approach.  Although it was submitted the Appellant spoke Tamil, he also
    indicated he spoke Sinhalese.

12. The judge was entitled to  firstly  look  at  the  issue  of  ethnicity
    considering the vagaries attached to  it  within  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence and a seeming shift in how the Appellant described himself  in
    terms of his motives for allegedly assisting the LTTE and  his  motives
    for allegedly being a member of the TGTE during his time in the UK.  If
    the Appellant simply did not want to discuss or  engage  with  his  own
    asylum claim that was his choice.

13. In any event to some extent the ethnicity  of  the  Appellant  was  not
    relevant.  The relevance was whether he had been  associated  with  the
    LTTE in Sri Lanka, arrested and tortured and potentially put on a  list
    and secondly whether he had been associated with the TGTE in the UK and
    his involvement generally in sur  place  activities.   Those  were  the
    factors that would determine and inform risk on return.

14. The Respondent had for valid reasons  given  rejected  the  Appellant's
    account to have been associated with the LTTE arrested and tortured and
    put on any list.  The authorities essentially have no adverse  interest
    in the Appellant and he was not  on  any  wanted  or  stop  list.   The
    Appellant provided no evidence  to  refute  those  proper  matters  and
    therefore failed to discharge the burden of proof.

15. In respect of sur place activities irrespective  and  separate  to  the
    question of ethnicity the judge provided reasons why he did not  accept
    that the Appellant was a member of the TGTE.  He was  plainly  entitled
    to reach that conclusion for the reasons given.

16.  Again,  independent  of  findings  relating  to  either  ethnicity  or
    membership of the TGTE he had looked at  the  claimed  involvement  and
    demonstrations.  He accepted in line with UB the Appellant may well  be
    questioned on return to Sri Lanka.  He then assessed the risk  in  that
    respect.  The judge found that:-

      1) The Appellant was not Tamil.

      2) The Appellant was not a member of the TGTE.

      3) The Appellant essentially failed to discharge the burden of proving
         that he had ever come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities
         prior to arrival in the UK.

17. The judge had  considered  the  potential  publicity  relating  to  the
    Appellant's  attendance  at  a  protest  and  the  likelihood  of  risk
    therefrom (paragraph 20 to 22).  There was no material error of law  in
    the judge's findings or in his conclusions on  the  evidence  available
    and perhaps in light of the peculiar approach taken by the Appellant in
    the conduct of his case that the judge could look at the  risk  factors
    outlined in the earlier case of GJ and he was entitled to  assess  that
    the Appellant did not fall within any of those risk categories.

Notice of Decision

18. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
