
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13347/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 27th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     e d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Zapata Besso instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 20 May 2001.   He
    entered the United Kingdom  illegally  on  8  March  2017  and  claimed
    asylum.  The basis of his claim was that he had been trafficked to  the
    UK by a Belgian.

 3. On 8 November 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 7 February 2019, Judge Powell dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but  allowed  the  appeal
    under Art 3 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to dismiss his appeal on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

 6. On 12 March 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 7. Prior to the hearing of the  appeal,  on  20  May  2019  the  Competent
    Authority under the  National  Referral  Mechanism  made  a  Conclusive
    Grounds decision in the  appellant's  favour  that,  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, he was the victim of modern slavery, namely that he  had
    been trafficked to the UK for the purposes of forced labour.

 8. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Howells  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in  law  in  dismissing  the  appellant's  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claims based upon his claim that  he  had  been
    trafficked to the UK.  He accepted that the appellant had, in the light
    of the Conclusive Grounds decision, been trafficked to the UK.

 9. Together with Ms  Zapata  Besso,  who  represented  the  appellant,  Mr
    Howells invited me to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    order to remake the decision in respect of the appellant's claim  based
    upon him being a victim of trafficking.  The issue on remittal would be
    what, if any, risk there was to the appellant  on  return  to  Albania,
    including the risk  of  retrafficking;  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection; and internal relocation.

10. Both representatives accepted that the judge's decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under Art 3 should stand (including his findings in para 53) and
    any findings either expressly or impliedly referred to  in  that  para.
    Further, the judge's finding at [22]-[23]  that  the  appellant,  as  a
    victim of trafficking, was a member of a particular social group should
    also stand.

Decision and Disposal

11. In the light of these matters, I am satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds involved the making of an error of law.
     That decision is set aside.

12. The judge's decision to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Art  3
    stands.

13. In remaking the decision, the judge's findings in para [53] in relation
    to Art 3, together with any findings expressly or impliedly referred to
    there shall be preserved.  Likewise, the judge's finding at paras [22]-
    [23] that the appellant, as a victim of trafficking, is a member  of  a
    PSG is also preserved.

14. The issues before the judge on remittal will  be  what,  if  any,  risk
    there is on return for the appellant to Albania, including  a  risk  of
    retrafficking; whether a sufficiency of protection is available to  him
    against any risk; and whether he could safely and reasonably internally
    relocate within Albania.

15. This appeal is, consequently, remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    that basis to be heard by a judge other than Judge Powell.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


