
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13569/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  mr. S.P.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  11th  September  1980,
    appeals with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge J. C. Hamilton) dismissing his appeal against  the  Respondent's
    refusal to grant his protection claim.

 2. In summary the Appellant's claim is that as a convert  to  Christianity
    he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh, not only on account of his
    faith but also because he would  be  considered  an  apostate.   It  is
    accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  has  converted  to
    Christianity and become a member  of  the  Baptist  church.  His  claim
    therefore is that because of embracing Christianity as  a  Baptist,  he
    would be at a heightened  risk  of  being  targeted  by  extremists  on
    account of the evangelical nature of Baptist beliefs.

 3. The FtTJ in reaching his decision heard evidence from the Appellant and
    two witnesses, one of whom was the Reverend Dr  Woodman,  the  minister
    from the Bloomsbury Central Baptist Church who prepared  the  Appellant
    for baptism.  He also heard remotely from Dr Hoque,  a  country  expert
    witness called on the Appellant's behalf.  He  took  into  account  and
    referred to a large amount of documentary evidence.  This included  the
    October 2018 CPIN report and the Report of a Home  Office  Fact-Finding
    Mission Bangladesh published September 2017, together with other pieces
    of  background  evidence,   photographs   and   supporting   statements
    confirming the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.

 4. Having reviewed the evidence, the judge came to  the  decision  that  a
    return to Bangladesh for the appellant would not place him  at  a  real
    risk of serious harm such as to amount to persecution. He dismissed the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 25th January 2019.

Onward Appeal

 5. The  grounds  seeking  permission  are  lengthy  and  set  out  various
    criticisms of the FtTJ's approach to the evidence.  The main  criticism
    focuses upon saying that the FtTJ failed to have proper regard  to  the
    expert  report  when  considering  sufficiency  of  protection/risk  on
    return.  As part of that criticism, it is said that the FtTJ failed  to
    apply the correct test in regard to persecution, failed to have  regard
    to the principles in HJ (Iran) and failed to appreciate the  nature  of
    the Appellant's conversion.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted in the following relevant terms

    "2.  Much of the grounds, though lengthy, have little  arguable  merit;
         for example, as to paras 21 - 30 of the grounds, whilst  the  Judge
         has considered murders at [50] and [52] within the context  of  the
         decision, it is not reasonably  arguable  that  he  has  failed  to
         consider other acts of harm short of murder;, he has considered the
         question of risk and safety at [54] and [67  -  71].  His  findings
         were  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  before  him  and  are   not
         unreasonable or irrational and do not show that  he  has  conflated
         persecution with or that he has applied the wrong test in  relation
         to the question of persecution.

    3.   However, the Judge does accept that "nosey neighbours" may lead to
         the identification of the Appellant as a Christian  (as  would  his
         desire to live an openly Christian life), and  background  evidence
         suggests that there is more hostility towards converts from  Islam,
         who are seen as apostate. Even without the video evidence (and  the
         Judge's findings on that at [55 - 59]  were  open  to  him  on  the
         evidence before him), it is just arguable that  the  Appellant  may
         face persecution on  return.  As  permission  is  granted  on  this
         ground, the Appellant is not precluded from relying on the rest  of
         the grounds."

    A Rule 24 response was served by the Respondent defending the decision.

 7. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    FtTJ contains such error of law that it requires it to be set aside and
    be remade.

Error of Law Hearing

 8. The grant of permission whilst  observing  that  much  of  the  grounds
    though lengthy have little arguable merit, nevertheless opened  up  the
    grant  to  allow  argument  on  all  grounds.   Mr  Turner  began   his
    submissions therefore by following the lines of the grounds saying that
    the FtTJ had made several critical errors.  The  judge  had  failed  to
    have proper regard to the evidence of Dr  Hoque  and  had  applied  the
    incorrect test in regard to persecution, failed to have  proper  regard
    to the principles of HJ  (Iran),  failed  to  properly  comprehend  the
    nature of  the  Appellant's  faith,  failed  in  his  consideration  of
    sufficiency of protection and  failed  to  give  sufficient  or  proper
    reasons for his findings in respect of Article 3. In addition the  FtTJ
    had made inconsistent findings regarding both the documentary and  oral
    evidence.

 9. Mr Turner's submissions continued saying the judge  had  conflated  the
    issue of risk on return  by  reference  only  to  the  details  in  the
    expert's report outlining the relatively low number of Christian murder
    victims rather than addressing the heightened risk which the  Appellant
    faced on account of his apostasy.  The judge had failed  to  take  into
    account and give correct weight to the issue of the video  showing  the
    Appellant's baptism. The video is in the public domain  and  the  judge
    was incorrect in his approach when assessing Dr Woodman's response that
    the video would be taken off the internet in order to reduce  the  risk
    to the Appellant should he be returned to Bangladesh.   The  point  was
    that the Appellant should not have to have  the  video  taken  off  the
    internet because to do so offended the principles of  HJ  (Iran).   The
    judge did not address that point in the decision.  The judge  therefore
    failed to understand the impact of the video, which would  represent  a
    very public act of apostasy.

10. Mr Turner asserted that the judge had cherry picked part of Dr  Hoque's
    report and had ignored other parts of it.  The judge failed to  address
    the question of whether the Appellant as an individual would be at risk
    on return.  The judge  proceeded  on  a  false  matrix  and  failed  to
    appreciate that the Appellant is not simply  someone  who  was  born  a
    Christian returning to Bangladesh, but is a  Christian  convert.   With
    regard to Dr Hoque's report, Dr Hoque is an expert and a  full  reading
    of his report clearly indicates that there  is  a  real  risk  to  this
    Appellant returning to Bangladesh.

11. Mr Tarlow responding referred to the Rule 24 response which  he  relied
    upon.  In summary he said that the FtTJ had clearly  taken  fully  into
    account the evidence of Dr Hoque and given aspects of  it  considerable
    weight.  The judge  had  looked  at  the  situation  not  only  in  the
    Appellant's home area of Chittagong but also  in  Dhaka,  in  order  to
    assess whether there was an internal flight option.  The judge did  not
    accept that there would be sufficient adverse interest in the Appellant
    returning to Chittagong to amount  to  persecution  but  in  any  event
    concluded that the Appellant could exercise internal flight by going to
    live for example in Dhaka where he would be able to exercise his  faith
    openly.  In simple terms  Mr  Tarlow  submitted,  the  FtTJ  took  into
    account the expert's report but found the situation was not as bleak as
    the expert had opined  and  accordingly  relocation  was  viable.   The
    findings were fully open to the judge to make on the evidence which was
    before him.  There is no misdirection and the decision should stand.

12. Mr Turner  responded  by  reiterating  that  the  FtTJ  had  failed  to
    differentiate between born Christians and Christian converts,  had  not
    properly answered the questions raised in HJ (Iran), and  the  decision
    was fundamentally flawed on  whether  the  Appellant  was  at  risk  on
    return.  At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which  I  now
    give with reasons.

Consideration

13. It seems to me that following Mr Turner's argument, essentially,  there
    are two main strands to the criticisms made of the judge's decision:

       . the  Appellant  is  an  apostate  and  thus  the  judge  failed  to
         appreciate that this places him in a higher risk category from non-
         state actors; and aligned with this the authorities  in  Bangladesh
         do not provide adequate protection

       .  the  judge  has  failed  to  properly  evaluate  whether  internal
         relocation would be a viable option.

14. It is clear that the Appellant's case is predicated on saying  that  he
    fears Islamic extremists/ostracism in  the  local  community  and  that
    potentially he would be identified  as  someone  who  would  stand  out
    wherever he went because of being a Christian convert.

15. The FtTJ had before him a great deal of documentary evidence, which  he
    sets out in [19] to [20], including not only Dr Hoque's report but also
    the Respondent's CPIN (2018) which in turn sources an  Australian  DFAT
    Fact-Finding Mission Report published February 2018.

16. I find the judge identified the competing arguments before him [42] and
    [43] and was well aware of what the issue before him was,  namely  that
    the Appellant would be returning as an apostate rather than someone who
    was born into a Christian family.  I find Mr  Turner's  assertion  that
    the judge failed to understand this concept, and as a result failed  to
    properly evaluate the risk on return,  is  not  made  out.   There  are
    numerous references in the decision to  the  Appellant's  status  as  a
    Christian convert which indicate that this factor was very much at  the
    forefront of the judge's mind.

17. The main challenge raised by Mr Turner in essence came down  to  saying
    that the judge did not properly address Dr Hoque's expert  evidence  in
    that he disagreed with parts of it.  The  expert's  report  formed  the
    core  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim.   Dr  Hoque  reached  several
    conclusions including that the Appellant may  be  targeted  by  Islamic
    groups in Bangladesh due to his apostasy  and  would  face  intolerable
    persecution, possibly death,  should  he  return  to  Bangladesh.  This
    situation results not only from his known apostasy but also because  as
    a member of the Baptist church he is enjoined to  promote  Christianity
    and thus is perceived as an active critic  of  Islam.   In  Dr  Hoque's
    opinion the law enforcement agencies in Bangladesh do not  possess  the
    resources to be able to provide sufficient protection to the  Appellant
    in that Islamic organisations operate with  relative  impunity  due  to
    widespread institutional corruption.  Moreover  organisations  such  as
    ICS are known to resort to  fatal  violence  against  those  whom  they
    perceive to be enemies of Islam, particularly those who  through  their
    actions or words express criticism of Islam.

18. Mr Turner's argument was that the FtTJ had ignored material parts of Dr
    Hoque's report and that anyone reading this report would  be  bound  to
    conclude that the Appellant was at real risk  and  thus  the  FtTJ  had
    formulated his assessment on a false matrix.

19. I find that the judge did not agree with all of the conclusions reached
    in Dr Hoque's report.  He did not  accept  that  the  state  would  not
    provide effective protection for Christian converts and therefore  they
    were at heightened risk from Islamists.  In other words the  judge  did
    not accept that the Appellant was at  such  a  heightened  risk  as  Dr
    Hoque's conclusions set out.  His reasons for this I find, are set  out
    by reference to the documentary source material which he had before him
    and are contained in paragraphs [6], [61] and [62] of the decision.

20. In reaching this conclusion, the judge acknowledges that the DFAT Fact-
    Finding Report contains negative reports about the police being  Muslim
    themselves, with instances of  corruption  and  colluding  with  Muslim
    community leaders to grab land illegally from Christians.  However  the
    judge concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  for  him  to
    conclude   that   this   behaviour   was   endemic,    systematic    or
    institutionalised within the police force.  The FtTJ noted at [60] that
    there was a rapid action battalion created and committed to  combatting
    political Islam.  When Dr Hoque was  asked  to  comment  on  the  Dhaka
    Tribune Report of the arrest of two  JMB  militants  plotting  to  kill
    converts, it is recorded by the judge that Dr Hoque did  not  say  much
    beyond making it clear he did not change his opinion.

21. I find it is plain that the judge  has  tested  the  evidence  in  this
    regard and given greater weight to source material  than  the  expert's
    report.  That he is permitted to do because the matter of  what  weight
    to place on each piece of evidence is one solely  for  the  judge.   In
    coming to this conclusion, the judge drew strength from the  background
    evidence which, in the  2017  report,  indicated  that  the  state  had
    provided security for churches which must of  necessity  include  those
    who have converted. Thus the judge concluded that  looking  at  matters
    holistically it could not be said that  the  state  would  not  provide
    adequate protection for the Appellant.

22. So far as criticism is made of  the  judge's  findings  concerning  the
    video evidence, Mr Turner's submission was to the effect that the judge
    had misunderstood the import of the video evidence.  The video evidence
    denotes a very public act of apostasy and as such it was this  exposure
    which would inevitably result in a heightened  risk  to  the  Appellant
    from extremists. The Appellant should not have to  hide  the  video  as
    this would offend the principles in HJ (Iran).  I find  the  judge  did
    consider this point, finding  that  the  perceived  risk  did  not  add
    significantly to the claim.   Again  drawing  on  the  source  material
    before him, this is a finding that was open to the judge to make.   The
    Home Office Fact-Finding Report 2017 reported that  baptising  converts
    was not a problem for traditional churches like the Roman Catholic  and
    Baptist [54].  He noted from the source material  that  in  2002,  four
    hundred converts were baptised  in  the  Baptist  Church  in  a  single
    ceremony.  The judge acknowledged  that  Dr  Hoque's  report  was  that
    Christian converts kept safe by remaining quiet about their belief  but
    equally, the judge found that if the situation in  Bangladesh  were  so
    bad that a vast number, if not  the  majority,  of  Christian  converts
    routinely had to hide or deny their faith in order to remain  safe,  it
    would be reasonable to expect such a widespread problem  to  have  been
    reported more prominently [53].  This led him to  the  conclusion  that
    the video evidence would not place the Appellant at a  heightened  risk
    as contended.

23. The FtTJ accepted that the Appellant's best friend in his home area and
    the local Imam were aware  of  the  Appellant's  conversion,  and  that
    connections within the community  might  disseminate  this  information
    further [65, 69].  Nonetheless I find that the FtTJ  has  given  proper
    consideration to the question of the Appellant returning  to  his  home
    area.  He set out that Dr Hoque referred to the Appellant's  home  area
    of Chittagong generally being a very conservative area, but equally did
    not identify any specific difficulties  that  Christians  or  Christian
    converts had experienced there.  There was evidence from the  Appellant
    that the local Imam had criticised him but equally the Appellant's  own
    account  referred  to  the  many  Christian  friends  he  had  made  in
    Chittagong.  In addition he had  attended  Christian  schools  both  at
    primary and secondary level.  Further, the Appellant  is  supported  by
    his  mother  who  accepts  his  conversion.   In  conclusion  the  FtTJ
    acknowledged that the Appellant may face an increased risk in his  home
    area as a result of some knowledge about his conversion but  determined
    that this is insufficient for him to "conclude  it  elevates  the  risk
    sufficiently for me to find he would be at 'real risk' of serious  harm
    or  discrimination  amounting  to  persecution"  [67-71].   This  is  a
    conclusion that was open to him to make.

24. The next criticism made of the decision centred on what is said  to  be
    the  judge's  lack  of  reasoning  in  his  consideration  of  internal
    relocation.  I find this  ground  is  also  not  made  out.   The  FtTJ
    considered relocation  elsewhere  in  Bangladesh  and  noted  that  the
    Appellant was well educated, in general good health and that there is a
    substantial Christian community in Dhaka, including a  Baptist  Church.
    The FtTJ noted at [27] that Dr  Hoque  disagreed  with  the  conclusion
    drawn in the October 2018 CPIN that in general internal relocation  was
    feasible for those at risk from non-state actors.  The  FtTJ  preferred
    to accept the evidence of  the  CPIN  report  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could relocate to Dhaka or another  urban  centre,  aided  by
    support from his mother and the local Baptist church [73-74].

25. Drawing all these  strands  together  the  FtTJ  made  a  finding  that
    although he accepted that there may be some risk for the  Appellant  in
    that no-one can be guaranteed a risk-free existence, nevertheless  even
    applying the lower standard of proof, the Appellant had not reached the
    threshold of showing that  a  return  to  Bangladesh  would  amount  to
    persecution.

26. I find that the decision was carefully prepared and one  in  which  the
    judge stated specifically that all the evidence  had  been  considered.
    The judge directed himself as to the correct  assessment  in  cases  of
    this nature and I find all matters were brought to account in the round
    following a logical analysis with a clearly structured  approach.   The
    judge focused on  the  central  elements  of  the  Appellant's  history
    contained in the expert's report.  He explained why he did  not  accept
    certain elements of that report. Generally speaking the  weight  to  be
    given to the expert's evidence is a matter  for  the  trial  judge.   A
    judge's decision not to accept expert  evidence  does  not  involve  an
    error of law on his part provided that he approaches that evidence with
    the appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision  (SS  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ155).  I find this is the  approach  taken
    by the FtTJ.  In essence,  his  reasons  were  that  he  preferred  the
    evidence provided from the CPIN report and the source material.

27. For all the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge's  findings  were
    ones which were open to him to make on the evidence before  him.   They
    cannot  be  characterised  as  irrational  or  perverse.   It   follows
    therefore that the decision of the FtTJ contains no legal error capable
    of vitiating the  decision.   The  Appellant's  appeal  fails  and  the
    decision of the FtT stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  FtT  promulgated  on  25th  January  2019  contains  no
material error of law.  The decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     15 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
