
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13604/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018                          |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL



                                   Between

                                     F A

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Fitzsimons of Counsel instructed by Hoole &
Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background


 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Page (the  Judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 21st March 2018.


 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born 1st January 2004 making
    him 14 years of age.


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 27th July 2017 having arrived in the UK
    earlier that month.  His asylum claim was  made  on  two  grounds.   He
    claimed to be a member of a particular  social  group,  that  being  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child, and secondly claimed asylum on  the
    basis  of  imputed  political  opinion,  having  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of Daesh in his home area of Nangarhar Province.


 4. The claim for international protection  was  refused  on  4th  December
    2017, although the  Appellant  was  granted  limited  leave  to  remain
    because of his age until 23 May 2020.  The  appeal  was  heard  on  7th
    February 2018.


 5. The judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant  who  was  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness.  Evidence was also given by his foster carers.  The
    judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness and  did  not
    accept his account.  It was not accepted that  the  Appellant's  father
    had  disappeared  nor  was  it  accepted  that  Daesh  had  killed  the
    Appellant's mother.  It was  not  accepted  that  the  Afghan  National
    Police visited the Appellant's home, nor was it accepted that Daesh had
    visited his home.  The judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that he had not attended school in Afghanistan.


 6. The judge dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The
    appeal  was  however  allowed  pursuant  to  Article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.


 7. The judge at paragraph 32 found that the Appellant would be at risk  if
    returned to Afghanistan and  was  therefore  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection under Article 15(c).


The Application for Permission to Appeal


 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which are summarised below.


 9. Firstly, it was submitted that the judge had erred by  not  considering
    the particular  social  group  basis  of  the  asylum  claim.   It  was
    submitted that the findings made by the judge at paragraphs 5  and  32,
    demonstrated  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  asylum   as   an
    unaccompanied child who would be at risk  on  return.   The  judge  had
    dealt with the political opinion aspect of the asylum  claim,  but  had
    failed to deal with the membership of a particular social group aspect.




10. Secondly, it was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  making  an
    adverse credibility finding in relation to the  Appellant's  education.
    The judge did not accept that the Appellant had not been educated.  The
    judge had taken  judicial  notice  that  Nangarhar  Province  had  many
    schools.  It was submitted that the judge had been  unfair  as  it  was
    never part of the Respondent's case that the Appellant was not credible
    because he was not educated.  There was no background evidence on  this
    issue that was before the judge, and the judge had not  made  it  clear
    what evidence he had considered when  taking  judicial  notice  of  the
    state of education in Nangarhar Province.


11. The third ground contended that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  giving
    insufficient  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  age  when  assessing
    credibility.


Permission to Appeal


12. Permission to appeal was initially refused but  a  renewed  application
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in the following terms;


      i) The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Page)  dismissed  the  Appellant's
         appeal against the decision to refuse his international protection,
         humanitarian protection and human rights claims.  The judge made an
         adverse credibility finding and rejected the Appellant's account to
         be at risk on return to Afghanistan from Daesh.


     ii) The grounds raise three points.  Grounds 1 and 2 are arguable.   It
         is arguable that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
         asylum claim on the basis of being a member  of  a  PSG  given  his
         findings in paragraph 32.  It is also  arguable  that  the  judge's
         reasoning based upon evidence of which he took "judicial notice" at
         paragraphs 20 - 22 was impermissible in the absence  of  background
         evidence (which the Appellant had  an  opportunity  to  deal  with)
         about the education  system  in  Nangarhar  Province.   I  am  less
         persuaded about ground  3,  which  as  a  self-serving  ground  may
         ultimately have no merit, but would not  exclude  consideration  of
         it.


    iii) Consequently, I grant permission on all grounds.


The Upper Tribunal Hearing


13. Mr Howells confirmed that the Respondent  had  not  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, but  the  Respondent's  position  was  that  the  judge  had  not
    materially erred.  Mr Howells confirmed that  the  Respondent  had  not
    entered  a  cross-appeal,  and  therefore  did  not  dispute  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to be granted humanitarian protection.


14. Miss Fitzsimons relied upon her typed speaking note dated 11th  October
    2018 which is comprehensive and which need not be reiterated here.


15. In very brief summary Miss Fitzsimons clarified that Ground 1  did  not
    challenge the adverse credibility findings made by the  judge,  but  in
    fact relied upon findings made by the judge at paragraphs 5 and  32  of
    his decision.


16. Reliance was placed upon AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]
    UKUT 00016 (IAC), and LQ (Age:  Immutable  Characteristic)  Afghanistan
    [2008] UKAIT 0005.  I was asked to find that the judge in making  those
    findings, and in finding the Appellant to be at risk  and  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection, had not considered the particular social group
    basis of the asylum claim.


17. Miss Fitzsimons submitted  that  it  was  unclear  why  the  judge  had
    dismissed the Article 3 claim if he had found the Appellant  to  be  at
    risk and in need of humanitarian protection.  I was asked to set  aside
    the decision of the FTT, and substitute a decision allowing the  appeal
    on asylum and Article 3 grounds.


18. It was only if I  rejected  the  above  submission  that  it  would  be
    necessary to consider Grounds 2 and 3.  Miss Fitzsimons submitted  that
    the judge had drawn an adverse credibility finding from the Appellant's
    contention that he was not educated in Afghanistan.  The judge had  not
    given the parties an opportunity to make  submissions  on  this  point.
    Reliance was placed upon EG Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015.  As  the  issue
    of education had not been raised with the parties at the  hearing,  the
    parties had not had an opportunity to make submissions on this point.


19. With  reference  to  the  third  ground  Miss  Fitzsimons  relied  upon
    paragraphs 25 - 29 of her speaking note.


20. Miss Fitzsimons pointed out that the judge was in error at paragraph 32
    in commenting that a grant of humanitarian protection to the  Appellant
    would be academic given that  the  Appellant  had  discretionary  leave
    until 2020 as the  grant  of  humanitarian  protection  would  probably
    coincide  with  that  grant.   Humanitarian  protection   entitles   an
    Appellant to five years' leave.


21. Mr Howells accepted that it was unclear why, if  the  judge  thought  a
    grant of humanitarian protection was appropriate, he  had  not  allowed
    the appeal with reference to Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention.




22. Mr Howells had little to say in relation to Ground 1,  commenting  that
    some of the judge's findings indicated that the Appellant would not  be
    an unattended child on return to Afghanistan.


23. With reference to Ground 2 Mr Howells accepted that the judge erred, as
    contended in the grounds, but submitted that this was not material,  as
    the adverse credibility findings made  by  the  judge  were  not  based
    solely upon his conclusion that the Appellant had not  told  the  truth
    about being educated.


24. Regarding Ground 3 Mr Howells submitted that there was no error of law,
    and it was clear that the judge was fully aware of the Appellant's  age
    and vulnerability and took that into account.


25. In response Miss Fitzsimons  submitted  that  the  adverse  credibility
    finding made in relation to education was material,  as  this  infected
    other adverse credibility findings made by the judge.


26. Miss Fitzsimons submitted that if a material error of law was found  in
    relation to Ground 1, the decision of the FTT should be set aside and a
    decision substituted that the appeal was allowed on asylum  grounds  on
    the basis that the Appellant was an unaccompanied asylum seeking  child
    who would be at risk, and  the  appeal  should  also  be  allowed  with
    reference to Article 3.


27. If no material error was found in relation to Ground 1, but a  material
    error found in relation to Grounds 2 and 3  Miss  Fitzsimons  suggested
    that the appeal be remitted to the FTT.  Mr Howells did not disagree.


28. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.


My Conclusions and Reasons


29. I am asked to consider findings made by the judge,  with  reference  to
    paragraphs 5 and 32 of his decision.  At paragraph 5 the judge  records
    that the Respondent, having accepted the Appellant's age, concedes that
    the Appellant is a member of a particular social group  that  being  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child.


30. On behalf of the Appellant reliance is placed upon paragraph 92  of  AA
    Afghanistan CG and the following is cited in Miss Fitzsimons's speaking
    note;


         "The background evidence demonstrates that unattached children
         returned to Afghanistan, depending upon their individual
         circumstances and the location to which they are returned, may be
         exposed to risk of serious harm, inter alia from indiscriminate
         violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and a
         lack of adequate arrangements for child protection.  Such risks
         will have to be taken into account when addressing the question of
         whether a return is in the child's best interests, a primary
         consideration when determining her claim to humanitarian
         protection."


31. I find that the judge has not demonstrated that he has  considered  the
    Appellant's claim to asylum based on membership of a particular  social
    group, as an unaccompanied child at risk of serious harm.  It is common
    ground that a Tribunal must consider the  appeal  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing, even if the Appellant has been  granted  leave  to  remain  on
    account of his age, as in this case.  Leave granted by  the  Respondent
    was until 23rd May 2020.


32. At paragraph 32 the judge finds that the Appellant would be at risk  on
    account of his age in circumstances where it is not known  for  certain
    that there would be adequate reception facilities available to  him  on
    return.  The Appellant's family  cannot  be  traced.   The  possibility
    cannot be excluded that the Appellant  has  been  subjected  to  trauma
    which he has not disclosed.  The Respondent has accepted that there  is
    armed conflict in the Appellant's area with Daesh.


33. On the basis of the findings set  out  above,  the  judge  should  have
    considered whether the Appellant was entitled to refugee status on  the
    basis  of  his  membership  of  a  particular  social   group   as   an
    unaccompanied child.  In my view, this failure amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.


34. I do not find that a satisfactory explanation has been given as to why,
    if the Appellant is at risk in Afghanistan, as accepted by  the  judge,
    he would not be at risk of treatment that would breach Article 3 of the
    1950 Convention.  I find the lack of explanation to be an error of law.




35. In my view, taking into account the findings made  by  the  judge,  the
    Appellant is entitled to refugee status based on his  membership  of  a
    particular social group as an unaccompanied child who would be at  real
    risk of serious harm.  He is therefore entitled to a grant  of  asylum,
    and he would be at risk of treatment that would breach Article 3 of the
    1950 European Convention.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.


The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and on  human  rights  grounds  with
reference to Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention.


Because  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  asylum  he  is  not  entitled  to
humanitarian protection.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th October 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th October 2018

