
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13747/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 April 2019                    |On 07 May 2019                        |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [F G]
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr. J. Dhanji of counsel, instructed by SMA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Ms B. Jones, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 October 2011, as a Tier 4 (General)  Migrant.  His  leave
    was extended in this capacity until 24 July 2012. He was  also  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant between 15  January  2014
    and 15 February 2015. He was refused further leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds on 7 August 2015.

 2.  He applied for asylum on 24 May 2018 on the basis  that  he  feared  an
    honour killing if removed to Pakistan but his application  was  refused
    on 16 November 2018. He appealed and his appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill in a decision promulgated on 24 January  2019.
    He also appealed against this decision and he was granted permission to
    appeal by Deputy High Court Judge Gullick on 26 March 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   Permission to appeal was principally granted in relation to the  weight
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill to the  Appellant's  demeanour.
    However, Deputy High Court Judge Gullick  also  found  that  the  other
    grounds of appeal were potentially relevant when read together with the
    one relating to the Appellant's demeanour.

5.   For example, in the second ground of appeal, it was noted  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill  had  reminded  himself  of  the  contents  of
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules but had failed to  explain  how
    this paragraph applied to the Appellant's particular case.

6.   Furthermore, he failed to note that none of the  factors  in  paragraph
    339L refer to an Appellant's demeanour when giving evidence.

7.   Most significantly, he failed to remind himself of the decision by  the
    Upper Tribunal in KB & AH (credibility - structured approach)  Pakistan
    [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC) where it found at paragraph 50:

         "We alluded earlier to  the  possible  relevance  of  demeanour  in
         assessment of credibility and stated our own  view  that  it  would
         rarely if ever be of importance  in  asylum  appeals.  Illustrative
         perhaps of why, it was our own reaction to  the  first  appellant's
         evidence that throughout he seemed  uncomfortable  and  not  always
         able to give answers to the specific question being asked of him (a
         number of questions had to be repeated for that  reason).  However,
         viewing the evidence as a whole, we  bore  in  mind  that  we  were
         receiving his  evidence  through  an  interpreter  and  that  these
         features of his oral testimony were as  likely  to  be  personality
         traits not connected to matters going to credence. Hence we decided
         to attach little negative weight to  such  shortcomings.  Hence  we
         decided to attach little negative weight to such shortcomings".

8.   As a consequence, at paragraph 25 of his decision, First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mill stated:

         "I found the Appellant to be evasive in his oral evidence at times.
         This was particularly so when questions were  being  asked  of  him
         which sought  to  clarify  his  evidence  which  appeared  to  lack
         credibility. For example, he required to be repeatedly asked why he
         would give his brother's telephone number to the woman he claims to
         be have been in a relationship with when he knew  that  his  family
         would have serious problems with such  a  relationship.  He  evaded
         answering the question and struggled to provide a response and  was
         dilatory in doing so. He  also  looked  particularly  awkward  when
         trying to answer this".

9.   In his Rule 24 Response, the Respondent submitted that the  Appellant's
    demeanour was not mentioned at any point in paragraph 25.  However,  in
    last sentence of that paragraph, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  explicitly
    stated: "he also looked particularly  awkward  when  trying  to  answer
    this". I have also taken into account  the  fact  that  the  dictionary
    definition of "demeanour" is  "outward  behaviour  or  bearing".   This
    definition is capable of encompasses being evasive  and  struggling  to
    provide a response.

10.  In paragraphs 36 to 43 of SS (Sri Lanka), R (on the application  of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1391  Lord
    Justice Leggatt also discussed the  weight  that  should  be  given  to
    demeanour. In paragraph 36 he found  that  "it  has  increasingly  been
    recognised that it is usually unreliable and often dangerous to draw  a
    conclusion from a witness's demeanour as to  the  likelihood  that  the
    witness is telling the truth".

11.  At paragraph 37  he  also  noted  that  "the  reasons  for  distrusting
    reliance on demeanour are magnified where the witness is of a different
    nationality from the judge and is either speaking English as a  foreign
    language or is giving evidence through an interpreter".  The latter was
    the case in the Appellant's appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mill.

12.  In her oral submissions the Home Office Presenting  Officer  sought  to
    rely on paragraph 41 of SS (Sri Lanka) but it did not appear to me that
    this assisted her when read as a  whole,  as  in  this  paragraph  Lord
    Justice Leggatt found:

         "No doubt it is impossible,  and  perhaps  undesirable,  to  ignore
         altogether the impression created by the  demeanour  of  a  witness
         giving evidence. But to  attach  any  significant  weight  to  such
         impressions in assessing credibility risks making  judgments  which
         at best have no rational basis and at worst  reflect  conscious  or
         unconscious biases  and  prejudices.  One  of  the  most  important
         qualities expected of a judge is that they  will  strive  to  avoid
         being  influenced  by  personal  biases  and  prejudices  in  their
         decision-making...Rather  than   attempting   to   assess   whether
         testimony is truthful from the manner in which  it  is  given,  the
         only objective and reliable approach is to focus on the content  of
         the testimony and to consider whether it is consistent  with  other
         evidence (including evidence of what the witness has said on  other
         occasions) and with known or probably facts".

13.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also relied  on  the  fact  that  in
    paragraph 42 of his judgment Lord Justice Leggatt accepted that it  was
    permissible for the judge in that First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  SS  to
    consider the plausibility of the appellant's account and whether it was
    consistent with  objectively  verifiable  information.   She  submitted
    that, even  if  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mill  had  relied  on  the
    Appellant's demeanour in paragraph 25 of  his  decision,  he  had  also
    considered the plausibility of his account in paragraphs 25, 26,31  and
    34.

14.  However, the manner in which plausibility was  assessed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill did not take into account the cultural  context  of
    the appeal. For example, if the  Appellant  was  going  to  spend  time
    studying in the United Kingdom the woman, to whom he was  engaged,  may
    well have wished to delay their wedding so that she could  continue  to
    live with her own family and not move to live with his family whilst he
    was away. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed to  enquire  as  to
    why the Appellant provided his girlfriend with a  telephone  number  of
    his next of kin, when there  may  have  been  a  particular  culturally
    specific reason for doing so.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also failed to take the totality  of  the
    evidence into account before reaching his decision on  the  credibility
    of the Appellant's account or give sufficiently  detailed  reasons  for
    not finding the second witness to be credible. In my view it  was  also
    not necessarily incredible that the lawyer had not charged  a  fee  for
    assisting the Appellant. His letter indicates  that  he  was  asked  to
    mediate and that he was not instructed as a lawyer.

16.  For all of these reasons, I find that  there  were  errors  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill's decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mill or Gumsley.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 26 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


