
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13216/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     JB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Criggie, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated 21 August 2018 (which is annexed), I gave  my
    reasons for setting aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    part in the appeal by the appellant, a national  of  Iran,  born  March
    1984, against the Secretary of State's decision dated 18 November  2016
    refusing his protection claim.  The  appellant's  claim  was  based  on
    conversion to Christianity in Iran and flight when the  "house  church"
    he had been attending was raided by the authorities.

 2. In the United Kingdom he was baptised in Glasgow  in  the  Upper  House
    Church in April 2017 following religious instruction at that church  in
    addition to classes  at  Tron  Church.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    comprehensively disbelieved the appellant as to his  Iran  and  Glasgow
    based activities.  I concluded that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    erred in relation to her findings on the events  in  Iran,  but  I  was
    satisfied there was an error of law in relation to  the  findings  that
    related to the  appellant's  conversion  in  Glasgow.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision insofar as it related to the Glasgow  activities  was
    therefore set aside and I directed that the remaking  of  the  decision
    would be on the basis that the appellant did not convert as claimed  in
    Iran or that he had left under any  cloud  of  adverse  interest.   The
    remaking  required  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's   post-arrival
    activities and, whether on the facts found, these  would  result  in  a
    risk on return.

 3. At outset of the hearing Mr Mullen acknowledged  by  reference  to  the
    February 2018 CIPN report, that if the  appellant  was  accepted  as  a
    genuine convert, he will be a refugee.  That  set  the  scene  for  the
    approach at  the  hearing  during  which  I  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and four witnesses.  In addition,  the  appellant  relied  on
    written evidence from a fifth.  I summarise their evidence as follows.

THE APPELLANT

 4. His statement

      i) He is from Esfahan where he lived with his parents, two sisters and
         his brother.  He married on 27 July  2015.   His  wife  remains  in
         Iran.  His family are Shia Muslim but they do  not  practise  Islam
         nor had the appellant.  His wife has spoken about  divorce  in  the
         light of their separation.


     ii) On arrival in Glasgow (in May 2016) he attended the Tron Church for
         Sunday services and Friday  Bible  study  where  he  completed  the
         Christianity Explored Course in preparation for baptism.   He  also
         attended Upper Room Church where he was baptised on Easter Day 2017
         although his first preference had been for baptism at Tron  Church.
         He has attended Upper Room Church exclusively for the last  six  or
         seven months where he attends Thursday services  and  sometimes  at
         the pastor's house on Monday for Bible study.  Apart from attending
         City of Glasgow College where the appellant  is  studying  English,
         the majority of his time is spent at church or being involved  with
         the church.  It is important for him to be allowed to  continue  to
         practise his religion freely. The appellant prefers the  atmosphere
         at Upper Room Church which is not as crowded as Tron  Church.   The
         appellant contends that Christianity  has  had  a  really  positive
         impact on his life hence his passion about encouraging others.   He
         is very vocal about his religion and whenever he  sees  an  Iranian
         person, he enjoys speaking to them  about  Christianity  and  being
         able to do  so  without  fear.   He  describes  his  experience  of
         encountering the witnesses and his encouragement for them to attend
         Upper Room.


    iii) The appellant's family are aware of his  conversion  but  have  not
         really come to terms with it.


 5. Cross-examination

    Key points that emerged in cross-examination and my questions for
    clarification as well as re-examination are as follows.


      i) The appellant considered that  religion  should  be  something  one
         chose oneself rather than being chosen for one by  birth.   He  was
         happy with the path that he had chosen.  Of the  many  things  that
         had changed in his circumstances that led him from  not  practising
         any religion to a different religion, these included  kindness  and
         forgiveness.  The appellant had been quite depressed  in  Iran  and
         attendance at the House Church had changed him completely.  It  was
         not just the people he encountered but also the book  he  had  been
         studying which had informed him.


     ii) The appellant contrasted the circumstances of those born  Christian
         in Iran who did not have problems with those who had converted from
         Islam.  He described the hurt of having to be secretive about their
         faith and being over the moon because of the route he had taken and
         his ability to speak out and spread the word.


    iii) At to the suggestion that some people might say  he  had  converted
         because it was a  sure  win  in  an  asylum  claim,  the  appellant
         responded that with all his heart he believed in  Christianity  and
         God knows that belief.  He  spoke  of  Jesus  having  said  of  the
         company chosen so many reject you.  He had given his  understanding
         of Christianity to the court but also to his friends in response to
         the challenge that he was merely saying what was thought the  right
         things to the Home Office and representatives.


     iv) Of all the people he had taken to church, totalling four  or  five,
         not all were refugees.


      v) As to why he had been in contact with his wife but not his parents,
         he was afraid to put them in danger.  He had not let his wife  know
         about the conversion but that he had gone to the  House  Church  at
         night.  He accepted that contact with his wife (from the UK)  might
         have been dangerous for her and so he  had  used  WhatsApp  with  a
         short message just to let her know that he was okay.  He  had  last
         spoken to his wife roughly three or four months ago.  That was  the
         time she had said that she wanted to separate and wanted a divorce.
          He confirmed she had known that he had changed his religion and on
         learning this, she had reminded him of the danger when telling  her
         in Iran.


 6. My questions

      i) The appellant had told his parents,  sisters  and  brother  of  his
         change of religion in Iran.  They were not against it.  His  mother
         had said that he was an adult and he could choose any way he  liked
         but she was nevertheless anxious.  He had been in contact with  his
         mother since arriving in the United Kingdom once or  twice  through
         WhatsApp.


     ii) It was about a month prior to Easter that he  had  learned  of  the
         impossibility of baptism at Easter in the Tron Church.  Classes for
         that baptism had taken three to four months.  He had registered for
         those classes some five months prior to Easter  although  he  could
         not remember the exact date  or  month.   He  had  discovered  Tron
         Church three or four  days  after  reaching  Glasgow,  having  been
         initially detained on arrival in the United Kingdom for five or six
         days before dispersal.


    At the conclusion of my questions Mr Criggie acknowledged that WhatsApp
    messaging was encrypted which meant that it could not hacked.

 7. Re-examination

      i) The appellant clarified that he was not living  with  his  wife  in
         Iran and referred to the culture there of a period of engagement to
         prepare for living together and acquiring furniture, etc for  this.
         He confirmed his date of marriage as 27  July  2015  about  a  year
         before he  left.   When  his  parents  became  aware  that  he  had
         converted, his mother was not happy and was worried.  This had been
         about two to two and a half months before he had  left  Iran.   His
         wife had noted his mood change on  his  conversion.   She  had  not
         agreed to his suggestion  that  she  attend  classes  at  the  Home
         Church.  His communication with his  wife  since  arriving  in  the
         United  Kingdom  had  been  exclusively  by   WhatsApp   which   he
         acknowledged was safe from hacking.  As to why  he  had  not  lived
         with wife on marriage, he explained the custom in Iran  of  initial
         engagement prior to a complete marriage ceremony which could be for
         a period of one and a half  to  two  years.   When  pressed  by  Mr
         Criggie the appellant explained as to the event  on  27  July  2015
         whether it was a wedding or something else, the appellant responded
         it was his engagement.


     ii) As to the significance of Easter,  he  described  this  as  a  very
         important date for Christians and his desire to be baptised on such
         an Eid.  He referred to Easter as a celebration when  Jesus  Christ
         "woke up" after three days from the dead.


    iii) Finally, the appellant confirmed that he had been  attending  Upper
         Room Church for baptismal classes and he had  been  going  to  Tron
         Church at the same time.  On learning that the  Tron  Church  could
         not baptise him at Easter, Dr White  from  the  Upper  Room  Church
         suggested that as he was attending (classes)  at  Tron  Church,  he
         could be baptised in Upper Room.


 8. My observations

      i) In part, the appellant showed some  confusion  when  recalling  his
         recent experiences and events in Glasgow.   His  account  has  been
         corroborated by witnesses as described below and I do not  consider
         that this confusion is indicative of any deception  as  far  as  UK
         based events are concerned. Despite it having been made clear  that
         his story of conversion in Iran had been rejected, he persisted  in
         referring to circumstances and events there as part of his path  to
         conversion.  His reluctance to let go that narrative might  however
         mean that this aspect possibly had some truth with  regard  to  his
         burgeoning interest in Christianity if not the  circumstances  that
         led to his plight.


     ii) Throughout his  evidence,  the  appellant  has  referred  to  being
         married but ultimately accepted, when pressed by Mr  Criggie,  that
         he  had  only  been  engaged.   The  appellant  however  has   been
         consistent that he has not lived with his wife.  I do not rule  out
         the possibility that he regarded himself as committed to marry  and
         therefore thought of himself as married in accordance with  Iranian
         tradition.  As he has never  sought  to  assert  that  he  and  his
         fianc�e lived together the negative  pull  of  his  claim  to  have
         married is reduced.


    iii) The suggestion that Jesus Christ awoke after three  days  following
         his  crucifixion  shows  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of   the
         significance  of  Easter  which  is  concerned   with   death   and
         resurrection.  Nevertheless, as  Mr  Criggie  pointed  out  in  his
         submissions, the appellant gave the correct answer in his screening
         interview in October 2016 which was early on in the course  to  his
         conversion in the United Kingdom. The detail provided in  interview
         answers demonstrates a good understanding of the  basic  principles
         of Christianity and its story.  I cannot rule out  the  possibility
         that the reference to "awoke" comes from a mistranslation.


     iv) The appellant has given separate accounts of his mother's  response
         to the news of his conversion.  The differences however are not  so
         great  as  to  undermine  his   story.    Given   the   appellant's
         understanding of the reported and encryption of WhatsApp  messaging
         it is odd that he gave security as a reason  for  not  making  more
         frequent  contact.   However,   I   cannot   rule   out   plausible
         irrationality given the climate of hostility in Iran to  those  who
         convert.


      v) The appellant also demonstrated at the hearing a  poor  ability  to
         give a clear timeline in relation to his parallel Bible classes  at
         the Upper Room and  Tron  Churches.   Overall  his  recall  of  the
         chronology of matters was weak resulting in the  confusion  I  have
         referred to above.  This may be a pointer to deception but  also  a
         weak aspect of his intellect.


     vi) The  accumulation  of  the  above  factors  has  the  potential  to
         jeopardise the appellant's credibility particularly if  I  were  to
         decide his case on his own evidence in isolation.  But that is  not
         the reality. I do not need to be convinced that the  appellant  has
         converted to Christianity; that would be an error  of  approach  to
         the standard  of  proof.   It  is  for  the  appellant  to  show  a
         reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  he  has  given  a  credible
         account.   With  that  in  mind  together  with   the   appellant's
         assurances of his conversion and his evidence of its impact, I turn
         to the evidence of two witnesses to  whom  he  has  introduced  the
         Upper Church.


 9. [F K] and [T N]

    Ms [K] is also an Iranian national and she has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee by the Secretary of State on  account  of  hostility  from  the
    authorities due to her participation as an  engagement/wedding  planner
    which involved, on one occasion, gay men.  She too was  born  a  Muslim
    and began attending Upper Room Church in January 2017  soon  after  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom.   She  has  completed  the  Christianity
    Explored Course at that church.  As well as attending a Bible class  on
    Mondays she also holds a women's study group every  Tuesday.   She  now
    considers herself a Christian.  She confirms the appellant's popularity
    within the church where he is an  active  member.   She  confirms  that
    since meeting him he has brought a few other people to that church  and
    has been with him on several occasions where he has  spoken  to  others
    about his faith and has encouraged them to Christianity.  She  has  now
    moved away from Glasgow.

10. Under cross-examination Ms [K] explained  where  they  had  met  (Clyde
    House), and described how they  had  fallen  into  conversation  whilst
    waiting in a lengthy queue with her son.  She described the  assistance
    the appellant had provided her with the Bible.  She was clear that  she
    had no notion of conversion prior to leaving Iran.  In response  to  my
    question she explained that she had been recognised as a refugee  after
    her interview on 15 June 2017.

11. Mr [T] is also from Iran and has been in the United  Kingdom  for  some
    eighteen years where today he is a British citizen and works as  a  bus
    driver.  He explains in his statement that he met the appellant a  year
    ago through another friend and also how the appellant  invited  him  to
    church when Mr [T] revealed  his  unhappiness.   He  started  attending
    Upper Room Church some four months ago and reports in his statement the
    improvement in his mood as a consequence.

12. Under cross-examination Mr [T] explained  that  he  had  not  yet  been
    baptised and referred to the requirement that he should  join  classes.
    He had not attended them yet  but  was  nevertheless  attending  church
    praying and learning about Christianity.  Others suggested  he  convert
    to Christianity in the past, but he  had  not  taken  this  as  a  very
    serious matter.  He confirmed that the appellant had convinced  him  to
    make the journey to conversion explained by  his  previously  depressed
    state and the understanding the  appellant  had  given  him  about  the
    church which he attends on Thursday.

13. In response to my questions  for  clarification  he  explained  he  was
    married with two children and confirmed his wife's Iranian origins.  As
    to the basis of his asylum claim he explained he had problems with  the
    Iranian government. He was not otherwise forthcoming as to the  precise
    nature of the basis of his claim.  He confirmed that he  had  not  been
    back to Iran since his first arrival in the United Kingdom.

14. I find both witnesses to  be  credible  about  the  way  in  which  the
    appellant had encouraged them to convert and as to  the  benefits  that
    had ensued.

15. [A Z]

    Mr [Z] was granted  refugee  status  in  November  2016.   He  met  the
    appellant some two years ago according  to  a  statement  at  the  Tron
    Church which he had been attending for around three years.  He had been
    introduced to the appellant in a Christianity Explored class  and  they
    became friends.  They used to attend  Glasgow  City  College  together.
    The appellant was very vocal and enthusiastic in the class and attended
    it regularly.  They have completed  the  Christianity  Explored  class.
    The appellant used to attend Sunday services at  the  Tron  Church  and
    appeared to Mr [Z] to be very committed to the church  and  his  faith.
    He is aware of the appellant's switch to Upper Room Church which he had
    previously attended although his loyalty is now to  Tron  Church.   The
    appellant had introduced him to Upper Room.  Mr [Z] was present at  the
    appellant's baptism.  He refers also to  the  enjoyment  the  appellant
    obtains from evangelising others and his belief that it is his duty  to
    spread the word of Jesus.  The appellant is the only person amongst his
    friends whom he could really trust and describes him as a  very  caring
    and kind person.

16. Under cross-examination Mr [Z] confirmed his faith as a  Christian  and
    described what it was about the appellant that  marked  him  out  as  a
    Christian too by reference to his  enquiries  about  the  religion  and
    having a clear heart.   He  considers  it  is  his  duty  to  help  any
    Christian  that  he  believes  is  genuine.   When  asked  whether   he
    considered it is his duty to help and to be  kind  to  members  of  all
    faiths, Mr [Z] asked for a further explanation  (which  was  provided).
    He explained that he believed he should help a person who is  genuinely
    Christian and that was why he was at court.

17. In response to my enquiries, he confirmed that the  class  he  and  the
    appellant had attended led to their baptism and that the basis  of  his
    fear of return to Iran was his own conversion; he had arrived  here  on
    21 September 2015.  He had been born a  Muslim  and  had  converted  to
    Christianity  roughly  about  two  months  before  he  had  left  Iran.
    Recognition of his refugee status came after an appeal hearing.

18. As with the preceding witnesses, I have no basis  for  disbelieving  Mr
    [Z] as to his sincerity and assessment of the appellant as well as  his
    recognition of the appellant's evangelism.  There is no indication  why
    he was first refused when he applied for asylum or of the matters  that
    led to recognition  following  his  appeal.   To  an  extent  Mr  [Z]'s
    contribution to my assessment of the genuineness of  the  appellant  is
    less than that of the preceding witnesses.  In the light of the absence
    of the above material and furthermore the indication that Mr [Z] is  no
    longer attending Upper Room and consequently is unable to speak  as  to
    the appellant's current activities.  Those activities are addressed  by
    the next witness.

19. Dr White

    Dr White explains in his statement that he was born in 1955 and is a US
    citizen.  He is the pastor of Upper Room Church in Glasgow and has been
    a pastor for 37 years in the United States and the United Kingdom where
    he divides his time between Upper Room Church and Nazarene  Theological
    College -  Glasgow  Learning  Centre  which  affiliated  to  Manchester
    University.  He holds a PhD in Theology from the  University  of  Notre
    Dame and a Doctor of Ministry from Denver  Seminary,  USA.   He  is  an
    ordained member of the clergy receiving a valid licence  of  ordination
    from   the   Christian   and   Missionary   Alliance   and   Communitas
    International.

20. He established Upper Room Church with his wife Cindy and  Mike  Kurtyka
    with his wife who are lay missionaries.   It  developed  from  a  small
    group arising out of a church called the Mosaic Community.

21. As to the appellant's activities, he confirms he started  attending  in
    the summer of 2016 and describes him as having been  very  faithful  in
    doing so since.  The appellant is very active  within  the  church  and
    comes to every Thursday gathering.  In  addition,  he  joined  a  class
    preparing for baptism which Dr White had led on Mondays at  his  house.
    The appellant has also  been  attending  Alpha  Study  Group  being  an
    introduction to Jesus Christ and to Christianity in general.   He  also
    attends their church movie night once per month which is followed by  a
    discussion.  The appellant was baptised on Easter Sunday 2017 for which
    they used the Parkhead Nazarene Church as Upper Room does  not  have  a
    baptismal pool.  That church has now moved  into  Re:  Hope  Church  in
    Parkhead.

22. The appellant often arrives early on Thursdays to help  set  things  up
    for the service and Dr White could think of a  good  number  of  people
    especially those from the Muslim  background  that  the  appellant  had
    introduced and  invited  to  the  church.   The  appellant  evangelises
    towards new people about his faith and Dr White adds that he  does  not
    hesitate at all in saying that he has really demonstrated  that  faith.
    There is a careful evaluation of people  who  are  growing  into  their
    faith based on:

      i) Consistency in attending meetings.


     ii) Faithfulness in prayer.


    iii) Hunger to learn about the Bible.


     iv) Authenticity in worship.


      v) Evangelism.


23. Dr White describes the appellant as attentive and clearly engaged.   He
    has invited Dr White to pray for others that  he  is  sharing  with  in
    terms of evangelism and he can think of few others who evidenced  their
    faith like the appellant.

24. Dr White acknowledges that there are people who claim faith  for  their
    own ends, but he simply did not believe this to be so for the appellant
    for whom he would vouch for in every possible way and could  not  state
    that in stronger terms.  The vast majority of those who are baptised by
    the Upper Room Church stay with them for long after and it is  not  the
    case that those who were granted refugee status simply  go  off  radar.
    He believes the church has a good pulse on those whom it  baptises  who
    are put through quite  a  rigorous  process  attending  eight  two-hour
    meetings in a group setting following a  grilling  by  Dr  White  about
    their desire to be baptised.  A series of baptismal questions  need  to
    be confirmed in order for baptism to take place.  There are a number of
    people who the church has decided were not ready  to  be  baptised  but
    that was certainly not the case with the appellant.

25. Under cross-examination, Dr  White  explained  why  Upper  Room  Church
    service took place on Thursdays; the church has other users on Sundays.
     He had been  aware  of  the  appellant's  attendance  at  Tron  Church
    previously and had discussed baptism with him at that time.   Dr  White
    explained the process for preparation for baptism  by  reference  to  a
    personal interview which he conducts, Bible  and  baptism  classes.  He
    referred to the appellant's excitement at baptism on  Easter  Day.   Mr
    Mullen explained the evidence was that  the  appellant  had  made  that
    election without anyone suggesting it to him. Dr White gave a  detailed
    response explaining that the plan for Easter baptism had not  been  set
    in stone.  There were others who wanted the  wonderful  coincidence  of
    baptism on that day; the possibility had been raised in discussion.  He
    did not however know about possible baptism of the  appellant  at  Tron
    Church.  He was aware of a specific Iranian Christian Church in Glasgow
    but could not comment on Mr Mullen's statement that there were not many
    conversions there; he did not know.

26. As to the evidence in his statement regarding  continued  adherence  by
    those who were baptised, Dr White explained that  this  was  understood
    through his relationships with them.  He described  the  vast  majority
    continued to stay  on  in  the  church  having  received  a  visa.   He
    confirmed there was one person who had received a visa  who  then  went
    off radar but also there were those who left Glasgow for  work  related
    reasons but did not "go off radar".

27. With reference to his statement that there had been a number of  people
    that the church had decided were not ready to  be  baptised,  Dr  White
    explained that such individuals were advised to continue to participate
    in church life and were not to be  discouraged.   He  referred  to  the
    challenge to the church in this regard that in terms of  the  drive  it
    could be for reasons of ulterior motives and not  in  line  with  their
    Biblical faith.  He acknowledged that sincerity was not easy  to  gauge
    being a subjective exercise but, in the light of his years of  pastoral
    work, he had strong trust in his own appraisal.

28. I asked Dr White a number of questions for clarification of aspects  of
    his life and the church.  From this it emerged:

      i) Upper Room Church  is  in  the  evangelical  tradition  giving  the
         description of the Christian Missionary Alliance and  the  role  of
         Communitas I have described in my summary of his evidence.


     ii) Dr White was tasked with coming here to plant a new  church  called
         the Mosaic Community which had been in 2001.  As that church  grew,
         his attention was given through the Upper Room Church  to  a  small
         group of refugees and asylum seekers.   His  activities  were  half
         funded by income raised in the United  States  and  half  from  his
         salary at the Theological College.


    iii) Dr White is the only ordained cleric at Upper Room,  his  wife  and
         colleagues being lay missionaries.


     iv) Dr White does not speak Farsi having learnt only a few phrases.  As
         to how he managed with a Farsi speaking congregation, he  explained
         he  relied  on  a  number  of  gifted  people  who  assisted   with
         translation.  That congregation was approximately 100  to  120  but
         might be as many as 150.  As to how he was able to  keep  in  touch
         with so many he replied that it was "relational" and he referred to
         his follow up.  He reiterated that he could  confidently  say  only
         one had "more  or  less"  departed.   That  congregation  comprised
         mainly refugees and asylum seekers but also included some  students
         from university, a middle-aged couple and a lady from Liverpool.


      v) The form of service on Thursdays begins with a prayer group at  5pm
         attended by ten or twelve people during which  others  arrive.   At
         5.30 he meets the translator to  go  through  the  sermon  for  the
         service at 6.30.  This starts with warm up songs led by  his  wife.
         She was competent on the piano although they only had  an  electric
         keyboard available plus drums and some  singers.   Special  prayers
         would be led, repeated in  Farsi  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the
         service there would be a meal together at about 8  o'clock.   There
         was a collection box where people could pay towards the cost of the
         Middle Eastern type food served. At  the  conclusion  of  the  meal
         there would be further prayer when usually 50 people stayed.


     vi) There were three types of classes that took place.  For baptism  it
         was on Monday afternoons at his flat  over  an  eight-week  period.
         There was a study group on Wednesday for the Alpha  group  and  the
         third was a group led by his wife in Bible study  for  women.   The
         last film  that  had  been  shown  at  the  session  which  led  to
         discussion afterwards was "Finding Neverland".  It had been  dubbed
         into Farsi.


    vii) He knew and appreciated the Tron Church which had a Sunday  morning
         service and also Farsi service on Sunday afternoon.


29. Mr Criggie (on my encouragement) raised with Dr White  the  appellant's
    response that Jesus Christ had woken upon on the third  day  after  his
    crucifixion.  This  led  him  to  give  a  theological  explanation  of
    resurrection being central to the Christian faith.  He speculated  that
    there might have been a language difficulty with the phrase used by the
    appellant but was nevertheless clear that the robust  theology  of  the
    church was that Christ had died and he had risen from the dead.

SUBMISSIONS

30. Mr Mullen relied on the refusal letter and argued that past events  had
    shed light on the evidence given by the appellant.  It was important to
    understand why someone had converted and the appellant  had  failed  to
    give a clear set of reasons.  He contended the appellant's  explanation
    that Christianity had made people  happy  was  glib  and  shallow.   He
    considered the appellant's answer astonishing when he  asked  what  was
    meant when questioned about the reach of his evangelism.  He considered
    there was  difficulty  with  the  responses  the  appellant  had  given
    regarding his express plans for baptism in the context of the  evidence
    of Dr White.  He acknowledged the possibility of  a  mistranslation  of
    the evidence of the appellant but nevertheless contended  that  he  did
    not  understand  the  significance  of  Easter.   There  was  a   clear
    discrepancy in the appellant's  evidence  regarding  his  marriage,  an
    aspect going to the core of his claim.  Little weight in the  light  of
    these factors  could  be  placed  on  the  appellant's  testimony.   He
    considered  the  testimony  of  the  appellant's   supporters   to   be
    superficial.  As to Dr White, he had no quarrel with his experience  or
    sincerity but maintained his concerns over the appellant's testimony in
    this case which turns on his credibility.

31. For his part, Mr Criggie argued the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account of his conversion and argued I should follow the  approach  set
    out by Lord Glennie in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58  whose  judgment
    followed a week after my own in finding error of law which identified a
    similar approach to  be  taken  to  the  evidence  of  other  witnesses
    including in this  case  Dr  White.   In  his  submission,  Dr  White's
    evidence with the other  witnesses  buttressed  the  testimony  of  the
    appellant.  He did not consider it significant that the  appellant  had
    difficulty in recalling the precise chronology in terms of his  studies
    and furthermore, the evidence regarding marriage was  not  relevant  as
    the appellant had not stated they were living together.   He  concluded
    with his endorsement of the quality of the evidence of Dr White.

MY FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

32. I consider that Mr Criggie was correct to  identify  the  force  of  Dr
    White's evidence which he gave in an assured authoritative manner  when
    cross-examined and in response to my own questions.  I have no doubt as
    to his sincerity.  Furthermore, I consider that he is well aware of the
    potential for abuse given the targeted congregation by his church  with
    its  missionary  tradition.   Dr  White  is  supported  by  three   lay
    missionaries and I do think it possible that there is  enough  manpower
    to keep an eye on the congregation  in  particular,  the  movements  of
    those post-baptism.  It is clear to me  that  the  process  leading  to
    baptism  is  reasonably  thorough  and  I   received   a   satisfactory
    explanation how the language barrier was overcome.   The  structure  of
    the Thursday evening services demonstrates  that  it  is  more  than  a
    social gathering which had been of concern to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  The personal involvement in the process of instruction as  well
    as interview leading to  baptism  persuades  me  that  it  is  unlikely
    someone who was not genuine would be able to mislead him in the  manner
    described by Lord Glennie at [60] "... has in effect lived a  lie  i.e.
    created a false persona and lived a false lifestyle over  a  protracted
    period and has successfully duped the witnesses from  the  Tron  Church
    into believing that his new faith was genuine when  it  was  not".   As
    acknowledged by Lord Glennie it was not impossible that  someone  would
    do this but as he observed "to reach this conclusion there must be some
    evidence which points to it".

33. I have  identified  above  the  negative  aspects  in  the  appellant's
    testimony including this his dishonesty over the events leading  up  to
    his flight from Iran.  The reach of that lie does  entail  a  need  for
    strong evidence to show on the lower standard that  the  appellant  has
    nevertheless genuinely converted and has not opportunistically embraced
    Christianity to achieve refugee status.  I do not  accept  Mr  Mullen's
    submission that the appellant's account of the joy that he feels  as  a
    convert  glib  and  shallow;  the  expression  of  happiness  in   such
    circumstances is commonly heard.   His  supporting  witnesses  for  the
    reasons which I have already given add some strength to the appellant's
    claim. What however persuades me  to  accept  that  the  appellant  has
    genuinely converted is the testimony of Dr  White  who  conscientiously
    considers whether those who convert are genuine in  their  belief.  His
    belief in the genuineness of the appellant is not a substitute  for  my
    own assessment but is nevertheless an important factor.

34. I find that the appellant has demonstrated to a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood a credible account that he has converted to  an  evangelical
    denomination as  a  Christian.   A  core  part  of  that  faith  is  an
    evangelical element.  In the light of Mr  Mullen's  acceptance  of  the
    position were I to find the appellant credible I am satisfied  that  he
    is a refugee and allow this appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2018

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
Annex

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13216/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 August 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     J B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Criggie, Advocate instructed by Latta & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by an Iranian national born March  1984  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski who for reasons  given
    in her decision following a hearing on 14  August  2017  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  18
    November 2016 refusing his protection claim which was based on  a  fear
    of harm in Iran, his country of nationality owing to his conversion  to
    Christianity. The appellant's case is that he left Iran in May 2016 and
    claimed asylum in the UK  after  he  was  encountered  in  a  hotel  in
    Wetherby on 26 May 2016. After his release from a  short  detention  in
    Yarl's Wood, he was dispersed to Glasgow where he has been  principally
    active in two churches (Tron and Upper Room).

 2. The appellant was substantively interviewed on  26  October  2016.  The
    Secretary of State did not believe his account of  conversion  in  Iran
    and the troubles he had met as a result that had led to his  flight  or
    that he had established that he is a genuine Christian convert.

 3. There was no representation by the Secretary of State  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal when the judge heard evidence  from  the
    appellant and from three witnesses, Dr Wesley White  (from  Upper  Room
    church) and two persons of Iranian origin who have been  recognised  as
    refugees. The appellant had introduced them to Upper House church,  his
    current place of worship. The appellant was baptised with  one  of  his
    lay witnesses in April 2017.

 4. The judge rejected the  appellant's  account  of  his  introduction  to
    Christianity in Iran as not credible.  In addition, she rejected as not
    credible the appellant's account of his escape during  a  raid  by  the
    Iranian authorities on a house church which he had  been  attending  in
    Esfahan and his subsequent departure from Iran.  As to the  appellant's
    church-based activities in Glasgow, the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    appellant  had  shown  a  genuine  or  even  perceived  conversion   to
    Christianity  and  dismissed  the   appeal   on   Refugee   Convention,
    Humanitarian Protection and Human Rights grounds.

 5. The following grounds of challenge have been  made  to  that  decision.
    The  first  is  the  judge's  reasoning  was  opaque   and   could   be
    characterised as a flat  refusal  to  accept  any  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in relation to his account of conversion  (in  Iran)  and  the
    judge had relied mainly on speculation.

 6. The second ground relates to  the  appellant's  UK  activities.  It  is
    contended that the judge was vague in her assessment  of  the  evidence
    provided by the witnesses and no findings had been  made  as  to  their
    credibility and reliability as far as the appellant's commitment to the
    church was concerned.  The third ground relates to the judge's approach
    to the Administrative Court decision in  SA  (Iran)  [2012]  EWHC  2575
    (Admin).

 7. Mr Criggie submitted that the judge had given  inadequate  reasons  for
    her credibility findings in relation the events in Iran and had allowed
    her negative assessment  of  that  aspect  to  inform  her  as  to  the
    credibility of the witnesses relating to the Glasgow    activities.  No
    findings had been made on their evidence. He referred me to [24] of  SA
    where HHJ Gilbart QC had observed the dangers of:

         "... anyone, and perhaps especially a judge, to peer into what some
         call a man or woman's soul to assess whether a professed  faith  is
         genuinely held, and especially not when it was and is  agreed  that
         she was and is a frequent participant in church services. It  is  a
         type of judicial exercise very popular some centuries ago  in  some
         fora, but rather rarely exercised today. I am also  uneasy  when  a
         judge, even with the knowledge one gains judicially in  a  city  as
         diverse as Manchester,  is  bold  enough  to  seek  to  reach  firm
         conclusions about a professed conversion, made by a woman raised in
         another culture, from the version of Islam practised therein, to an
         evangelical church in Bolton within one strand of  Christianity.  I
         am at a loss to understand how that is to  be  tested  by  anything
         other than considering whether she is an active participant in  the
         new church. But I accept that such judicial boldness as this  judge
         showed does not necessarily undermine a decision in law if he  does
         so, and his decision was not successfully appealed. But that is not
         the only point. There must be a real risk that if she has professed
         herself to be a Christian,  and  conducted  herself  as  one,  that
         profession, whether true or not, may be taken in Iran  as  evidence
         of apostasy. On the  basis  of  the  Home  Secretary's  now  stated
         position, that amounts to a potentially different circumstance from
         that addressed by the Immigration Judge."

 8. Mr Govan argued the judge had taken a logical approach by assessing the
    Iranian incidents and then the UK activities. She  had  identified  the
    correct approach in [33] by noting that if the appellant were perceived
    as a Christian by the authorities his motives for his  conversion  were
    not relevant. The findings made as to events in Iran were open  to  the
    judge and she had heard evidence from the appellant. Her reasoning  was
    explained over [29] to [32] of her decision. As to matters in  Glasgow,
    the judge had considered all the material in the round and to  him  the
    challenge appeared more a rationality challenge.

 9. In reply, Mr  Criggie  questioned  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
    "hoodwink" his witnesses over such an extended period.  Paragraph  [33]
    of the decision contained a non sequitur where the judge considered the
    motives for conversion not relevant to risk assessment that  they  were
    of  "some  significance  in  assessment  of  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant".

10. The judge's findings are set out after a detailed  record  of  all  the
    evidence and the appellant's  case  which  included  the  gist  of  the
    evidence of the three witnesses. A summary of the respondent's case  is
    also recorded in clear terms.

11. In my judgment the judge did not err in her finding on  the  events  in
    Iran based on the ground of challenge. She gave sustainable reasons for
    questioning the plausibility  of  the  process  whereby  the  appellant
    became involved in the House Church without  an  explanation  from  his
    introducer, the risks the latter took and the reported  contentment  by
    the appellant after his third visit. The appellant had not received any
    bible study and there was  an  absence  of  guidance  or  teaching.  In
    addition, the judge was entitled to question the appellant's ability to
    escape whilst having a cigarette outside  the  House  Church  during  a
    service when the police raided as  well  as  his  father's  ability  to
    source funds and make arrangements for the flight from Iran in only  10
    days. The findings on this limb to the claim are adequately reasoned in
    a  number  of  paragraphs  and  cannot  be  said  to   be   opaque   or
    characteristic of a flat refusal, as asserted in the grounds, to accept
    any of the evidence which the judge appears to  have  considered  as  a
    whole.

12. I am less confident as to the absence  of  error  in  relation  to  the
    findings on the Glasgow based activities. Here the judge begins with  a
    statement of her understanding of a feature of church life in  Glasgow.
    At [34] she explains:

         "I note that the witnesses produced before me  all  indicated  that
         they thought that the Appellant's conversion  to  Christianity  was
         genuine.  However, given that I do not accept the Appellant had any
         interest in Christianity whilst in Iran, question marks must  arise
         about why the Appellant took such an interest in  attending  Church
         when he came to Glasgow.  I also appreciate  that  there  are  some
         churches in  Glasgow  where  there  are  very  committed  Christian
         missionaries with Farsi interpreters on hand who go out to  welcome
         refugees and asylum seekers.  As the witness, Miss [K] indicated in
         her oral evidence, she wanted  to  find  an  Iranian  community  in
         Glasgow for the purpose of socializing when she made  contact  with
         the Appellant and she was happy to attend the Upper Room Church for
         that reason.  I consider that such churches such as the Tron Church
         and the Upper Room Church provide such a social  gathering.   Given
         the isolation that most asylum seekers  have  to  endure,  together
         with the confusion of having to  cope  with  the  western  culture,
         different values and possibly the inability to understand  English,
         I find that when asylum seekers are dispersed to Glasgow, it  would
         be quite understandable for them to congregate  at  Farsi  speaking
         Christian meetings run by such  Christian  missionaries.   Food  is
         sometimes provided, as are outings such as to Edinburgh.  There  is
         always social interaction at these meetings.  The price  that  that
         (sic) would be paid from an asylum seeker's point of view would  be
         the lectures on Christianity.  It does not mean  that  there  is  a
         lasting  conversion  to  Christianity.   I  asked  the  Appellant's
         witnesses how many Moslem Iranians they knew  in  Glasgow  and  the
         answer was startling.  It was only one or two but  they  knew  many
         Christian Iranians, all attending the same set  of  churches.   The
         thriving nature of the Iranian social group in  these  churches  is
         significant in Glasgow."

13. This passage appears to suggest the  possibility  that  the  judge  was
    drawing on her experience of a pattern of similar cases in Glasgow  and
    it is not clear the extent to which the appellant  and  Dr  White  were
    invited to comment. It is also significant  that  the  judge  makes  no
    clear findings on his evidence. Her  attention  was  drawn  to  another
    passage from SA [24]:

         "What appears to have impressed the immigration judge, and then the
         Home Secretary, is that the Claimant's conversion  to  Christianity
         was not regarded by him as genuine, and had  been  manufactured  to
         assist her asylum claim."

14. The judge rejected the submission based on  this  extract  for  reasons
    given at [36] of her decision:

         "However I must disagree with the  submission  of  the  Appellant's
         Representative that regular attendance at a Christian church is  in
         fact the only key to assessing a person's conversion.   I  consider
         that there are numerous explanations for regular  attendance  at  a
         particular Christian church as I have indicated, social interaction
         being one explanation.

15. Whilst it was open to the judge to reject attendance as the  only  key,
    she  does  not  explain  what  method  of  assessment  she   considered
    appropriate in this case apart from  the  presence  of  doubts  in  the
    process of conversion and the pull of her earlier negative  credibility
    findings. These aspects and other matters are  considered  at  [37]  to
    [41]:

         "37. I find that it is noteworthy that  the  Appellant  claimed  to
             have converted so  rapidly  and  to  have  such  complete  and
             absolute certainty in his new faith.   I  would  have  thought
             that there would have been doubts along the way.  On asking Dr
             White whether he would expect someone to have doubts whilst in
             the process of conversion, Dr White confirmed  that  he  would
             fully expect that to be the case.  There are no signs  of  any
             doubts  whatsoever  with  the  Appellant  and  the   Appellant
             insisted that that was in fact the case.  Because I  find  the
             Appellant's credibility is poor with regard to  his  claim  to
             have been a Christian in Iran, I find that this must  also  be
             one of the factors in my assessment  of  the  Appellant's  sur
             place claim.

         38.  I find that the nature of the  Iranian  community  in  Glasgow
             having a large Christian influence and the significant  impact
             that certain Glasgow churches have in the social gathering  in
             that community, tackling the isolation of asylum  seekers  and
             refugees, all indicate to my mind that such churches offer  an
             important social role but not  necessarily  a  spiritual  one.
             The Appellant's poor credibility  also  detracts  to  the  sur
             place argument.

         39.  It has been argued that the Appellant has been baptized by  Dr
             White of the Upper Room Church in a ceremony in April 2017.  I
             place little reliance on the baptism ceremony as  proof  of  a
             conversion given that Miss [K], who had only  arrived  in  the
             United Kingdom in January 2017 was also baptised at  the  same
             ceremony.  Dr White was clearly satisfied  that  she  too  had
             converted.  I consider that a matter of 10  weeks  or  so  for
             Miss [K] to have been introduced to Christianity would not  be
             sufficient for a genuine conversion and  I  consider  that  it
             undermines the Appellant's own claim concerning  his  baptism.
             I do not consider that a baptism certificate  is  a  badge  of
             honor  or  graduation  certificate  which  proves  a  person's
             conversion.  It simply means a person is willing to go through
             a particular ceremony and nothing more.

         40.  Taking all of this into account, I note that all the witnesses
             for the Appellant speak of the Appellant's regular  attendance
             at two Glasgow churches and him helping out at such places.  I
             find that it may be indicative but I do not find that fact  of
             itself to be conclusive in the circumstances.   I  reject  the
             baptism certificate as being even significant in the issue  of
             conversion.  In the circumstances I do not consider  that  the
             Appellant has shown a genuine or even perceived conversion  to
             Christianity because I find the Appellant's credibility to  be
             so poor.  The  Appellant  appears  to  spend  a  lot  of  time
             attending more than one church.  However, I consider that  the
             social  aspect  of  attending  these  particular  churches  in
             Glasgow  is  significant.   These  are  churches  with   large
             attendances of Iranian people and would indicate participation
             in communal activities, rather than demonstrating a  spiritual
             aspect to such participation.

         41.  There is no indication that the Iranian government  has  shown
             any interest in  monitoring  the  activities  of  any  of  the
             Churches in Glasgow and I do not consider it  shown  that  the
             Iranian authorities are even aware of the Appellant even being
             in Glasgow, let alone attending  Church  there,  for  whatever
             motive."

16. I do not underestimate the difficulties as acknowledged by Mr Govan for
    a judge in making findings on a claim of this kind  particularly  where
    the Secretary of State has not bothered to be represented.  It is still
    necessary to decide the credibility of the evidence of  all  witnesses,
    something which is absent from this decision. There is no doubt that Dr
    White will have had insight into the way people embrace his church  and
    there is no indication that the concerns expressed over the absence  of
    doubt by the appellant were put to him for his reflection. There is  no
    finding over the reliability of his assessment of the strength  of  the
    appellant's  conversion.  Such  an  evaluation  may  or   may   to   be
    determinative but it is necessary where on a claim of this kind insight
    is required into  matters  that  go  to  the  very  core  of  someone's
    identity. Without answers on these points, the correctness of the judge
    in giving such prominent  weight  to  the  negative  reach  of  earlier
    deception is not sustainable. An asylum seeker may seek to mislead over
    one aspect of a claim and be telling the truth in relation to  another;
    this can include conversion to another faith.

17. In my judgment the errors that surface in ground two are  material  and
    the decision in so far as to relates to the Glasgow  activities  cannot
    be upheld. Accordingly, I set aside the decision  restricted  to  these
    matters alone. The decision in respect of events  in  Iran  stand.  The
    remaking of the decision will be on the basis that  the  appellant  did
    not convert as claimed in Iran and that he  did  not  leave  under  any
    cloud of adverse interest. The remaking will require an  assessment  of
    his post arrival activities and whether on the facts as found  he  will
    result in a risk on return.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the FtT is set aside on the limited basis set out  above.  A
remaking of the  decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  post  arrival
activities will take place in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be notified.


Signed

UTJ Dawson
UTJ Dawson

