

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/13846/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House London              | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 August 2017                        | On 7 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     fn
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Farmer that was  issued  on
    23 May 2017.

 2. Judge Farmer decided the appellant was not a  refugee  from  Uganda  or
    otherwise in need  of  international  protection.   Judge  Farmer  also
    decided the appellant does not  benefit  from  articles  3  or  8  ECHR
    because she is HIV+.  The appellant alleges Judge Farmer legally  erred
    in her assessment of the facts and therefore she  could  not  draw  the
    conclusions she has.

 3. Judge Farmer imposed an anonymity direction.   Given  the  contents  of
    this appeal, it is appropriate that direction is continued, and I  make
    an order so doing, the full terms of which appear at the  end  of  this
    decision.

 4. After hearing from the representatives, I announced that I would  allow
    the appeal and set aside Judge Farmer's decision because I find  it  is
    legally flawed.  Given the errors that exist, and with the agreement of
    the parties, I have decided that the interests of justice  require  the
    appeal to be remitted for a fresh hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    before a judge other than Judge Farmer.  My reasons are as follow.

 5. At the crux of this appeal is the question of whether the appellant  is
    lesbian.  I am satisfied the decision and reasons  statement  does  not
    show that Judge Farmer approached the evidence as required by paragraph
    339L of the immigration rules, which of course transposes article  4(5)
    of the Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).   Those  provisions  are
    matters to EU law and reflect the earlier  extensive  jurisprudence  of
    the senior courts.  The provisions  require  anxious  scrutiny  of  the
    evidence and identifies that before an  assessment  of  credibility  is
    undertaken evidence from other sources should be assessed.

 6. Although Judge Farmer cited these provisions at  paragraph  23  of  her
    decision, she jumped straight in to deciding  whether  the  appellant's
    own evidence was infected by any of the five  factors  listed.   In  so
    doing, Judge Farmer failed to have regard  to  the  opening  provision,
    which requires decision-makers, including judges, to look separately at
    those parts of a person's statements supported by documentary or  other
    evidence.  In the appellant's case, she had  provided  statements  from
    other  people  and  documents,   including   medical   evidence,   from
    independent sources.  It is  evident  from  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement  read  as  a  whole  that  Judge  Farmer  used  her  negative
    assessment of the appellant's  overall  credibility  to  undermine  the
    other evidence; that was the incorrect approach.

 7. Judge Farmer's approach to the medical evidence  is  perhaps  the  most
    significant failure.   The  medical  report  identified  the  appellant
    suffered from PTSD.  It was supported by other medical  evidence.   Yet
    the judge decided she could give little weight to  the  medical  report
    because the appellant's account  and  history  displayed  factors  that
    suggested she was not credible.  In so doing, Judge  farmer  failed  to
    take proper account of how  the  appellant's  mental  health  condition
    might affect her ability to obtain or give evidence.

 8. Similarly, Judge Farmer decided to reject the evidence from independent
    organisations about the appellant's sexual orientation because she  did
    not find the appellant to be  credible.   Again,  in  so  doing,  Judge
    Farmer failed to explain how she came to that conclusion  in  light  of
    the appellant's medical evidence.

 9. These problems with Judge Farmer's findings were  so  obvious  that  Mr
    Singh conceded that her approach to the medical evidence was  confused.
    He pointed out that Judge Farmer failed to make an appropriate  finding
    as to how the  appellant's  PTSD  was  caused  and  thereby  failed  to
    consider whether it was reasonably likely to be linked to  her  claimed
    sexuality.

10. Other issues were discussed, such  as  whether  Judge  Farmer  had  had
    regard to the Presidential Guidelines regarding Vulnerable  Appellants.
    I reminded the  representatives  that  since  Judge  Farmer  heard  the
    appeal, the Court of Appeal  had  identified  the  importance  of  such
    guidance (see AM (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123).   Ms
    Benfield suggested that Judge Farmer's reference to such  guidance  was
    insufficient to  show  that  she  appreciated  the  need  to  enable  a
    vulnerable person to given their best evidence.  I  do  not  find  this
    argument to raise any matter not already covered in the general concern
    as to how Judge Farmer approached the evidence.

11. The last matter to be considered is whether the appellant's HIV+ status
    would be a very significant obstacle to her  integrating  into  Uganda.
    This is a factor that needed to be considered in  terms  of  article  8
    ECHR (particularly with a view to paragraph 276ADE of  the  immigration
    rules) but was not examined or assessed in detail by Judge Farmer;  the
    only reference is the last sentence of paragraph 38 of the decision and
    reasons statement, which does not include any  analysis  or  reasoning.
    It is a further basis to allow the appeal since  the  judge  failed  to
    make adequate findings on a relevant issue.

12. It was obvious to the representatives that the nature of  the  failings
    meant the appeal must be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing on all matters.  I agree.

Decision

Judge Farmer erred in law.

Her decision is set aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge  other
than Judge Farmer.



Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"FN".



Signed                          Date         6 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
