
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13607/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2019                              |On 1 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                   k a a m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mallick of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Reasons for Decision

 1. Judge Burns (the judge) dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  on
    human rights grounds because he did not find  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness or that he would be at risk on return.

 2. The grounds claim the judge made material errors of law as follows:

 3. At [25] the judge failed to consider the appellant's young  age.   When
    he claimed asylum and as at the date of the hearing,  he  was  still  a
    minor.  The judge failed to give the appellant the benefit of the doubt
    when he was recalling events that happened to him in Iran in 2016.

 4. At [27] the judge also failed  to  consider  properly  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  The appellant clearly stated that in  2017  he  did
    not know about the existence of the document.

 5.  At  [28]  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the
    appellant's witness statement.  He said in  that  statement  that  Star
    only informed him of the existence of the document and  only  sent  the
    appellant photos because he was too afraid to send the  original.   The
    original was posted to him at a later date by [JZ].

 6. At [31] the judge's finding lacked reasoning.  The appellant  would  be
    at risk either way.  Either fear of conscription  to  the  military  or
    imprisonment  for  being  actively  involved  with  a  political  party
    opposing the government.

 7. At [32] the judge failed to give reasons as to what expertise he had to
    make a finding that the document  was  forged.   The  judge  is  not  a
    country expert.

 8. At [33] the judge failed to consider the appellant's young age when  he
    was questioned  about  the  claim.   The  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    witness.

 9. Overall, the grounds claimed that the errors identified were sufficient
    individually or cumulatively to vitiate the decision as  a  whole.   In
    particular, the errors as identified undermined the adverse credibility
    findings of the judge.

10. Judge L Murray granted permission on 6 February 2019.  She  said  inter
    alia as follows:

         "3.  The appellant is a minor and the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
             consider  his  evidence   in   accordance   with   the   Joint
             Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:  child,  vulnerable
             adult and sensitive appellant guidance.  This arguably amounts
             to an error of law affecting his findings on credibility."

11. The Rule 24 response was handed up at the hearing.

Submissions on Error of Law

12. There was no skeleton argument for the appellant.  Ms Mallick submitted
    that the judge had erred  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note with regard to children.  The appellant  was
    a child at the date of the hearing.  In any event, there were  problems
    with the decision itself; see grounds.

13. Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response.  The grounds  were  nothing
    more than a fishing expedition in the hope of establishing an error  of
    law when there was none.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14. It is always good  practice  to  bear  in  mind  and  apply  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance when hearing the appeal of a child  but  it  does
    not necessarily follow that failure to mention the guidance will result
    in an error of law.

15. The judge was aware of the appellant's age.  He said he had  been  born
    on 28 May 2001.  The hearing was on 4 January 2019.  In  assessing  the
    appellant's asylum claim, the judge was mindful of the fact  that  when
    he first gave his account, the appellant was 15 years of age  and  that
    as of the date of the hearing, he was still a minor.  See the  decision
    at [39]. There is nothing to suggest in a close reading of the decision
    that the judge conducted the hearing in any way that was at  odds  with
    the guidance.

16. The  appellant  was  represented  at  the  hearing  by  an  experienced
    immigration practitioner.  There was no complaint from Mr  J  D  Knight
    following the hearing that the judge had conducted the hearing  in  any
    way inappropriate to the  Appellant's  age  or  such  as  to  establish
    unfairness on the part of the judge.

17. The judge comprehensively set  out  the  appellant's  account  and  the
    reasons why he said he would be at risk on return.  Ms Mallick drew  my
    attention to [18] of the decision as evidence that the judge failed  to
    take account of  and  did  not  ensure  the  appellant's  understanding
    particularly given his age.  I find that the judge did not err  in  the
    manner in which he  approached  the  new  development  with  regard  to
    military service which had been raised for the first time at  the  date
    of the hearing.  The judge recited the events at [17]  -  [20]  of  the
    decision.  The skeleton argument handed up at the  hearing  included  a
    reference to the appellant being at risk on return as  a  draft  evader
    but in discussion at the hearing, Mr Knight confirmed that there was no
    suggestion the appellant was a draft evader or deserter or  was  wanted
    for military service in Iran.  Further, there was no suggestion that if
    on return the appellant was conscripted into the Iranian military, that
    that would  amount  to  persecution.   Mr  Knight  confirmed  the  only
    reference to  military  service  was  because  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was close to the age of conscription  and  that  might  be  a
    possible additional reason for him to be questioned at the  airport  on
    return.  It  appears  from  what  the  judge  said  at  [18]  that  the
    appellant, possibly prompted by the exchange between the judge  and  Mr
    Knight, referred to military service and  other  separate  issues  with
    regard to his claim.  There is nothing to suggest  that  the  appellant
    did not understand or that the exchange was in any way  significant  in
    terms of the Joint Presidential Guidance.

18. Another criticism raised by Ms Mallick is the judge's failure to  refer
    to Tanveer Ahmed when making an adverse  credibility  finding  at  [32]
    that a document recently produced had been forged such that  the  judge
    said he would give it little weight.  Whilst it would have been  useful
    for the judge to remind himself of the principles in Tanveer Ahmed,  he
    did not err in the particular circumstances of  this  case  bearing  in
    mind his wholesale adverse credibility findings.   The  judge  did  not
    believe the whole of the appellant's account. That was  a  finding  the
    judge was entitled to come to on the evidence before him.

19. I do accept as Mr Melvin acknowledged that there appeared  to  be  some
    confusion on the part of the judge at [31], however, I do not find that
    to be material.  It can be viewed and ignored in isolation.  It  in  no
    way infects the rest of the decision.

Notice of Decision

20. The judge's decision contains no material error of law and shall stand.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
