
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13682/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd May 2017                      |On 02 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                     mahmoud said ahmed mohamed ibrahim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Raikes of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd January 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male Egyptian citizen  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 27th July 2010 as a visitor.   He  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom when his visa expired.  On 13th June  2016  the  Appellant  was
    arrested for harassment of a former girlfriend.  Following  his  arrest
    he claimed asylum.  His claim was made on the basis that he had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Egypt because he  had  married  a  woman
    without her family's consent, and the family  had  threatened  to  kill
    him.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  on  30th  November
    2016.  The Appellant appealed and the hearing of his appeal took  place
    on 10th January 2017 at Stoke-on-Trent.

 4. The Appellant did not attend.  There was no explanation  for  his  non-
    attendance and his representative advised the FtT that efforts had been
    made to contact him by telephone without success.

 5. The Appellant's representative applied for an adjournment to enable the
    Appellant to attend a hearing at a later date.  The FtT  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant had been given proper  notice  of  the  hearing  and
    noted the failure to attend without explanation.  The FtT  refused  the
    adjournment request and proceeded to hear the appeal in the Appellant's
    absence.  The Appellant's representative  thereafter  took  no  further
    part in the proceedings.

 6.  The  FtT  considered  the  documentary  evidence  submitted   on   the
    Appellant's behalf and did not find him to be credible.  The FtT  found
    that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  if  returned  to  Egypt  and
    therefore  the  appeal  was  dismissed  with   reference   to   asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and on human rights grounds.  The FtT did  not
    accept that the Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    breach Article 8, as his removal would not represent a disproportionate
    breach of his family and private life.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  contending  that  there
    had been a mistake as to a material fact which could be established  by
    objective and uncontentious evidence, where the  Appellant  and/or  his
    advisors were not responsible for the  mistake,  and  where  unfairness
    resulted from the fact that a mistake was made.

 8. It was submitted that the Appellant had been arrested and  detained  by
    police in Derby on the evening  of  9th  January  2017.   He  was  only
    released on the morning of 10th January 2017 between  6  and  7am,  and
    therefore could not attend his hearing on the morning of  10th  January
    2017.

 9. It was contended that the FtT could not be blamed for proceeding in the
    Appellant's absence, as the Appellant had not given a  reason  for  his
    non-attendance.  However fairness  would  dictate  that  the  Appellant
    should be given a proper opportunity to place his case before  the  FtT
    through giving oral evidence to rebut the refusal letter, and establish
    his credibility.  Reliance was placed upon MM (Sudan) [2014]  UKUT  105
    (IAC).  It was submitted that relevant evidence had not been considered
    by the FtT, that being the Appellant's  oral  evidence,  and  this  had
    resulted in unfairness.

10. It was submitted that the Appellant's failure to attend the FtT to give
    evidence was the result of external circumstances outside his control

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kimnell of the FtT who found;

         "There may have been procedural unfairness by  proceeding  to  hear
         the appeal in the Appellant's absence since, whilst it was  unknown
         to the  judge  at  the  time,  the  Appellant  was  prevented  from
         attending because he was in police custody until the morning of the
         hearing.

         One might have thought the Appellant or his  representatives  would
         have informed the Tribunal before  promulgation  took  place,  thus
         giving the opportunity to restore the matter to the list, but  that
         does not appear to have been done."

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending  that  the  FtT  directed  itself  appropriately.   The
    Appellant had not explained why, having been released between 6 and 7am
    he did not contact the Tribunal or his representatives.  The FtT  found
    against the Appellant in relation to credibility, but  also  considered
    the Appellant's claim in the alternative at paragraphs 29  30,  and  in
    view of this,  there  was  no  material  error  disclosed  by  the  FtT
    proceeding in the Appellant's absence.   The  FtT  had  considered  the
    Appellant's claim at its highest, and  had  regard  to  sufficiency  of
    protection, internal relocation and the relevant  background  evidence.
    The grounds did not seek to challenge the FtT analysis of these issues.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. The Appellant did not attend.  There was no explanation  for  his  non-
    attendance, but Mr Howard indicated that he was content to  proceed  to
    deal with error of law in the Appellant's absence.  He was not  seeking
    an adjournment, and in those circumstances, I was satisfied  both  that
    the Appellant had been given proper notice of  the  hearing  date,  and
    that it was appropriate and in the interests of justice to proceed  and
    hear submissions in relation to error of law, for which the Appellant's
    attendance was not necessary.

15. Mr Howard relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was asked to accept that the Appellant had now
    explained  why  he  did  not  attend  the  FtT  hearing,  and  in   the
    circumstances, it would  be  unfair  not  to  allow  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to give oral evidence.

16. Mr Bates submitted that the FtT had not materially erred  in  law,  and
    relied upon the rule 24 response.

17. Mr Bates submitted that the Appellant had had sufficient time to attend
    the hearing.  Mr Bates pointed out that the  Appellant  was  in  police
    custody in Derby, which is where he lived.   Therefore  he  would  have
    been travelling from Derby to Stoke for the hearing in any  event,  and
    the journey time between Derby and Stoke by train was approximately one
    hour.

18. Also Mr Bates submitted that the FtT  had  considered  the  Appellant's
    case at  its  highest  and  found  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and a reasonable option of  internal  relocation  available.
    There had been no challenge to those findings in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.

19. The FtT had taken into account the documentary evidence provided on the
    Appellant's behalf and there was no  indication  that  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence would have been any different to  that  contained  within
    the documentary evidence.

20. In response Mr Howard pointed out that at paragraphs 29 and 30 in which
    the  FtT  had  considered  sufficiency  of  protection   and   internal
    relocation, the FtT had made a finding that the Appellant's claim  that
    he could not internally relocate was not credible.  Therefore, the  FtT
    findings were based on credibility, and may have been different if  the
    Appellant had been given the opportunity to give oral evidence.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. I have to decide whether the FtT has erred in law so that  the  hearing
    was unfair.  MM makes it clear that an error of law  may  be  found  in
    circumstances where some material evidence, through no fault of the FtT
    was not considered, which resulted in unfairness.

23. I find no material error of law was made by the FtT in this  case,  for
    the following reasons.

24. I do not accept that the Appellant's failure to attend the FtT  hearing
    was as a result of external  circumstances  outside  his  control.   He
    could have attended if  he  wished.   The  Appellant  has  produced  no
    evidence from the police to confirm exactly what time he was  released.
    I accept that he was in custody at Derby Police  Station  overnight  on
    9th January 2017.  I accept his statement dated 6th February 2017  that
    he was released without charge between 6 and 7am on the morning of 10th
    January 2017.

25. The police station was in Derby, and the Appellant lives in Derby.   He
    presumably would have made arrangements to travel from Derby  to  Stoke
    on the morning of 10th January 2017, so that he could arrive at the FtT
    in  time  for  his  hearing  at  10am.   No  adequate  or  satisfactory
    explanation has been given as to why the Appellant could  not  maintain
    those travel arrangements.  If one consults the train timetables, it is
    evident that trains between  Derby  and  Stoke  take  approximately  50
    minutes.  It is unlikely that the Appellant would have planned to leave
    Derby before 7am on the morning of 10th January 2017.

26. There is no evidence to indicate that the Appellant  was  unwell  as  a
    result of his detention at the police station.   He  has  not  provided
    evidence to indicate that he was  in  any  way  unfit  to  travel.   No
    evidence has been given to indicate that he would have  been  unfit  to
    give evidence.

27. The Appellant has not adequately  explained  why  he  did  not  contact
    either his solicitors or the FtT hearing centre if he  was  having  any
    difficulty in travelling from Derby to Stoke.  The FtT hearing did  not
    commence until 12.40pm.

28. It is therefore not the  case  that  the  Appellant  was  prevented  by
    external forces from attending the Tribunal hearing.  He did not attend
    because he chose not to.

29. The FtT, in my view, was clearly correct to proceed with the hearing in
    the absence of any explanation for the Appellant's  non-attendance.   I
    do not find  that  unfairness  has  resulted  from  proceeding  in  his
    absence.

30. The FtT took into account the documentary  evidence  submitted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf, including a skeleton argument, and the  Appellant's
    witness  statement  dated  3rd  January  2017,  commenting   upon   the
    Respondent's reasons for refusing his application.

31. I find that the FtT gave cogent reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant's
    claim to be incredible.

32. However, the FtT went on to consider objective evidence in relation  to
    sufficiency of protection  in  Egypt,  and  the  option  of  reasonable
    internal relocation.   Although  at  paragraph  29  the  FtT  did  make
    reference to  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  could  not  internally
    relocate  being  incredible,  the  FtT  nevertheless   considered   the
    objective position.

33. There has been no challenge to the findings made that the Appellant had
    not proved that there would no sufficiency of protection or  reasonable
    internal relocation option available, if such was needed.

34. The FtT comprehensively considered the  Appellant's  appeal,  and  gave
    adequate and sustainable  reasons  for  findings.   No  unfairness  has
    resulted from the Appellant's failure to attend.

Notice of Decision

The FtT did not materially err in law.  The  FtT  decision  stands  and  the
Appellant's appeal is dismissed.
Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been request  to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity.  I do not see a  need  to  make  an  anonymity
order






Signed                              Date: 26th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 26th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
