
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13569/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 March 2019                        |On 26 March 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    m R A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Georget of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He  said  he  was  born  in
    1978.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 7 December 2017  to
    refuse asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 3. Judge Freer (the judge) dismissed the appeal in a decision  promulgated
    on 25 October 2018.  He did not find the appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness regarding events in his own country.  The judge found he  would
    not be at risk  on  return  and  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate as regards Article 8.

 4. The grounds claim the following:

         "The judge incorrectly stated the  appellant's  claim  at  [2]  and
         [8](6) that the appellant  had  participated  in  an  attack  which
         killed many people.  What the appellant said was that he had  never
         been involved in any such attack, rather, that he had been  accused
         of the same.  The judge used that inaccuracy as a basis of  finding
         at [68] that the appellant would on his  own  account  be  excluded
         from the Refugee Convention as a result."

 5. Further, the judge erred in  finding  that  the  appellant's  claim  to
    humanitarian protection was based on the killing of government members.
     See [49] of the decision.  At [70] the judge explained  his  reasoning
    for finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection by stating that he "... has not been shown  to  have  killed
    any members of the government or to  be  a  wanted  ex-Taliban".   That
    contradicted   the   reasoning   and   fundamentally   misstated    and
    misunderstood the basis  for  the  appellant's  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection.

 6. The claim to humanitarian protection  was  put  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's mental health and the country information as considered  in
    AS (safety of Karbul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) and recent
    UNHCR  guidelines.   Whilst  the  judge  accepted  such   evidence   as
    favourable to the appellant's Article 3 and 8 claims  at  [71]  -  [84]
    because of inadequate reasoning, it was not clear why such evidence was
    not considered  relevant  to  the  appellant's  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection under 339C.

 7. The grounds claim that the judge's finding at [35]  that  PTSD  was  no
    longer a problem was perverse.  The finding appeared to be based upon a
    reference in the Southwark MHA November 2017 to his PTSD as historic as
    opposed to current.   See  [21]  and  [23].   The  MHA  assessment  was
    conducted by John Webster (see page 12 of the appellant's bundle) whose
    subsequent witness statement of 15 January 2018 at [4] referred to  the
    PTSD as a current diagnosis.  Whereas the judge gave great weight to Mr
    Webster's evidence at [28] he appeared to  have  failed  to  appreciate
    that Mr Webster was the author of the Southwark assessment.

 8. Further grounds claim that the judge gave no  adequate  direction  upon
    the meaning  of  PSG  in  terms  of  being  in  need  of  international
    protection on the basis of membership of  a  particular  social  group.
    The judge's decision that the Refugee Convention was  not  engaged  for
    want of a Convention reason was focussed upon whether the appellant had
    suffered past persecution in Afghanistan.  See [65].  That  was  itself
    an error of law as the appellant did not need to have been  the  victim
    of past persecution.

 9. Judge Shimmin granted permission on 20 November 2018.   He  said  inter
    alia as follows:

         "2.   Ground  1  (paras  5  and  6)  argues  that  the  judge   had
             misunderstood the evidence in respect of the participation  by
             the appellant in an attack which killed many people  and  this
             led to the judge excluding  the  appellant  from  the  Refugee
             Convention.   It  is  arguable  that  the   judge   has   been
             contradictory in the findings made (decision paragraphs 68 and
             70) and that inadequate reasons have been given in respect  of
             the judge's findings in relation to Article 15(c).

         3.   Ground 2 (paras 7 and 8) argues that the judge has  failed  to
             make a proper consideration of the evidence  relating  to  the
             appellant's mental health and to have made a  misdirection  of
             law  in  relation  thereto.   This  ground  is  material   and
             arguable.

         4.   Ground 3 (para 9) argues that the judge has made an  erroneous
             assessment of the newspaper article submitted by the appellant
             and this constitutes a material and arguable error of law."

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Georget clarified the grounds and relied upon his skeleton  argument
    dated 11 January 2019.  The issues were briefly that having  found  the
    circumstances of the appellant's mental health and risk of suicide gave
    rise to breaches of Article 3 and Article 8, the judge erred by failing
    to go on to consider whether the appellant was entitled to humanitarian
    protection on the basis of those same facts and  wrongly  excluded  the
    appellant from the Refugee Convention  on  the  basis  of  inconsistent
    findings and further, by misdirecting himself as  to  the  question  of
    whether mental health could properly  constitute  a  PSG  in  law.   Mr
    Georget submitted that the judge ought to have gone  on  to  allow  the
    appeal under the Refugee Convention and/or the Qualification  Directive
    (humanitarian protection) on the basis of those same circumstances.

11. Mr Lindsay relied upon his skeleton dated 22 February 2019.  As regards
    Article  15(c),  the  Qualification  Directive   claim,   the   leading
    authorities for the case now advanced by  the  appellant,  that  is,  a
    medical claim,  including  N  and  Bensaid  were  referred  to  by  the
    Secretary of State in the decision letter  dated  7  December  2017  at
    [103]-[110].  The appellant did not meet the high threshold set out  in
    those cases to demonstrate a right to remain in the UK.

12. Mr Lindsay took issue with the appellant's contentions  at  [8]  of  Mr
    Georget's  skeleton  which  did  not  accurately  reflect  the  judge's
    reasons.  The Qualification Direction point fell away.

13. The appellant contended that the judge found there would be "an absence
    of any access to support or treatment" on return.  In fact,  the  judge
    found at [78] that the appellant "can have limited support at best from
    his parents or he can in theory be a patient in hospital but not both".
     There was no challenge to the conclusion that the appellant  could  in
    principle access treatment as an in-patient at a  psychiatric  hospital
    in Kabul on return.  See [106]  of  the  decision  letter.   Given  the
    presence of such treatment facilities in Kabul, and  the  lack  of  any
    evidence that the appellant would not reasonably be able to access  the
    same, any argument under the Qualification Directive had  no  realistic
    prospect of success.

14. The appellant contended at [8] of Mr Georget's skeleton that the  judge
    had reached a "stark" finding that the appellant "would  likely  either
    be chained to a shrine or be forcibly sedated with  opium".   In  fact,
    the judge noted at  [76]  that  there  had  been  reports  of  isolated
    incidents (my emphasis) of people with mental health  conditions  being
    chained to shrines.  At  [77]  the  judge  clearly  did  no  more  than
    speculate on the "hypothetical act of  chaining  such  a  person  to  a
    shrine".

15. Mr Lindsay submitted that  none  of  that  could  be  characterised  as
    findings.  The judge explicitly concluded at [77]  that  "there  is  no
    evidence to show which outcome of the two is the more likely or to what
    extent when measured in numbers.  Quantitative evidence is vital".   Mr
    Lindsay submitted that that could only be construed as a  finding  that
    the appellant had failed to prove to the requisite standard (that of  a
    real and substantial risk) that such  treatment  might  befall  him  on
    return.

16. The judge noted at [62] that there remained significant conflict in the
    evidence regarding the extent and duration of  the  appellant's  health
    conditions, finding that was "strongly inconsistent"  with  his  asylum
    claim.  Mr Lindsay submitted that the same inconsistency  must  on  the
    findings militate equally against any  claim  under  the  Qualification
    Directive.

17. As regards the Refugee Convention and Mr Georget's submission that  the
    appellant was part of a particular social group, Mr  Lindsay  submitted
    that the appellant's mental health problems set out  at  [104]  of  the
    decision  letter  did  not  establish  that  any  of  the   appellant's
    conditions were immutable characteristics.  The Upper Tribunal noted in
    TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92  at  [145]  that  "about
    half of adults who suffer from PTSD  can  recover  within  about  three
    months.  Others may suffer symptoms for as long as 50 years."   In  any
    event, no evidence had been presented to support an argument that  PTSD
    could ever amount to a permanent, lifelong and/or incurable  condition.
    Mr Lindsay relied upon the same point with  regard  to  depression  and
    anxiety, both of which are expressed as "recurrent", implying that they
    both come and go.  The judge was entitled to find that the  appellant's
    mental  health  difficulties   did   not   amount   to   an   immutable
    characteristic and that the appellant was not part  of  any  particular
    social group.

Conclusion on Error of Law

18. It is correct that the judge erred in saying the  appellant  had  taken
    part in an attack rather than he was perceived as doing so,  however  I
    do not find the error  to  be  material.  The  judge  took  no  adverse
    credibility point with regard to that issue; he had no need  to  do  so
    given the other extensive adverse credibility findings he made. All the
    judge said at [68] was that if he had been a member of the Taliban  who
    killed many people the appellant would  have  been  excluded  from  the
    Refuge Convention for that alternative reason, aside from  the  overall
    lack of credibility of the claim. The judge went on to say  that  there
    was not a shred of evidence that the appellant had been  prosecuted  in
    his absence or would still be of any interest on return.

19. I do not accept that the appellant has made  out  his  claim  that  the
    judge erred with regard to the  Qualification  Directive  under  either
    Article 15(b) or (c).  There  are  treatment  facilities  open  to  the
    appellant in Kabul.  The appellant could in principle access  treatment
    as an in-patient at a psychiatric hospital in Kabul on  return.   There
    is no evidence that he would not reasonably be able to access the same.



20. It is a misreading of the judge's decision at [76] and [77] to  suggest
    that he would "likely (my emphasis) either be chained to  a  shrine  or
    forcibly sedated".  As regards the  1951  Convention,  Mr  Georget  was
    unable to demonstrate how or in  what  circumstances,  the  appellant's
    mental health issues amounted to an immutable characteristic such as to
    come within a particular social group.

21. It is a  misreading  of  the  UNHCR  guidelines  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's own particular circumstances come within the following:

    "UNHCR considers that depending on the individual circumstances of  the
    case, persons with disabilities, including in particular  persons  with
    mental disabilities, and persons suffering from mental illnesses may be
    in need of international refugee protection on the  basis  of  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution  at  the  hands  of  non-state  actors  for
    reasons of membership of a particular social group  or  other  relevant
    Convention grounds, combined with the general inability of the state to
    provide protection from such persecution."

22. The judge carried out a careful, sensitive analysis.  His findings with
    regard to Article 3, regarding which he allowed the  appeal,  could  be
    described as generous.  The judge did not err and  his  decision  shall
    stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

