
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13391/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    m a s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J L Blair, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James
    promulgated on 16 February 2018.

2.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1982.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 October 2015 and claimed asylum
    on 5 June 2017.  Her asylum claim was treated  by  way  of  dependency,
    being parasitic on the separate claim of the same date brought  by  her
    husband. There are five dependent children. The  husband's  appeal  was
    refused on 26 February 2016, appealed and refused  on  15  March  2016.
    That appeal was dismissed on 10 October 2016, in  substantive  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns.

3.   When the matter of this appellant's claim came before Judge James,  the
    starting point, in the light of the decision in Devaseelan v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2002]  UKIAT  00702,  was  that  the
    decision of Judge Burns and that Judge James was required  to  consider
    the extent to which there had been any change, particularly of familial
    circumstance or within prevailing country guidance.

4.   Judge James came to the conclusion, having regard to the material  that
    was available, that although the situation in relation to Sikhs  within
    Afghanistan  was  becoming  progressively  more  problematic   as   the
    population shrank, there was a rejection of  a  claim  in  relation  to
    Article 15(c) on  the  basis  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant would face the death penalty, execution, unlawful killing  or
    torture on return, nor would she face inhuman or degrading treatment.

5.   The basis upon which permission to appeal was granted  in  this  matter
    turned primarily upon the error on the judge's  part  in  finding  that
    Article 15(c) was not engaged. It  is  argued  that  the  judge  failed
    (either at paragraph 30 or elsewhere) to give clear or adequate reasons
    that she was satisfied that the level of mistreatment of the  appellant
    and her daughter would reach the level of serious harm.  The judge  did
    not give any proper or adequate consideration of the  country  guidance
    decision in the  case  of  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC)  in  relation  to  the  risk  of
    persecution on return of Afghan Sikhs.

6.   Miss Blair,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  relies  on  her  skeleton
    argument which helpfully summarises and brings into sharper  focus  the
    somewhat discursive grounds which had been settled by  her  instructing
    solicitors.  In her oral submissions she  relies  particularly  on  the
    fact that there had been a significant change in the substantive issues
    to be addressed by Judge James, in  contradistinction  to  those  which
    were considered and  resolved  by  Judge  Burns,  in  relation  to  the
    appellant as a female Sikh and the two daughters  growing  in  age  and
    having a greater period in secondary education in the United Kingdom.

7.   The criticisms made by Miss Blair are well-founded, that there  is  not
    an appropriate engagement with the principle in HJ (Iran)  v  Secretary
    of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Rev  1)  [2010]  UKSC  31   and
    particularly the requirement of female Afghan Sikhs being  required  to
    live discreetly.  This is of relevance not merely to the appellant  but
    also to her two teenage daughters.

8.   The impact on the appellant and her daughters  not  fully  or  properly
    considered. However, my principle concern is with the  paucity  of  the
    judge's of the applicability of 15(c).  It is not enough simply to rely
    upon what Judge Burns may have decided two years earlier in cases where
    the situation on the ground was changing and changing rapidly and where
    the country guidance was of greater significance.

9.   However, what is dispositive of this appeal, is  the  complete  absence
    of any consideration of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Paragraph 3 of the decision makes plain that the appellant was
    relying on Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Convention, and yet when it comes
    to the judge's findings and reasons, none of it addresses Article 8.

10.  Miss Isherwood for the Secretary of State takes me to paragraph 29  and
    to the application of the statutory test under Section 55 of  the  2009
    Act which considers the best interests of minor children.  Whilst  this
    is a feature  which  is  placed  in  the  balance  when  an  Article  8
    assessment is being made,  it  is  not  the  only  feature  nor  is  it
    determinative of the assessment.  The two teenage daughters  had  spent
    further time in secondary school since the matter was  heard  by  Judge
    Burns. There was material available from  the  school  regarding  their
    education and development which ought properly to have been  considered
    and was not.  In  addition,  the  level  of  discrimination  which  the
    appellant and her two daughters might suffer  is  something  which  was
    given at best only cursory consideration.

11.  Looking at the decision holistically, the error into  which  the  judge
    fell was in placing undue reliance on Judge  Burns'  decision  and  not
    taking proper account of the altered  circumstances  between  then  and
    when the judge  determined  the  matter,  in  particular  the  features
    especially relevant to the appellant as a woman and to her two  teenage
    daughters.

12.  Although the decision is in many ways comprehensive,  the  analysis  of
    these matters is illusory.  Miss  Isherwood  concedes  in  relation  to
    Article 8 that it is insufficient, although she says  not  material  in
    the overall context of the decision. I  reject  that.  The  failure  to
    address Article cannot be remedied by reference to  other  sections  of
    the decision. This is not a decision which appears  to  have  been  the
    subject of anxious scrutiny.  It is not appropriate to try to  preserve
    any one part of it.  The flaw goes to the heart of the decision.

13.  The decision must be set aside and the matter heard afresh.  Of  course
    the outcome may be entirely the same, but it  is  important  the  judge
    considers all matters and applies the correct tests.



Notice of Decision

    1) This appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       set aside.

    2) The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  it  to  be
       reheard by a judge other than Judge James.

    3) No findings of fact are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     7 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

