
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13048/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th February 2020                |On 3rd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KH
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Allan Briddock, of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Sudan born in 1981.  He arrived  in  the
       UK in 2010 and claimed asylum in a false identity claiming to be from
       Chad, his claim was refused, and the appeal dismissed. In August 2011
       the appellant made a fresh claim in his real identity, but  this  was
       refused in November 2011 without a right of appeal. He was  convicted
       of a number of offences between 2012 and  2105,  including  arson  in
       September 2015 for which  he  was  given  a  five  year  sentence  of
       imprisonment. The appellant appealed against the decision  to  refuse
       his protection and human rights claim made when  he  was  written  to
       notifying him that a deportation order  would  be  made  against  him
       under s.32(5) of the UK Border Act 2007  unless  he  showed  that  an
       exception in s.33 of the 2007 Act applied.  His  appeal  against  the
       refusal of the human rights claim was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Thorne in a determination promulgated  on  the  18th  September
       2019 who found he was a refugee and had rebutted the  presumption  at
       s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that he  was
       a danger to the community.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on
       27th November 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing to follow EN (Serbia) v SSHD &
       Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 630 which found that  it  was  likely  that  the
       claimant would be a danger to the community if he had been  convicted
       of a particularly serious crime and there was  a  real  risk  of  its
       repetition. It was also arguable  that  the  reports  the  First-tier
       Tribunal relied upon in allowing the  appeal  did  not  support  this
       conclusion as the psychologist concluded the claimant was a  moderate
       risk of re-offending and the OASys report that he was a  medium  risk
       of reoffending and a medium risk of serious harm.

Submissions - Error of Law

    3. The Secretary of State argues in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  skeleton
       argument and oral submissions from Mr Clarke in summary  as  follows.
       The appeal was allowed because  the  appellant  succeeded  on  asylum
       grounds and he was found to have rebutted the presumption at s.72  of
       the 2002 Act that he was a danger to the community. It is argued that
       it was not  open  to  the  judge  to  rationally  reach  this  latter
       conclusion given the evidence  in  the  OASys  report  and  from  the
       probation officer.  EN (Serbia) holds that there is a danger  to  the
       community if a person has been convicted of  a  particularly  serious
       crime and there is a real risk of repetition.

    4. It is also argued for  the  Secretary  of  State  that  there  was  a
       misdirection of the law as to the threshold for finding that s.72 had
       been rebutted as there was no reference to the case law on which  the
       Secretary of State relied, and the proper interpretation of  the  key
       case of EN (Serbia) is that a "managed risk" is nevertheless  a  real
       risk that serious crime may be  repeated.  This  was  said  to  be  a
       material issue in this case because it was clear from the  report  of
       the forensic psychologist, Dr Katherine Boucher, set out at pages 256
       to 283 of the respondent's bundle for this  hearing,  that  the  real
       risk of serious offending would reappear if the management  in  terms
       of the  claimant's  mental  health  and  probation  support  did  not
       continue as he might then revert to the alcohol and  substance  abuse
       which had fuelled his previous offending. The First-tier Tribunal had
       failed to factor in a consideration of how the risk of  serious  harm
       could increase with this claimant, for instance  by  considering  the
       possibility of a deterioration in his mental health. Reliance in this
       connection was placed on the case of Restivo (EEA prisoner  transfer)
       [2016] UKUT 00449 which holds that a threat of recidivism managed and
       reduced by imprisonment  nevertheless  continues  to  exist  for  the
       purposes of showing deportation of an EEA national is permitted under
       the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

    5. In the rule 24 notice and in oral submissions from  Mr  Briddock  the
       claimant argues in summary as follows. The challenge to  the  finding
       that the claimant was not a danger to the community is a  rationality
       challenge. It is argued that there is no evidence that  the  decision
       is irrational, or that there was a  misdirection  of  law.  There  is
       clear evidence from the  decision  that  all  material  evidence  was
       considered: there is clear and correct  consideration  of  the  OASys
       assessment, the psychiatric  report  and  the  forensic  psychologist
       report, see paragraphs  25  -28  of  the  decision.  There  was  also
       consideration of the evidence provided by the Probation  Service.  It
       was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that  the  index  offence
       was old and that the last offence committed by the  claimant  was  in
       2015.

    6. It is argued by the claimant that there is  proper  consideration  of
       the judgement in EN (Serbia) which  was  put  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in the claimant's skeleton argument so it is clear that  the
       decision was made in the context of the guidance from  the  Court  of
       Appeal. There is no evidence the First-tier Tribunal  misapplied  the
       correct threshold for s.72, and no basis to find  that  decision  was
       not a rational one based on an accurate understanding of  the  expert
       evidence. It is argued that it is clear from the  decision  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  was  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  risk   of
       reoffending was being managed, and that it was  appropriate  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal to make a decision based on the risk at the  date
       of hearing whilst obviously making a global  assessment  taking  into
       account the longevity of  any  positive  developments,  such  as  not
       committing crime or abusing alcohol, in coming to its  conclusion  on
       risk. It is clear from the case of MA Pakistan [2014] EWCA  Civ  163,
       cited by the Secretary of State in her grounds  of  appeal,  that  an
       assessment by OASys is not determinative of  risk  and  the  evidence
       must be assessed in  the  round.  Restivo  is  argued  to  be  of  no
       relevance as it is  about  assessing  risk  posed  by  an  imprisoned
       appellant, and this appellant is not in custody.

    7. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination. It was  agreed
       that there would be a further remaking hearing in the Upper  Tribunal
       if an error of law was found, as any remaking would need to take into
       account of the further period of time the claimant had  been  in  the
       community and any other pertinent developments in his life.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant is a non-Arab Darfuri
       and that he would be at real  risk  of  persecution  if  returned  to
       Sudan. The challenge is to the lawfulness of allowing the  appeal  on
       asylum grounds, although it was of course also allowed under  Article
       3 ECHR.

    9. With respect to s.72 of the 2002 Act the First-tier Tribunal sets out
       the provision at paragraph 32  of  his  decision.  It  is  implicitly
       accepted that the claimant  has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
       serious crime at paragraph 33 of the decision, but found that he  has
       successfully rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger to
       the community at paragraph 34 of the decision.

   10. The reasoning for finding that the claimant has successfully rebutted
       the presumption of danger to the community is set out  at  paragraphs
       34 to 36 of the decision and is, in summary,  as  follows:  that  the
       last offence was old, as it was committed in 2015; that the  claimant
       was released from detention in December 2017 and has  not  reoffended
       since; that the claimant's credible oral  evidence  is  that  he  did
       rehabilitation courses in prison, is not abusing alcohol or drugs and
       has stayed out of trouble since leaving prison and sees his probation
       officer regularly; and that the evidence of his probation officer  is
       that he believes the claimant would be a productive member of society
       if given an opportunity to engage in personal development  activities
       and work; that the OASys report says he is a medium risk of  harm  to
       the public, and the forensic psychologist says that he is a  moderate
       risk of reoffending  but  the  forensic  psychologist  assesses  that
       current risk factors are low and suggests he is not a current risk to
       the general public. These documents are also summarised at paragraphs
       24 to 28 of the decision.

   11. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to
       consider any material  evidence.  There  are  summaries  of  all  the
       relevant reports which I find  to  be  very  short  but  sufficiently
       accurate.

   12. The key finding in EN(Serbia) is set out  at  paragraph  45  of  that
       judgement and is as follows: "So far as "danger to the community"  is
       concerned, the danger must be real, but if a person is convicted of a
       particularly  serious  crime,  and  there  is  a  real  risk  of  its
       repetition, he is likely to constitute a danger to the community."

   13. It is argued for the Secretary of  State  that  if  the  claimant  is
       currently not posing a risk of repeating serious  criminal  behaviour
       because he is managing the risks that  lead  to  his  offending,  for
       instance by avoiding contact with criminal associates or not drinking
       to excess or taking drugs or by accepting support and  guidance  from
       the Probation Service and/ or Health  Service,  then  this  does  not
       reduce the risk so it is not a real risk if absent that management he
       would pose a real risk of repeating  his  offending.  It  is  further
       argued  that  at  the  least  the  First-tier  Tribunal   failed   to
       interrogate how robust the management that is currently put in  place
       by the claimant is given his mental health  problems.  It  is  argued
       that  Restivo  supports  this  approach  and  interpretation  of   EN
       (Serbia).

   14. I do accept that this is  a  correct  analysis  of  the  test  in  EN
       (Serbia).  As  Mr  Briddock  argued  the  First-tier  Tribunal   must
       determine the issue of whether, at the date of hearing,  there  is  a
       real risk of repetition of  serious  criminal  offending.  I  do  not
       accept that "managed risks" can be separated out from risk in general
       in light of all of the material evidence. Whether anyone will  commit
       crime is a matter of the management of their lives, and their ability
       to seek and accept help from others when needed. The case of  Restivo
       is not about persons who are  managing  their  own  lives  but  about
       people who are managed by the prison system so as to minimalize their
       ability to commit crime. This claimant is not such a  person  who  is
       managed by the prison system. He is  someone  who  has  been  in  the
       community for the past two years and is managing his own life, albeit
       with the support of the Probation Service, friends and access to  the
       Health Service. I do not therefore find that there was a misdirection
       on the law.

   15. When considering whether a person is a danger to the community  under
       s.72 of the 2002 Act, and thus  whether  there  is  a  real  risk  of
       repetition of particularly serious crime, there must be consideration
       of the likely  future  behaviour  of  any  appellant  which  will  be
       informed by his past behaviour and  his  current  management  of  any
       problems he has which may affect his judgement  as  set  out  in  the
       various expert reports and his own evidence,  with  consideration  of
       the sustainability of that management.

   16. I find that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
       entirely open to him. He understood that the past history  led  to  a
       conclusion set out in the OASys report and by  Dr  Boucher  that  the
       claimant had a moderate or medium risk of reoffending.  However,  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge was able to give weight to the  opinion  of
       Dr Boucher that the claimant's current risk factors are presently low
       and that the claimant is not currently a risk to the  general  public
       for the following reasons: firstly his Probation Officer  finds  that
       he has reduced his alcohol consumption and has no  current  problems,
       having undertaken intensive risk reduction and  rehabilitative  work,
       which enable him to conclude that the claimant would be a  productive
       member of society if he was granted  the  opportunity  to  engage  in
       personal development activities and employment; secondly  because  of
       the claimant's own credible oral evidence that he has stayed  out  of
       trouble, sees his Probation Officer  regularly  and  is  not  abusing
       alcohol or drugs; and thirdly,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  the
       evidence that the claimant's risk management strategy as a whole  has
       stood the test of time as his last offence was in 2015 and he had not
       offended since being released from detention in December 2017.

   17. With respect to his mental health situation, which Mr  Clarke  raised
       as a factor not sufficiently considered when the First-tier  Tribunal
       considered the way in which the claimant  is  managing  his  risk  of
       reoffending, the evidence in the reports is that it has  improved  as
       the most recent report of Dr Boucher (dated August 2019) states  that
       he does not meet the diagnosis for any major mental health  disorder,
       although he has traits of PTSD, anxiety and depression which he might
       beneficially address through cognitive behavioural  therapy  although
       her opinion is that this is of limited benefit until inter  alia  his
       immigration status becomes stable. It is noted that the claimant  has
       previously engaged in  psychotherapy,  and  from  the  report  of  Dr
       Thomas, which was before the First-tier Tribunal and is at  page  111
       to 164 of the respondent's bundle for this hearing, this would appear
       to have been over a period of years from 2011 with the  Helen  Bamber
       Foundation. There is no evidence that  indicates  that  the  claimant
       would not engage with the Health Service or NGO providers to  address
       his remaining  mental  health  issues  when  needed  and  appropriate
       (particularly as he is supported in this by a friend who is a  senior
       psychotherapist who is able to alert his GP when help was  needed  as
       was done in April 2019 - see letter at page 42  of  the  respondent's
       bundle for this hearing), and thus I  do  not  find  that  it  was  a
       material error for this aspect not to have featured in  the  analysis
       of risk as in essence there is nothing that the claimant can usefully
       do to address his mental health problems at the current time, and the
       evidence shows that he has assistance when it is needed.




       Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal
       on asylum and human rights grounds.




       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid
       a likelihood of serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellant  from  the
       contents of his protection claim.


Signed:  Fiona Lindsley                      Date:  18th February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

