
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13601/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th March 2019                             |On 21st March 2019            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    A S R
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Sharma (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge G Clarke, promulgated on 8th October 2018, following a hearing at
    Harmondsworth on 13th July  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  1st
    August 1993.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    2nd December 2017 refusing his protection claim and refusing his  human
    rights claim, and decided to maintain the deportation order  which  had
    been signed on 24th February 2017.  The deportation is for  reasons  of
    the Appellant possessing a controlled drug of class A  with  intent  to
    supply (heroin) and possessing a controlled drug of class A with intent
    to supply (crack cocaine)  and  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  two
    concurrent sentences of four years' imprisonment.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is in essence that he was abducted by the Taliban
    and held for six months when he was aged 11, during which time  he  was
    raped 40 times and forced to dance for the Taliban.  After  six  months
    he was taken to a person called Salim's house  who  then  took  him  to
    Kabul.  He was then taken to Pakistan and then to India.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant's claim, that he  had  been  abducted
    and raped 40  times  and  then  made  to  dance,  was  consistent  with
    objective evidence in that the practice of abusing young boys is called
    "bacha bazi" or dancing boys.  The judge referred to the Country Policy
    and Information Note on Afghanistan,  "Sexual  orientation  and  gender
    identity" (Version  2.0,  January  2017),  which  confirms  the  sexual
    exploitation of young boys and teenagers by older men.  The judge  held
    that "the Appellant's evidence of sexual abuse and sexual  exploitation
    by the Taliban is entirely  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence"
    (paragraph 104).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge had identified a number
    of inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim (see paragraphs 75  to  78)
    and these included a  lack  of  witnesses  attending  at  the  hearing,
    despite the claim that the Appellant had many family  and  friends  who
    are aware of his sexuality, together  with  his  inability  to  provide
    Facebook evidence of his sexuality.  The  grounds  state  that  it  was
    irrational to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation, and to a  lesser  extent  domestic
    servitude.  Although  the  judge  may  well  have  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had been a victim of trafficking, this did  not  confirm  the
    Appellant's sexuality.  This is because the  starting  point,  in  line
    with the jurisprudence in Devaseelan, is that the Appellant was  a  man
    who was not of truth, and a previous determination of 11th May 2017 had
    confirmed this.  Second, the judge placed reliance on  medical  reports
    but failed to heed the strictures in JL (medical reports - credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 145, which makes it  clear  that  experts  should  be
    aware of previous negative credibility findings.  Third, the judge  did
    not have regard to the binding authority in relation to gay people from
    Afghanistan, of AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00001, which confirmed that  Kabul  would  be  a  place  to  which  the
    Appellant would be able to return if he was indeed gay as he claimed to
    be.

 6. On 5th December 2018 permission to appeal was granted with reference to
    four specific  points.   First,  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was trafficked, but this did not mean to say that he was gay.
     Second, that the previous finding by a judge was  that  the  Appellant
    was "not a man of truth".  Third, that the judge failed to have  regard
    to guidance given in JL (medical reports -  credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 145.  Fourth, that consideration was not given to  the  fact  that
    even if the Appellant was  a  gay  person  the  case  of  AJ  (Risk  to
    Homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001, stood to be applied.

Submissions

 7. Appearing before me, Mr Tan relied, on 7th March 2019 on the grounds of
    application.  He submitted that the Appellant had attended the  hearing
    without any witnesses.  The judge had referred to medical reports,  but
    failed in not taking account of the fact that the medical  reports  had
    to factor in the negative findings by a previous judge.  Third, even if
    the NRM had found that the Appellant was a victim of trafficking,  this
    did not mean to say that his homosexuality was proven.  In  any  event,
    the medical evidence referred to the delay in the Appellant's  claiming
    asylum, but did not refer to the discrepancies in his evidence.

 8. For his part, Mr Sharma, appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  relied
    upon his detailed and extensive skeleton argument.  In  particular,  he
    relied on the fact that there was no error of law if regard is  had  to
    the well-known judgment in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  where  Brooke
    LJ had said (at paragraphs 11 to 12) that "perversity"  represented  "a
    very high hurdle" and that here irrationality was raised as a Ground of
    Appeal which amounted to nothing more than "simply wasting  time".   He
    also relied on the fact that there  was  2017  guidance  that  confirms
    abuses that LGBT people face in Afghanistan (see paragraph 30 to 32  of
    his skeleton argument) and he submitted that the  decision  reached  by
    the judge was sustainable.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

10. This is a case where the Appellant had not ever relied  upon  the  fact
    that he was gay during his earlier applications for leave to remain  in
    the UK.   Thereafter,  when  deportation  proceedings  had  been  taken
    against him, he "only claimed that he was gay on the day prior  to  his
    removal from the United Kingdom despite the fact that he claims he knew
    he was gay from the age of 17" (paragraph 78).  This  is  also  a  case
    where the Appellant at the hearing attended without any  witnesses  who
    could confirm his sexuality (paragraph 75).  At the same time, this  is
    a case where there were medical reports.  There  was  a  report  by  Dr
    Thomas which confirmed that the Appellant  had  scarring  and  suffered
    from severe depression and PTSD.  There was another report by Dr Grant-
    Peterkin, who did not go as far as Dr  Thomas  in  his  diagnosis  that
    stopped short of making a diagnosis that the Appellant  had  PTSD  (see
    paragraph 96).  Be that as  it  may,  it  remains  the  case  that  the
    Secretary of State has accepted that the Appellant has thrice attempted
    to commit suicide in Afghanistan and has twice attempted to  do  so  in
    the United Kingdom (see paragraph 45).

11. Even so, there were conclusions reached here by the judge that were not
    subject to the Country Guidance. These are that the NRM on 26th January
    2018 does mention that the Appellant is gay, and does find  that  claim
    to be a credible one (paragraph 103). There is also  the  reference  to
    the  sentencing  judge's  remarks.  These  are  with  respect  to   the
    Appellant's relationship with his co-defendant,  which  were  that,  "I
    have observed the relationship between you which is clearly one of some
    proximity, closer than perhaps you might like  the  world  to  realise"
    (paragraph 106).  These are both conclusions, which, when arrived at by
    the judge in this case, were not subjected to the country  guidance  in
    relation to the treatment of homosexuals in Afghanistan.

12. In AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001,  it  was
    stated (see paragraphs 58 to 62) that, "so far as non-state actors  are
    concerned, a practising homosexual on return to  Kabul  who  would  not
    attract or seek to cause public outrage would not face a real  risk  of
    persecution" (see subparagraph 4).  It was also stated that

         "A homosexual may be relatively safe  in  a  big  city  (especially
         Kabul) and it would take cogent evidence in a  particular  case  to
         demonstrate otherwise.  The position in smaller towns and in  rural
         areas could be different and will  depend  on  the  evidence  in  a
         specific case" (see subparagraph 6).

13. It ends with the firm statement that "relocation to Kabul is  generally
    a  viable  option  for  homosexuals  who  have   experienced   problems
    elsewhere, though  individual  factors  will  have  to  be  taken  into
    account" (see subparagraph 7).  This is a case where the Appellant  has
    maintained that when he was in prison, he "has  not  been  openly  gay"
    because he was afraid of being bullied (paragraph 27).




14. Whether the Appellant has been openly gay, however, is  a  matter  that
    needs to be looked in the context of HJ (Iran), although  the  evidence
    suggests that he has not been openly gay, particularly in  Afghanistan.
    But even so, whatever the position, the country  guidance  case  of  AJ
    [2009] does need to be applied, and the failure to do so amounts to  an
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)  such  that  I  set
    aside the decision of the original judge.  I re-make  the  decision  as
    follows.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Clarke, on the basis of Practice
    Statement 7.2(b) because the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact-
    finding, which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to
    be re-made, is such that, having regard to the overriding objective  in
    Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. An anonymity direction is made.

17. This appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019



