
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13132/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2020                  |On 22 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born in 1983.  She arrived in
the UK with entry clearance as a visitor on 26 July 2015.  She claimed
asylum on 20 November 2017.

That protection claim was refused by the respondent in a decision dated 2
November 2018.  The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal
came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot at a hearing on 7 June 2019.
He dismissed the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.  However,
he found the appellant to be a credible witness and that she had been a
victim of trafficking.  He dismissed the appeal because, to summarise, he
concluded that she would not be at risk of persecution or Article 3 harm on
return to the Philippines, either by reason of re-trafficking, or
retribution from those involved in her previous trafficking.

Permission to appeal against Judge Talbot's decision was refused by a judge
of the First-tier Tribunal and then a judge of the Upper Tribunal.  On a
Cart judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's refusal to grant permission,
the decision to refuse permission was quashed.  Thereafter, the Upper
Tribunal granted permission in the light of the decision of the High Court.

Before setting out the grounds of appeal and submissions, I summarise Judge
Talbot's decision which sets out the appellant's circumstances and the
basis upon which the appeal was advanced.

Judge Talbot's Decision

The appellant's written and oral evidence was that she was one of eight
children whose parents struggled financially to bring them up.  She was
raised by an aunt but moved back with her parents when she went to High
School.  She obtained a scholarship to work in the school office to cover
her fees and expenses and then went to university, gaining a BA in Science
for Secondary Education.  She then obtained employment as a teacher in the
Philippines.

She married in 2004 and moved to another area where she again worked as a
teacher.  She had a daughter born in 2004 and a son born in April 2006.
Their daughter was diagnosed as being profoundly deaf and they were advised
that treatment would require a cochlear implant which would involve very
expensive surgery which they could not afford.  They would also have to pay
for her to be educated at a special school which, again, they could not
afford.  The appellant's husband, therefore, decided to work in Canada to
assist with these financial issues. He left for Canada in 2006 where he
worked and sent money back for the family.  He also visited his family in
the Philippines but the last time the appellant saw him was when he visited
in 2010.  Their marriage broke down when she discovered that he had
committed adultery.

It was at that time that the appellant realised that she would have to work
overseas in order to provide for her children.  Her daughter's special
educational needs were not being met. She found work as a teacher in Qatar
and sent money back for the children who were being looked after by her
husband's family in the Philippines.  In 2014 the appellant returned to the
Philippines because her in-laws were moving to Canada.  By that time, her
husband had completely stopped providing financial support.  The appellant
and the children then moved in with an aunt.  She found teaching work but
the income was insufficient to settle her daughter in a special school and
fund their own accommodation.

In order to earn enough money to provide for her family the appellant found
work as a private tutor for children in the UAE.  Her children remained
with her aunt.  She flew to Dubai in 2014 and went to her place of work.
It is not necessary to provide further information in relation to the
identity of the appellant's employers; suffice to say, that they were very
wealthy.

The appellant said that she was badly abused by her employers.  Rather than
working as a tutor she was made to work only as a housekeeper for the
family.  Her passport and mobile phone were taken away and not returned.
She was only allowed to call her family once a month from a landline in her
employer's office.  She needed to be able to communicate visually with her
daughter in sign language as her daughter is both deaf and mute but she was
only able to do this once, secretly, using an iPad.  She had to work long
hours and her salary was less than promised.  She was treated rudely and
disrespectfully by the family, including the children.

Although she tried to resign she was unable to because she was told that
she had signed a two year contract (which she had never seen), and that if
she resigned she would have to pay for her flight home and would not
receive any outstanding wages.  She was unsuccessful in seeking redress
through the Philippines Overseas Labour Office.

In June 2015 she was told that the family were travelling to the UK and
that she and other staff were to accompany them.  The appellant was waiting
for a replacement from the agency so that she could return home but she did
not want the family to punish her for refusing to travel to the UK. She,
therefore, agreed to go with them.

They arrived in the UK on 26 July 2015 and were driven to the family's
residence in central London.  The first time she went out with the family
for shopping, another member of staff managed to escape.  The appellant was
told by one of her employers that the member of staff who had escaped was
arrested by the police and that if she tried to escape the same would
happen to her.  Although she was not allowed to leave the house on her own,
she managed to run away in August 2015 whilst throwing out the rubbish.
She was chased by the caretaker but managed to get away.

She was helped by a Filipino woman she met at a bus stop who agreed to take
her home.  She stayed with her until September.  She did not go to the
police as she feared that she would be arrested and was scared that she
would be sent to prison.  She managed to contact an aunt through Facebook
who put her in touch with a childhood friend living in the UK with whom the
appellant stayed until December 2016.  In December 2016 she moved into the
house of a friend of her sister, where the conditions were less crowded.

Ultimately, through Kalayaan (a London-based charity for migrant domestic
workers) she was referred to the Competent Authority under the National
Referral Mechanism ("NRM") and was accepted on conclusive grounds as having
been a victim of trafficking.  The police were also contacted in order for
the family that she worked for to be prosecuted.  However, she was told in
April 2017 that the police had closed the investigation.  She had herself
issued civil proceedings against the family in the High Court in London but
those had not yet been served on the family.

The appellant fears that if she returns to the Philippines she would be
unable to afford to support her children and would be obliged to work
overseas again. Her fear is that she would then again become the victim of
trafficking.  In addition, she is worried that the recruitment agency may
have put her on the blacklist for having deserted her employer.  She is
scared of the family that she used to work for, who have a powerful
influence in the UAE and know where her aunt lives.  The fact that she has
taken proceedings against them adds to her fears.  Her aunt, who is
currently looking after the children, is only a pensioner with limited
means and energy to continue caring for the children.  Her siblings have
their own families and are not providing any financial assistance.

Judge Talbot also heard evidence from a Mr RM.  He is from the Philippines
and has a work visa in the UK.  He and the appellant started a relationship
although he lives in Cornwall whilst she lives in the Home Counties.  His
evidence was that he thought that the appellant was suffering from
depression.  He also thought that if she had to return to the Philippines
she would have to find work abroad again because it is difficult to support
a family on a teacher's salary.

Judge Talbot found the appellant to be a "very credible witness" and noted
that she had been accepted by the Competent Authority on conclusive grounds
as having been a victim of trafficking.  He further noted the extensive
supporting evidence in support of that claim.  He found that there was
nothing in her evidence that would lead him to form a different opinion
from that of the Competent Authority.

At paragraph 22 he referred to the appellant having submitted supporting
evidence in relation to her circumstances back in the Philippines, which he
said was consistent with her own evidence.  That evidence included a
statement from her aunt, Ms JJ, confirming that she has been caring for the
appellant's children, but as a retired lady with limited means and health
issues she struggles to continue looking after them.  The agreement that
she had with the appellant was that the money she has spent on looking
after the children would be paid back once the appellant finds a job.

Ms JJ also confirmed that the children's father has not supported them for
many years and that the appellant's siblings do not provide any financial
support either.  That witness also confirmed the appellant's daughter's
disability and the appellant's desire to be in a position to pay for a
specialist school and a surgical implant for her.  There was also a
psychological report in relation to her daughter.

Ms JJ was of the view that the appellant would again have to seek work
abroad in order to support the children, and that she fears retribution
from her traffickers.

Judge Talbot was satisfied that the appellant had given a true account of
her past and current family circumstances in the Philippines.

He rejected the respondent's contention that the appellant, as a former
victim of trafficking, is not a member of a particular social group.  With
reference to authority and the country background material, he found that
as a former victim of trafficking from the Philippines, the appellant was a
member of a particular social group.  In that assessment, with reference to
the background evidence, he concluded that the evidence clearly showed that
trafficking of Filipino overseas workers is a significant problem,
particularly for female domestic workers.

At para 25, Judge Talbot said as follows:

"I note that her evidence is somewhat inconsistent with regard to the
nature of her fears on returning to the Philippines.  Having heard directly
from her, I am satisfied that her overriding concern is to be able to
provide for her children.  I am also satisfied that she has been profoundly
affected by the appalling treatment that she received from her former
employers who blatantly exploited her, trafficked her and kept her in
domestic servitude.  I accept that as a result this treatment, she
genuinely fears being exposed to the same treatment again or being targeted
by the recruitment agency or directly or indirectly by the UAE family for
having escaped from their household."

At para 26 he said that the key issue was whether her fears were
objectively well-founded in the light of all the evidence "which includes a
wealth of background country materials".  He found that it was clear from
the background evidence that large numbers of Filipino nationals, including
in particular female domestic workers, become victims of international
human trafficking to a host of countries, notably to Gulf States like
Kuwait and the UAE.  He referred to the U.S. State Department Trafficking
in Persons Report of June 2018 to the effect that an estimated 10,000,000
Filipinos reside or work abroad and that a significant number of these
migrant workers are subjected to sex and labour trafficking.  According to
the report, traffickers, typically in partnership with local networks and
facilitators, engage in illegal recruitment practices that leave migrant
workers vulnerable to trafficking, such as charging excessive fees,
producing fraudulent travel and contract documents, and confiscating
identity documents.

He also referred to aspects of that report which he said give some credit
to the Philippines government for seeking to address the problem.  However,
the report also notes that the government, whilst meeting the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking, did not improve the
availability and quality of protection and assistance services for
trafficking victims.

After referring to HD (Trafficked women) Nigeria (CG) [2016] UKUT 00454
(IAC), he said as follows at paras 28 - 30:

"28. I now need to apply such considerations to the specific position and
circumstances in the instant case.  This Appellant is a highly educated
intelligent and resourceful lady.  She also is a professionally trained
school-teacher and has had several years' experience of teaching in the
Philippines (as well as abroad in Qatar).  Despite having been the victim
of past exploitation, she is not a simple-minded or gullible person and,
especially in the light of her past experiences, is likely to be
particularly cautious when assessing overseas job offers in the future
(should she feel the need to work abroad again).  If she decides instead to
seek work in the Philippines, she has some 7 years of teaching experience
in her home country which would surely give her some prospects of finding
work, even if it will not allow her to earn enough to achieve her aims of
enrolling her daughter into a special school and paying for her medical
treatment.  However, it would not leave her completely destitute and
without means.  All of these factors significantly reduce the risk of the
Appellant finding herself in similar circumstances again.

29.  The Appellant has said that she fears retribution from her former
employers for having deserted their employment.  However, whilst they may
be highly influential in the UAE, they are not residents of the
Philippines.  As for the agency in the Philippines that recruited her,
there is no evidence that the agency has sought to pursue her for breach of
contract and in fact they may be very wary to do so for fear they could be
reported to the authorities as being complicit in her trafficking
(particularly as this has been formally recognised by the UK authorities).
If the Appellant was to suffer harassment or threats from the agency, she
could report them to the authorities and I note from the USSD Trafficking
Report that the Philippines Government takes action to revoke licences of
agencies found complicit in trafficking.

30.  Taking all the evidence into account, I am not satisfied even to the
lower standard of proof that the Appellant faces a real risk of persecution
or serious harm either in the form of re-trafficking or retribution from
those involved in her previous trafficking.  I conclude that she does not
meet the criteria for international protection under either the Refugee
Convention or Article 3 of the European Convention."

Finally, at para 31 Judge Talbot dealt with Article 8 of the ECHR.  He
accepted that the appellant had established a private life in the UK and
that her removal would constitute an interference of sufficient gravity so
as to engage Article 8.  He found, however, that she could continue her
private life in the Philippines, where she has family members including her
own two children, her aunt and her siblings and where she could seek work
on the basis of her professional training and experience as a teacher.  He
found that there would not be very significant obstacles to her integration
in her country of origin. He further concluded that there were no
compelling or exceptional circumstances indicating that her removal would
be disproportionate in Article 8 terms.

The Grounds and Submissions

The following is a summary of the grounds and submissions.

The grounds upon which permission was ultimately granted are twofold.
Ground 1 argues that it was perverse of Judge Talbot to conclude that the
risk to the appellant should she seek overseas employment would be
significantly reduced because she was likely to be particularly cautious in
the future and was not simple-minded or gullible.  Her ill-treatment had
nothing to do with her failing to be cautious, nor whether she is simple-
minded or gullible.  The appellant had applied for a tutoring job that was
appropriate to her qualifications and level of experience and she used what
was, on the face of it, a reputable agency.  Notwithstanding that, the
appellant was ill-treated because the trafficking of women overseas from
the Philippines was widespread, not because of any avoidable conduct on her
part.  The grounds rely on the U.S. State Department Trafficking in Persons
Report dated June 2018 in terms of the extent of trafficking in the
Philippines.

The grounds argue that instead of concluding that with greater care the
appellant might avoid being re-trafficked, Judge Talbot should have
assessed the future risk to her with reference to the country evidence and
paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  In that context he
had failed to identify any "good reasons" as to why the persecution would
not be repeated.

Ground 2 contends that in terms of avoiding persecution by remaining in the
Philippines, Judge Talbot's findings were inconsistent.  Thus, he found
that the risk of her being re-trafficked would be significantly reduced if
she chose not to work abroad and to remain in the Philippines.  However,
that finding was inconsistent with him having earlier accepted evidence
that she would be compelled to work abroad in order to try and provide for
her children, one of whom has special needs.  The grounds quote from para
15 of the appellant's witness statement dated 31 May 2019 to the effect
that the salaries on offer in the Philippines would mean depriving her
children of a future with prospects, and that all her choices have been for
her children's wellbeing.  The statement refers to inadequate social
support in the Philippines and to her daughter being particularly
vulnerable because her education and medical expenses are not free.

Quoting from Judge Talbot's decision at para 22, and further at para 23
where he found that the appellant had given a true account of her past and
current family circumstances, his conclusions were inconsistent.

In oral submissions, Ms Fijiwala accepted that Ground 1 was made out,
although it was submitted that the error of law in that respect was not
material.  It was not accepted that Ground 2 was made out.

Ms Smeaton relied on her skeleton argument prepared for the hearing before
me.  The skeleton argument, for the most part, repeats the matters raised
in the grounds, although emphasising that there was plainly a risk that the
appellant on return to the Philippines would be compelled to seek work
overseas again in order to provide for her children and would thus be at
real risk of persecution.  That risk could not be mitigated by her
exercising extra caution, it was submitted.

As regards Ground 2, the skeleton argument refers to the unchallenged
findings of fact made by Judge Talbot, including the finding that what she
could earn in the Philippines would not allow her to earn enough to enrol
her daughter in a specialist school or pay for her medical treatment.  I
observe at this point that this was not an express finding by Judge Talbot,
although I accept that it is certainly a finding that is strongly implied.

The skeleton argument then continues in arguing that Judge Talbot ought to
have assessed the risk to the appellant of being re-trafficked based on the
accepted facts of the appeal and the reality of the situation facing her on
return, namely that she would be compelled to seek work overseas.  Thus,
there would be a risk of being re-trafficked.  Her circumstances had not
changed.  The need to consider paragraph 339K of the Rules was emphasised.

Ms Smeaton argued that Grounds 1 and 2 were interlinked.  Judge Talbot's
reasoning was that she could avoid risk by exercising extra caution, and
for that reason she would not be at risk.  However, the result must
therefore be that if she had to seek work outside the Philippines, she
would be at risk.

In terms of Ground 2, the appellant's case was that she would have to work
abroad as there would not be sufficient income to take care of her
children's needs, in particular those of her daughter, if she worked in the
Philippines.  Judge Talbot accepted her evidence, including the background
evidence.  It was inconsistent to find that she would be able to remain in
the Philippines and seek work such that she would not be destitute.

I was referred to HD, in particular at para 70, in terms of the need for an
assessment of the particular personal circumstances of a victim of
trafficking in the context of the background material.

It was argued that by a process of elimination, the appeal must succeed.
Judge Talbot found that there was a risk for the appellant if she undertook
overseas work, but that that risk could be avoided by exercising caution.
His reasoning in terms of her ability to exercise caution is conceded to
have been marred by error of law.

Ms Fijiwala said that notwithstanding the error identified in Ground 1, it
was not accepted that the appellant would be at risk if she were to work
abroad.  That was not the effect of the FtJ's decision, it was submitted.

So far as Ground 2 is concerned, Judge Talbot had properly considered the
facts and concluded that she could work in the Philippines as she had done
so for seven years, notwithstanding that she would not earn enough to
provide for her children in the way that she wanted to in terms of medical
treatment, for example.  At para 29 he found that there would be no risk to
the appellant from her former employers (a matter which Ms Smeaton
indicated was not challenged).  It was submitted on behalf of the
respondent that Judge Talbot did not find that the appellant would have to
work abroad for her to support her children in terms of her disabled child
in particular.  He found that she would be able to remain in the
Philippines and work there.  At para 31 he found that she would have family
members there, apart from her two children, being her aunt and siblings,
and where she could work on the basis of her professional training and
experience.

The appellant had been in the UK for four years and there was no evidence
that her daughter went to a special school or was obtaining particular
medical treatment, or that the appellant was sending money back to the
Philippines for her care.

In reply, Ms Smeaton reiterated that the appellant was accepted to have
been a victim of trafficking and escaped in 2015.  She has not had
permission to work in the UK and she could not, therefore, have been
earning any money to send back to the Philippines.

Various aspects of Judge Talbot's decision were referred to and emphasised.
 In the light of those findings, it was submitted that if returned the
appellant would be compelled to seek work abroad to provide for her eldest
daughter.

On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that no further findings were
needed in the light of the background evidence summarised by Judge Talbot
at para 26.  As regards efforts  by the Filipino authorities to deal with
trafficking, as was said in HD the question is not whether a receiving
State has complied with any particular standards of conduct, but whether
the result is such as to reduce the risk below that of real risk.  Whilst
the Philippines, like Nigeria, (as in HD), is a Tier 1 country in terms of
efforts to tackle human trafficking, that does not mean that there is no
trafficking and no risk.  It was submitted that Judge Talbot's analysis and
findings at paras 26 and 28 amount to a finding of risk, although his
conclusion that that risk could be mitigated is perverse (as was conceded).

Assessment and Conclusions

It was conceded on behalf of the respondent that Judge Talbot erred in law
for the reasons argued in Ground 1.  I am also satisfied that Ground 2 is
made out.  Quite apart from what is contained in the appellant's witness
statement, Judge Talbot said at para 25 said that he was satisfied that the
appellant's overriding concern was to be able to provide for her children.
At para 14, summarising the appellant's evidence, he said this:

"If she returned to the Philippines, she would be unable to afford to
support her children and would be obliged to work overseas again and she
fears that she would again become the victim of trafficking."

He unequivocally found that the appellant was a credible witness (paras 21
and 23).

The ineluctable conclusion from those findings is that the appellant would
be driven to seek work abroad.  It must also follow, therefore, that the
conclusion that she could avoid persecution by working in the Philippines
is inconsistent with the earlier findings.

The conclusion is irresistible that the errors of law identified by Grounds
1 and 2 do require the decision to be set aside.  Neither party suggested
that, in the absence of any further fact-finding that was needed, the
decision could not be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

In re-making the decision I start by referring to para 339K of the Rules,
which states as follows:

"The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution or serious
harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm, will be
regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear of
persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good
reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be
repeated."

Para 339K plainly does not establish that a person who has been subject to
persecution or serious harm inevitably has a well-founded fear of
persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm.  However, it is a
"serious indication" of such an outcome.  There must be good reasons to
consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

The logic of the positive credibility findings is that the appellant would
be driven to seek work abroad.  Notwithstanding her education and
experience, she was not able to avoid persecution previously.  Having said
that, it is unrealistic to contend that she would not be cautious in her
search for employment abroad in order to avoid a risk of persecution.
However, the appellant is plainly driven by the need to support her
children and to provide the necessary care and treatment for her daughter,
who, on the accepted facts, needs an expensive operation and has special
educational needs which would require the appellant to earn more money than
she could earn in the Philippines.

The background evidence is very clear in highlighting the risk of
trafficking of persons from the Philippines.  The evidence reveals that
sophisticated methods are used by the traffickers, such as the use of
illegal recruitment practices, fraudulent contract documents and the
confiscation of identity documents.

Whilst it is for the appellant to prove her case, and as part of the
overall burden of proof that would include establishing that para 339K of
the Rules applies, I cannot find in the evidence, or in the arguments
advanced by the respondent, any good reasons to consider that the
persecution or serious harm that she was subjected to would not be
repeated.

In those circumstances, taking into account the facts as found by Judge
Talbot which are not infected by the errors of law, on the specific facts
of this appeal I am satisfied that the appellant has established to the
required standard that she has a well-founded fear of persecution for a
Convention reason, namely as a member of a particular social group.  In
those circumstances, the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds must be
allowed.

In the light of those conclusions, it is not necessary to go on to consider
Article 8.

    Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  Its decision is set aside, and the appeal is allowed on
asylum and human rights grounds with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  Date: 07th April 2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




