
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13349/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2019                   |On 27th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr Matewos Gebramaskel
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W. Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Young-Harry,  promulgated  on  4th  February  2019,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham Priory  Court  on  25th  January  2019.   In  the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Eritrea (contested), and was born
    on  10th  August  1988.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State dated 14th November  2018,  refusing  his
    claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph
    339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  he  is  a  national  of
    Eritrea and is a Pentecostal Christian.   He  fears  that  his  illegal
    departure from his  country,  and  his  failure  to  complete  military
    service, would result in harsh treatment being  meted  out  to  him  on
    return.  However, the Respondent does not accept that the Appellant  is
    from Eritrea.  It is  asserted  by  the  Respondent  that  he  is  from
    Ethiopia.  The Respondent reaches that conclusion on the basis that the
    Appellant spoke "Amharic", which is more closely  related  to  Ethiopia
    than to Eritrea.  In Eritrea the spoken language is "Tigrinya", and the
    Appellant could not demonstrate proficiency in this language.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant spoke  Amharic  and  understood  a
    small amount of Tigrinya.  She observed that the  Appellant's  lack  of
    Tigrinya, as demonstrated in his  performance  during  the  substantive
    asylum interview, did not persuade her that he was Eritrean.  Moreover,
    he had provided evidence that he had visited the Ethiopian  Embassy  in
    London, to establish his nationality there, but had only spoken to  the
    receptionist, and taken matters no further (paragraphs 20 to 22).  This
    was important because had he been an Eritrean national, then an attempt
    to apply for confirmation of Ethiopian citizenship would  have  quickly
    revealed that he was not Ethiopian but more likely Eritrean.  The judge
    observed that "the Appellant made no attempt at all to  apply.   Simply
    walking into an  embassy  and  asking  a  receptionist  for  help  with
    confirming his nationality, I find does not assist his case" (paragraph
    23).  In addition,  there  was  "a  lack  of  any  supporting  evidence
    regarding his claim to be Eritrean", as well as there being  "a  number
    of inconsistencies in his evidence" (paragraph 24).

 5. Turning to the substantive aspect of  the  Appellant's  claim,  namely,
    that he was a member of the Pentecostal Christian community, the  judge
    held that the Appellant's attendance at a Pentecostal Christian  Church
    had been sporadic and inconsistent in the past.  He had begun to attend
    more regularly in the United Kingdom and there was a  letter  from  the
    Reverend Daniel (at paragraph 36) who had confirmed that the  Appellant
    had been attending church since June 2018.   However,  the  judge  held
    that this  had  to  be  balanced  against  the  Appellant's  occasional
    attendance of church "over the years" (paragraph 37), and when this was
    balanced  against  the  "regular  attendance"  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (paragraph 38), the judge could not be satisfied that the Appellant was
    genuinely as committed as  he  made  out.   If  anything,  the  regular
    attendance currently  was  "in  order  to  bolster  his  asylum  claim"
    (paragraph 38).  Applying the jurisprudence in relation to such  cases,
    the judge held that, "I find his past behaviour suggests that he  would
    not pursue or practise his faith either openly  or  discreetly  on  his
    return" (paragraph 39).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the finding by the judge that the
    Appellant  was  of  an  Ethiopian  nationality,  and  not  an  Eritrean
    national,  was  not  properly  reasoned  and  amounted  to  a  material
    misdirection.  They also assert  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's language difficulties  was  irrational.   Moreover,  it  is
    stated that the asylum  claim  was  wrongly  dismissed.   Finally,  the
    conclusions with respect to paragraph 276ADE(vi) in relation  to  there
    being "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's relocation to his
    country of origin, was an error of law as well.

 8. On 15th April 2019, permission to appeal was  granted.   The  grant  of
    permission was in two sections.  The first section, made it clear that,

         "The judge gave many and varied reasons  which  gave  rise  to  the
         judge's finding that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of
         proving to the balance of probabilities that  he  was  an  Eritrean
         national and the judge's assessment of the matter was to  be  found
         at paragraphs 16 to 28 inclusive  of  the  decision.   The  judge's
         concerns were open to the judge on the evidence."

 9. However, it was then secondly stated that the judge  appeared  to  have
    reached inconsistent conclusions in relation to the Appellant's risk of
    return, on account of  his  membership  of  the  Pentecostal  Christian
    faith.  This inconsistency arose  in  relation  to  what  was  said  at
    paragraphs 37 to 38.  At paragraph 37  the  judge  had  said  that  the
    Appellant "has occasionally attended church over the years".   But,  at
    paragraph 38 it was said that, "I  find  regular  attendance  does  not
    speak to the Appellant's commitment or involvement  in  his  church  or
    faith".  The grant of permission ended with the words "the  application
    for permission is granted".

10. A Rule 24 response was carefully and closely  reasoned.   It  is  dated
    14th May 2019.  It makes the point that the grant of  permission  found
    little merit in the challenge to the judge's findings  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's nationality claims.  If  that  was  the  case  then  it
    followed that the Appellant had failed to  establish  that  he  was  an
    Eritrean national.  The issue of the Appellant's claim  to  Pentecostal
    Christianity was rendered immaterial in the light of the fact that  the
    Appellant has not claimed, in the alternative, that  this  would  be  a
    risk factor upon return to Ethiopia.

11. Second, the judge notes that  in  addition  to  the  findings  (between
    paragraphs 16 to 28) there were further findings on the evidence around
    nationality (between paragraphs 29  to  32)  and  these  were  cogently
    reasoned and open on the evidence for the judge to come to.

12. Thirdly, there was no inconsistency between paragraphs 37 and 38.   The
    judge was clearly referring to the Appellant's admitted past  irregular
    church attendance as indicating the  now  claimed  regular  attendance.
    This being so it was merely a  "ruse"  to  bolster  an  otherwise  weak
    claim.  Furthermore, there was the absence of Dorodian witnesses  which
    undermined the Appellant's claim that he was a regular attendee at  the
    Pentecostal  Christian  Church  in  the  UK.   Indeed,  the  judge  had
    concluded that even if the Appellant was a  Pentecostal  Christian,  he
    was not an active one and could continue with his  religious  faith  on
    the basis of being a "discreet" practitioner of that faith.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by Mr  W  Khan.
    He went through the grounds  of  application  in  considerable  detail,
    closely arguing the relevant points, in a measured and careful way.

14. First, he submitted that the finding in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    nationality was an error of law because  the  case  of  FA  (Eritrea  -
    nationality) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00047, had  made  it  quite  clear
    many years ago, that the  origins  of  the  Appellant's  parents  is  a
    material factor in considering whether the Appellant's  nationality  is
    as claimed.  In this case the Appellant had asserted that  his  parents
    were of Eritrean nationality.  The  judge  makes  no  finding  on  that
    claim.  Unless that issue was first decided, it  was  not  possible  to
    then conclude that the Appellant was not a national of  Eritrea.   This
    is  because  in  Eritrea  there  is  in  existence  the  1992  Eritrean
    Nationality Proclamation which states that "any person born to a father
    or mother of Eritrean origin  in  Eritrea  or  abroad  is  an  Eritrean
    national by birth".

15. In this case, what had happened was that the Appellant had been born in
    Eritrea, of Eritrean national parents, and had then left  that  country
    at the age of around 3, with his parents, to go to  live  in  Ethiopia.
    Thereafter, at the age of 8, he had returned back  to  Ethiopia.   This
    being the chronology, it was important that the  judge  looked  at  the
    nationality of the parents. It was also important in another way.  This
    was the question of the  Appellant's  linguistic  abilities.   A  child
    normally becomes cognizant of language at around the age of 2.  In this
    case, if the Appellant had left at the age of 3, to leave  Eritrea  and
    go to Ethiopia, then he would only have had about a year's knowledge of
    hearing the Tigrinya language spoken to him or in his  presence.   This
    would explain  why  his  command  of  the  Tigrinya  language,  was  as
    rudimentary as it was.  This also explains why the judge's treatment of
    the questions asked during the  substantive  asylum  interview  of  the
    Appellant was misguided.

16. The judge had said that of the five questions asked the  Appellant  had
    only answered two.  However, when the Appellant was asked (at  question
    194) what year he was born in, he had said that he was born in "Assab",
    which is in Eritrea.  He was likely to have misunderstood the question.
     At question 194 he was asked what was the nearest hospital to the city
    where he lived in Ethiopia, and this would have been far too  difficult
    a question for him to answer (and I accept that this is indeed the case
    because unless the Appellant had the need to  go  to  the  hospital  he
    would not have known where the hospital was for the few years  that  he
    was living there).  There is then a question at question 198  where  he
    is asked what the word for "car" is  in  Tigrinya,  and  the  Appellant
    states "makina", but the interpreter indicates that this is  incorrect.
    It is not for the interpreter to give evidence in this way and  he  was
    obviously going outside the bounds of his  professional  competence  in
    this regard.

17. In relation to the use of language, the situation appears to have  been
    that the screening interview was in Tigrinya and at  the  end  of  that
    interview the Appellant was asked whether he  understood  the  question
    and he had said that he had done so.  Mr Mills, however, for  his  part
    made it clear that the refusal letter had stated (at paragraph 26) that
    the screening interview as well as the substantive asylum interview had
    both been in Amharic, but for the five questions that the Appellant had
    been asked during his substantive asylum interview in Tigrinya.

18. The Appellant then went on to deal with the judge's  treatment  of  the
    question as to whether the Appellant was a member  of  the  Pentecostal
    faith.  He repeated here what was said in the grounds  of  application,
    namely, that there was  an  inconsistency  between  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 37 and at paragraph 38.  This, he claimed, had to  be  cross-
    referred to the two witness statements that the Appellant had  provided
    at the hearing.  One of these was dated 17th August 2018 (see  page  35
    of the Appellant's bundle) and the other was dated 10th  December  2018
    (see page  27  of  the  Appellant's  bundle).   In  the  first  witness
    statement, the Appellant had said (at page 35) that "between  2000  and
    2003, we suffered problems due to our  religion  which  was  banned  in
    Eritrea  since  2002".   This  showed,  submitted  Mr  Khan,  that  the
    Appellant claimed to have been  the  subject  of  ill-treatment  for  a
    period of at least three years on account  of  his  religion.   In  the
    second witness statement (at page 31 of the  Appellant's  bundle),  the
    Appellant states that "I am a Pentecostal Christian" (paragraph 15) and
    that "I was a Pentecostal Christian in Eritrea.  My  parents  are  also
    Pentecostal as well" (paragraph 16), before going on to  say  that  "my
    faith is very important to me.  I would not  be  able  to  practise  it
    safely in Eritrea" (paragraph 17).  The judge's decision was  in  error
    in not properly taking account of this  evidence  in  the  two  witness
    statements, submitted Mr Khan.

19. Finally, he stated that the judge's conclusion  in  relation  to  there
    being an absence of "very significant  obstacles"  to  the  Appellant's
    relocation and integration in Ethiopia  was  misconceived  in  that  it
    involved a misapplication of paragraph 276ADE(vi) for the reasons  that
    are set out in the grounds of application.

20. For his part, Mr Mills submitted  that  the  grant  of  permission  had
    already stated that the judge was entitled to come to  the  conclusions
    that she did on the issue of nationality.  However, because  the  grant
    of permission had then ended with the statement that  "the  application
    for permission is granted" it had been open today for Mr Khan to  argue
    the matter as he  did.   Nevertheless,  he  would  make  the  following
    submissions.  First, the case of FA (Eritrea) [2005] is  an  old  case.
    It was not determinative of the issues in this case.  If  the  evidence
    in question here was simply the oral evidence of the  Appellant,  which
    the judge had rejected, then it was difficult to see what  his  stating
    that his parents were also from  Eritrea,  would  add  to  the  judge's
    assessment of the Appellant's nationality.  Second, in relation to  the
    language, both the  screening  interview  and  the  substantive  asylum
    interview were undertaken in Amharic  and  the  Appellant  had  clearly
    demonstrated difficulties over the five questions that he was asked  in
    Tigrinya.  Third, the Appellant did not make a bona fide attempt at the
    Ethiopian Embassy to ascertain his nationality.  It was incumbent  upon
    him to do so, and then to return to a  Tribunal  hearing  with  further
    evidence that he had been prevented  from  taking  citizenship  at  the
    Ethiopian Embassy because he was Eritrean.  The onus was on  him.   His
    failure to do so meant that he was not able to discharge the burden  of
    proving what his nationality was.  Finally,  the  judge  had  concluded
    that the Appellant would not be at risk of  ill-treatment  because  his
    practise of the Pentecostal faith had been irregular and on that basis,
    he could practise his faith in a discreet manner  because  he  was  not
    actively involved in his faith as he maintained.

21. In his reply, Mr Khan submitted that  FA  (Eritrea)  [2005]  was  still
    relevant.  It was still good law.  It did require the Tribunal to begin
    the issue of determining nationality on the basis of  asking  what  the
    parents' nationality  was.   Furthermore,  the  case  of  MA  (Disputed
    nationality) [2009] UKIAT 00022, makes it quite clear that the Tribunal
    had to ask whether the country in question would accept  the  Appellant
    as one of their own, and in this case there was no evidence  that  that
    was so.

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as  follows.   Notwithstanding  Mr  Khan's   eloquent   and   well-made
    submissions before me, I find that the judge was entitled  to  come  to
    the conclusions that she did.

23. First, although it is the case that FA (Eritrea) makes  it  clear  that
    under the 1992 Eritrean Nationality Proclamation, the initial  question
    is what the nationality of the parents is because "any person born to a
    father or mother of Eritrean origin in Eritrea or abroad is an Eritrean
    national by birth", in this case the judge had not found the  Appellant
    to be a credible witness in relation to the claimed nationality.

24. Second, the judge was emboldened in this decision by the assessment  of
    the Appellant's frugal attempt to  go  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  and
    ascertain his nationality, because there he failed to do anything  more
    than simply speak to the receptionist.  The judge's firm conclusion was
    that,

         "I find his failure to make an actual  application  confirming  his
         nationality, does not make this a bona fide attempt to confirm  his
         nationality following MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA  Civ  289.   It  is
         unclear what the Appellant told the  receptionist,  however  if  he
         informed her that he was Eritrean and that he wanted the assistance
         of the Ethiopian Embassy, it follows that he was informed that they
         could not help" (paragraph 22).

25. Third, the Appellant's own evidence was that he had engaged in the past
    in irregular  church  attendance.   It  is  only  with  the  church  in
    Birmingham, at the Christ Convent Church,  that  the  Reverend  Daniel,
    confirmed that the Appellant had been attending the church  since  June
    2018 (paragraph 36).  In relation to the Appellant's  past  attendance,
    the judge was clear that "his evidence  is  that  he  has  occasionally
    attended church over the years" (paragraph 37).

26. That being so, the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  the  "regular
    attendance" presently was simply an  attempt  "to  bolster  his  asylum
    claim" (paragraph 38).  In these circumstances, the judge  even  stated
    that "even if I am wrong and the Appellant is a Pentecostal  Christian,
    I find his past behaviour suggests that he would not pursue or practise
    his faith either openly or discreetly on his  return"  (paragraph  39).
    That allows for every possibility and the judge was entitled to come to
    the conclusion that she did, and there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision


27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction is made.

29. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd August 2019






