
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13635/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 17 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling of Counsel instructed by Sky
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Farmer who, in a determination promulgated on 25  March  2019,
    dismissed her appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated
    11 December 2017 to refuse her asylum.  The appellant's partner MTR and
    their son KF are her dependants in this appeal.

2.   The  appellant  and  her  dependants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan,  the
    appellant having been born on 15 September 1983 and her  partner  on  1
    January 1987.  Their son was born on  29  March  2017.   The  appellant
    entered Britain as a student in 2011 at the age of 27.  In August  2012
    she applied for leave to remain as a student which was granted until 23
    November 2012.  On 28 April 2014 she again applied for leave to  remain
    as a student which was refused on 30 May 2014.  On  12  June  2017  she
    claimed asylum with her child and partner as her dependants.

3.   In 2012 the appellant had met MAA and  married  him  that  year  in  an
    Islamic marriage ceremony.  Her husband was abusive  towards  her.   He
    was a police officer but was suspended from the police in December 2014
    when  certain  sexual  offences  were  being  investigated.   He  again
    assaulted the appellant in January 2015.  She moved in with her  sister
    and reported the incident of violence to the  police  and  she  asserts
    that her sister told her family in Pakistan what was happening and  her
    family then instructed her to return to live with her  husband  despite
    his violent behaviour and the criminal investigation.  She had returned
    to her husband but his ill-treatment of her  continued  and  she  again
    left him in February 2015.  In April that year he was found  guilty  of
    serious sexual crimes including the grooming of children and  sentenced
    to 23 years in prison.  She asserted at the hearing that her family had
    not contacted her to offer support.

4.   The appellant met TR in 2016.  He supported her emotionally  and  their
    relationship developed, their son being born on 20 March 2017.  It  was
    the appellant's claim that because her son was born out of wedlock  she
    had not been able  to  obtain  identity  documents  for  him  and  that
    although she was separated from her husband  and  despite  his  actions
    towards her she did not feel emotionally strong enough to divorce  him.
    Her assertion in her asylum claim was that she,  her  partner  and  the
    child would be subject to honour killings on return and that they would
    not be safe anywhere in Pakistan because societal attitudes  were  such
    that her son would not be accepted anywhere.  Her family would  not  be
    able to tolerate what she had done.

5.   The appellant's appeal was first heard in January 2018 by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Wright who allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appealed and Judge Wright's decision was  set  aside
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the basis  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the guidance in the country guidance case of SM (lone  women
    - ostracism) Pakistan (CG) [2016] UKUT 67 and remitted  to  the  First-
    tier.  In these circumstances the  appeal  came  before  Judge  Farmer.
    Judge Farmer noted that at her interview the appellant had stated  that
    her family were emotionally supportive and that therefore the appellant
    was changing her claim before the hearing,  and  indeed  he  noted  the
    argument by the Presenting Officer that the appellant was changing  her
    claim so as to put forward the assertion that she would be  subject  to
    an honour killing on return.  She noted moreover the submission of  the
    appellant's representative that the respondent could  not  assume  that
    the appellant should or would act in a certain way and therefore  could
    not assume that she would divorce  and  remarry.   The  judge  noted  a
    document which set out  the  requirements  to  obtain  an  ID  card  in
    Pakistan and the appellant's assertion that her partner had called  the
    Pakistan High Commission who had told him that a  marriage  certificate
    would be required for the ID card.  The assertion by the appellant  was
    that she could not register her child at school as  she  would  not  be
    able to obtain an ID card for him as he was born out of wedlock and was
    illegitimate.  The judge considered the documentary  evidence  relating
    to the obtaining of the ID card which stated that such a card could  be
    obtained by going to the nearest NADRA office and could be obtained  in
    Britain.  The judge concluded  that  what  was  required  was  physical
    presence of the parents as well as a detailed birth certificate  naming
    both the mother and the  father  and  stated  it  was  clear  from  the
    documentation that where an illegitimate  child's  father  was  unknown
    then there would be a  genuine  difficulty  in  registering.   However,
    given that the birth certificate named both parents the judge concluded
    that it was clear that the parents would be able to register their  son
    and obtain an ID card for him and therefore he would be able to  access
    both health and educational services in Pakistan.  The  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant's partner was told that he could  not  obtain
    an ID card for his son or that he was wrongly advised or  misunderstood
    the advice he was given.  The judge stated that had the  appellant  and
    her partner attended the offices in an attempt to get an ID  card  they
    would have been able to do so.  She did not find that the appellant and
    her partner were credible on that  issue.   Turning  to  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant and her  family  would  be  persecuted  on
    return the judge considered whether or not internal relocation would be
    unduly harsh following the guidance in the House of Lords  judgment  in
    Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5.  The judge came to the conclusion that she
    could not be satisfied that there  was  a  risk  from  the  appellant's
    family, particularly given that the appellant had said that her  family
    had been supportive of her when they found out  what  her  husband  had
    done and that she had made no mention of  her  family  forcing  her  to
    return to him either in the interview or in her first  statement.   The
    judge pointed out that that issue had only  been  raised  in  the  most
    recent witness statement and she found that that was not credible.   In
    any event, she found that internal relocation would  be  open  for  the
    appellant, her partner and  their  child  who  would  be  returning  to
    Pakistan as a family unit and would have the option of  marriage.   The
    situation of the appellant was quite different  from  that  of  a  lone
    female returning with a child on her own.  The judge stated  that  they
    would present as a couple and be treated  as  such  and  that  Pakistan
    being  such  a  large  and  diverse  community   that   would   provide
    opportunities  for  relocation  and  offered  a  degree  of  anonymity.
    Although there was a stigma associated to children born out of  wedlock
    the  judge  found  that  that  fell  short  of  meeting   international
    protection, and secondly, that as they were returning as a  family  the
    appellant's partner would be a suitable male patron for her  and  their
    child.

6.   The judge set out the head note in SM and MH (lone women  -  ostracism)
    Pakistan (CG) [2016] UKUT 00067 and noted that the appellant's evidence
    was that she did  want  to  be  divorced  and  she  considered  herself
    divorced but she had not had the strength to do so and was too upset to
    face that process.  Moreover, the appellant had said that she  did  not
    want to marry as she  associated  marriage  with  control  and  it  had
    negative feelings for her.  Her partner had expressed a wish  to  marry
    but said that he could not force her.

7.   The judge stated:-

         "34. It is clear that the appellant could divorce  her  husband  if
             she chose to do so.  She has given  evidence  that  she  would
             like to be separated from him and already regards  herself  as
             such.  I accept her evidence that she has not wanted to  think
             about it but I also find that as it is her wish to divorce him
             this is something that with support she can and will  do.   As
             far as remarriage is concerned, for the reasons set out  above
             I find that she is in a  loving  and  committed  relationship.
             She lives with her partner and together they  care  for  their
             much loved child.  I do  not  accept  her  evidence  that  she
             cannot  bring  herself  to  marry  in   those   circumstances,
             especially when accepting her evidence that  she  worries  for
             the safety of her son which understandably is her priority".

8.   In paragraphs 37 onwards the judge noted  the  terms  of  a  report  by
    Professor Christoph Bluth dated 6 March 2019 in  which  he  had  stated
    that:-

         "The argument is  entirely  predicated  on  the  concept  that  the
         appellant would divorce her current husband and marry  her  partner
         and that she conceals the  truth  about  her  child's  birth.   The
         appellant has decided, for whatever reasons,  not  to  divorce  her
         husband and to marry her partner.  It is her right to make  such  a
         decision.  The Home Office statement raises  the  question  whether
         the fact that in her country of origin persons  can  be  persecuted
         because they have sexual relationships outside  marriage,  or  they
         are single mothers means that the appellant should be  expected  to
         marry to mitigate that risk.  This is a legal issue which it is for
         the Tribunal to determine.  As a country expert,  I  will  consider
         the accepted facts of the case as they present and the implications
         for the potential risks to  the  appellant  on  the  basis  of  the
         country evidence as instructed by the solicitor."

9.   The judge said that she considered that the analysis  put  forward  was
    flawed in that in the determination in SM the  Tribunal had found  that
    it was safe to return as an unmarried couple.  If the  appellant  chose
    not to marry she could still return without the  risk  of  persecution.
    The judge stated:-

         "The logical conclusion of Professor Bluth is that no woman who has
         an illegitimate child  and  is  not  married  to  her  partner  can
         relocate to Pakistan."

    The judge went on to consider the assertion by Professor Bluth that  if
    the appellant returned to Pakistan with her partner:-

         "This situation will not necessarily be mitigated because unmarried
         couples cannot live together and they  cannot  establish  a  family
         life ... Even if the appellant were  to  divorce  her  husband  and
         marry her partner, she would still be vulnerable to the  charge  of
         zina, because in fact she has committed  this  act.   She  has  had
         sexual relations with a man whilst married to another man  and  has
         had a child as a result.  Her partner would also be  vulnerable  to
         such charges."

    The judge stated that having found that there was  strong  family  life
    between the appellant, her partner and their child and that they  could
    live together and support each other and that Professor Bluth's  report
    was proceeding on the incorrect  basis  that  the  appellant  would  be
    likely to be returning to Pakistan alone with her child  as  a  single,
    unmarried woman,  the reality was that in SM  the  country  expert,  Dr
    Ballard, had found that to return with a male  guardian  would  protect
    the appellant and that her reputation as a respectable woman  could  be
    restored by her becoming a wife and daughter-in-law in  a  new  family,
    and that if her partner were able to marry her  that  would  legitimise
    her social status.  The judge preferred  that  conclusion  to  that  of
    Professor Bluth.  Moreover, the judge went on to take into account  the
    fact that the appellant's partner had no independent  legal  status  in
    Britain as he had been in Britain on  a  spouse  visa  until  2016  and
    despite divorcing in 2015 he had taken no  steps  to  notify  the  Home
    Office that he was no longer entitled to that visa.


10.  The judge emphasised that it was open to the appellant to  divorce  her
    husband as she had expressed a wish to do so.  She did not accept  that
    there was any evidence to indicate that the  appellant's  family  would
    reject the appellant and their grandchild or her new partner, but  that
    even if the appellant did not wish to return to her home area she,  her
    partner and their child would be able to establish themselves  with  or
    without the support of extended family members taking into account  the
    Assisted Voluntary Return System and that they had some money  to  tide
    them over and enable them to find accommodation suitable for the family
    in  the  short  term.   She  therefore  concluded  it  would   not   be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to  internally
    relocate to a city in Pakistan such as  Lahore  or  Karachi  where  she
    could live a normal life.

11.  The grounds of  appeal  first  stated  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant's child could receive  a  NADRA  ID  card
    when the document obtained from the High  Commission  has  stated  that
    physical presence was required  together  with  an  original  Pakistani
    passport or old ID card,  a  detailed  birth  certificate  naming  both
    parents, the computerised national ID  card  of  both  the  mother  and
    father with one of the parents having updated their marital  status  at
    NADRA and that otherwise  NADRA  would  not  be  able  to  process  the
    application and that a marriage certificate for married  applicants  or
    divorce  or   death   certificate   to   change   marital   status   to
    divorced/widowed, originals or photocopies would be  required.   First,
    it was therefore argued that the  judge  had  not  considered  all  the
    requirements of the NADRA Rules.  Secondly, the grounds argued that the
    judge had erred in consideration of the credibility  of  the  appellant
    when concluding that the appellant would not be at risk  from  her  own
    family.  It was stated that the appellant had at interview stated  that
    she feared from her family and from the government and the  possibility
    of an honour killing.  Thirdly, it was argued that the judge  had  been
    wrong in her consideration of the  issues  of  divorce  and  remarriage
    given that the appellant had given clear reasons why she would not wish
    to do so emphasising that at the hearing the appellant had  been  upset
    when this issue was put to her.  The fourth ground  asserted  that  the
    judge had erred in her consideration of the expert report and the issue
    of the appellant being able to legitimise her status.

12.  The fifth ground stated that the judge had erred in  the  consideration
    of internal relocation, and the sixth stated that the judge  was  wrong
    to state that the appellant had not made a claim within the Rules.

13.  The application for permission was considered by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Boyes who granted permission on the  first  four  grounds
    but not on the final two grounds relating to internal relocation and in
    relation to whether or not the appellant would come within  the  Rules.
    The judge was clearly correct not to  grant  permission  on  those  two
    grounds and indeed that decision has not  been  challenged.   There  is
    simply nothing to indicate that the appellant, even if it were the case
    that her father was a retired army officer,  could  be  traced  by  her
    family if she did not want to contact  them  on  return  and  secondly,
    there had never been a credible argument put  forward  that  she  could
    meet the requirements of the Rules.

14.  Judge Boyes noted that Professor Bluth had claimed  to  have  expertise
    relating to conditions in a very large number of countries  and  indeed
    seemed to focus on questions of nuclear proliferation and  stated  that
    it was appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to  examine  to  what  extent
    Professor Bluth was an expert on the  issues  in  the  appeal  and  his
    treatment of the evidence generally.  Before the hearing  before  me  a
    statement from Professor Bluth, asserting his expertise, was submitted.



15.  Mr Spurling argued that I must conclude  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the position as it stood at the date of hearing and what the
    situation would be if it were replicated in Pakistan.  That  being  the
    case, he argued that the appellant was entitled to asylum.  He referred
    to the grounds of appeal arguing that the findings of fact of the judge
    were not supported by the evidence with regard to the support which the
    appellant's family would give to her - the fact that she had said  that
    they had given her emotional but not financial  support  did  not  mean
    that they would support her decision to leave her  husband.   Moreover,
    with regard to the issue of divorce the  appellant's  reasons  for  not
    getting divorced were plausible and her  assertions  should  have  been
    found credible by the judge.  The situation on return would be that the
    appellant's sin of having a relationship outside marriage and having an
    illegitimate child could not be wiped out and therefore this  case  was
    distinguishable from that of the country guidance case.

16.  He referred to the report  of  Professor  Bluth  and  stated  that  the
    details therein showed that Professor Bluth understood the subject  and
    moreover, he went  on  to  argue  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    consideration of the NADRA card.

17.  In reply, Mr Jarvis stated that there was no evidence  that  the  NADRA
    card was required to obtain basic access to services even if it were  a
    legal requirement.  He referred to the judgment in  MA  (Ethiopia)  and
    stated the reality was that the appellant would be being returned on an
    emergency travel document and that that should be sufficient for her to
    fulfil the requirements for obtaining the NADRA card.  He  argued  that
    the judge had reached findings and conclusions which were fully open to
    her with regard to the appellant's relationship with her  family.   The
    judge was correct to follow relevant country  guidance.   No  case  had
    been made that country guidance should  not  have  been  followed.   He
    referred to the punishments for zina offences and stated that there was
    no evidence whatsoever as to how often such offences were punished.

Discussion.

18.  The essential questions before me are whether or not the  judge  either
    made an error in application of the law or an error of fact  such  that
    the error of fact was material to the extent that that amounted  to  an
    error of law.  I consider that the basic facts as found  by  the  judge
    were well reasoned.  In brief this is an appellant who came to Britain,
    married and separated from her husband because of his violence and  his
    criminal activities.  He was imprisoned for  23  years  in  2015.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant had formed a  relationship  with  her
    current partner and their child and that the relationship was  a  close
    family relationship where both  parents  were  not  only  in  a  loving
    relationship with each other but also with  the  child  and  that  they
    would do all they could for the benefit of that child.

19.  I consider that there is no evidence before me to show  any  impediment
    whatsoever to the appellant divorcing her husband to whom she had  been
    married in an Islamic ceremony, without  undue  difficulty  and  indeed
    that she would be able to do so in Britain and, secondly,  particularly
    given that her partner and the child are her dependants in this appeal,
    I can only conclude that this is a family unit which would be returning
    to Pakistan together and moreover, that there are no  reasons  why  the
    appellant should not marry her partner once she is divorced.  There are
    clearly no immutable characteristics in the appellant's position  which
    would mean that the fact that she is not married is a fact  which  will
    always remain and therefore she either could not  or  would  not  marry
    either before returning to Pakistan or on return.  That is the  context
    in which I have to consider the grounds of  appeal  and  indeed,  I  am
    entitled to take into account that the judge  gave  clear  reasons  for
    finding that internal relocation would be open to this family on return
    and  that the appellant would not be a lone woman on return: she  would
    be returning with her child and her partner.  While I consider that the
    judge was perfectly entitled to find that the appellant would not be at
    risk of harm from her family, there is simply no reason why, if she did
    not wish to contact them, she would have to do so on return as internal
    relocation would be available to her.

20.  Specific matters were raised in the grounds of appeal, the first  being
    the issue of the NADRA  card.   While  it  may  be  the  case  all  the
    documents set out in the note at page 101 of the bundle, from the  High
    Commission for Pakistan are not all available, it is not at  all  clear
    that a marriage certificate for the parents  of  the  applicant  for  a
    NADRA card or child registration  certificate  is  required.   What  is
    clear is that a birth certificate mentioning the  father  and  mother's
    names is required as well as their own identity cards and that physical
    presence of the immediate blood relative  is  required.   The  marriage
    certificate is only  required  for  married  applicants.   I  therefore
    consider that the grounds  of  appeal  are  wrong  to  claim  that  the
    parents' marriage certificate must be produced.   That  simply  is  not
    what is said in the document from the High Commission.  But be that  as
    it may, there is nothing on that document to indicate that an  ID  card
    is required for anything in Pakistan or alternatively, that if a  child
    does not have an identity document that child  would  be  stopped  from
    access to education or basic healthcare.  It is for  the  appellant  to
    prove her claim and that has not been done.  I would add that  I  could
    find nothing in Professor Bluth's report to  indicate  that  the  child
    would face persecution or discrimination amounting to ill-treatment  on
    return because he did not have an ID card.

21.  Professor Bluth's report concentrates on the appellant being  a  victim
    of prosecution under the Zina Ordinances  on  return  because  she  had
    formed an adulterous relationship.   There  is  simply  no  statistical
    evidence to show that a woman in a stable relationship with the  father
    of her child would be prosecuted under those  ordinances  or  what  the
    likelihood  of  such  prosecution  would  be.    There   is   obviously
    considerable evidence about the use of the Zina Ordinances but there is
    nothing to indicate that they are used against a woman who has formed a
    genuine  and stable  relationship with another man while still  married
    where her husband had abused her and committed serious  crimes  to  the
    point that he was imprisoned in another country.  I therefore  consider
    that again the appellant has not proved that she would face persecution
    on return - internal relocation is open to her and she and her  partner
    would be able to go, as the judge stated, to a city where they were not
    known and live as husband and wife with their child.   That  being  the
    case, the appellant has not shown that she has a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution or indeed Article 3 ill-treatment on  return  to  Pakistan.
    There is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  appellant  could  not  live
    discretely with her partner in Pakistan or  that,  given  they  have  a
    child that they would not be accepted as a couple. This is clearly  not
    an HJ (Iran) situation: it is entirely the appellant's  choice  not  to
    divorce her husband and marry the father of her child: she  has  stated
    that she would like to marry him in due course. This is not case of the
    appellant having to hide her nature as it would be when a gay person is
    required to hide his or her sexuality.

22.  I would add that as there  is  simply  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant could not divorce her husband and remarry without  difficulty
    and therefore should she not wish to return to Pakistan as a woman  who
    was in a relationship with a man to  whom  she  was  not  married,  the
    remedy is in her own hands.  Indeed, I consider that the assertion that
    a woman who has no reason not to take steps to marry her  partner  even
    though she has stated that she would like to do so at some stage  would
    be entitled to asylum on the basis  that she would face persecution  on
    return is entirely false  and to so find would be perverse -  to  reach
    that finding would mean that any man and woman from Pakistan who wished
    to remain in Britain  and  believed  themselves  to  be  in  a  genuine
    relationship would be  entitled  to  remain  on  the  basis  that  they
    considered that they would be persecuted on return  because  they  were
    unmarried.

23.  The judge properly applied the guidance in the  country  guidance  case
    of SM and I consider that  on  the  evidence  before  her  she  reached
    conclusions which were fully open to her. Indeed, the country  guidance
    was not directly questioned.

24.  There is no error of law in the determination. I  would  add  that  the
    reality is that this nuclear family  would  be  returning  to  Pakistan
    together there is nothing to indicate that their rights under Article 8
    would be infringed by their being expected to do so.

25.  I therefore find that the decision  of  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    dismissing this appeal on asylum and human rights grounds shall  stand.



Decision.

This appeal is dismissed.
     Signed:  [pic]                     Date: 12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

