
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13242/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 January 2018                            |On 6 February 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                     AHMED IBRAHIM AHMED HASSANEIN SHATA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saeed, Counsel for Aman Solicitors, Wembley
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt  born  on  14  February  1979.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 14 November  2016
    refusing his asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights  claims.
    The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Khawer  on  8
    June 2017.  The appeal was dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  21
    July 2017.  An application for permission  to  appeal  was  lodged  and
    permission was granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Saffer on 23
    October 2017.  The permission states that it is arguable that the Judge
    may have materially erred by relying on a letter on the  Tribunal  file
    (not the  respondent's  file  as  wrongly  recorded  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 35) without giving the appellant the chance to deal  with  it
    and then making adverse credibility findings based on it.  The document
    was a letter from  the  appellant's  representative  to  the  appellant
    referring to an arrest warrant.  The appellant's representative did not
    have a copy of this letter in the bundle that was served on him and was
    unaware that the letter was before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The grounds go on to state that the Judge was wrong to  find  that  the
    appellant's actions, putting himself at risk of being shot  and  killed
    in order to take photos and videos was implausible, taking into account
    the fact that media journalists put themselves in positions of  danger.
    They go on to state that the  Judge  also  states  that  the  appellant
    proffered no explanation as to how the oppression would be  exposed  if
    he had no intention of publishing the videos, and  that  the  appellant
    gave a contradictory account as to the number of occasions on which  he
    took photos and videos. These issues were addressed in the  appellant's
    statement and the Judge has not given any reasons for why  he  rejected
    this evidence.


 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  This states that although  it  is
    unclear what documents were in the appellant's bundle the  grounds  are
    not made out in any event.  The document referred to  at  paragraph  35
    was originally generated by the appellant's solicitors and  the  letter
    is  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  own  evidence.   The
    response  states  that  the  grounds   infer   that   the   appellant's
    representative intends to argue a point which is clearly untrue and the
    grounds fail to particularise how this problem can  be  overcome.   The
    response states that it will be for the appellant  to  demonstrate  the
    materiality of the complaint.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the appellant submitted that there is one preliminary issue
    and that is an amendment to ground 2 in which it  is  stated  that  the
    First-Tier Tribunal finds it to be implausible that the appellant would
    put himself at risk to take photos and videos.  Counsel submitted  that
    no reference has been made to any objective evidence about this.

 5. The Presenting Officer opposed this, submitting that  the  Judge  found
    that the appellant's explanation was not credible as the  appellant  is
    not a media journalist and had limited interest in the  uprising  after
    Mohammed Morsi was deposed.


 6. I refused to allow this amendment as there is nothing in  the  decision
    which makes me believe that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    consider everything relevant.


 7. Counsel submitted that the grounds are adopted. With regard to ground 1
    and paragraph 35, although the appellant's solicitors knew  about  this
    letter they were not aware it was before the  Tribunal.   He  submitted
    that this letter was not in the respondent's bundle or the  appellant's
    bundle.  He submitted that the appellant was unaware  that  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal had this letter  and  the  letter  was  not  put  to  the
    appellant at the hearing so he had no opportunity to  deal  with  this,
    and he submitted that this was unfair.  He submitted  that  credibility
    is extremely important in this appeal and so this must  be  a  material
    error of law.


 8. I asked about the letter and was told that it  was  in  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal's file but was not brought to the attention  of  the  parties.
    This is a letter which was sent to the appellant by his representative.


 9. Counsel then referred to ground 2. He submitted that the Judge, finding
    that it was implausible that the appellant would put himself at risk by
    taking photographs and videos, is irrational, people do this.


10. With regard to ground 3, Counsel submitted  that  the  Judge  makes  no
    reference to the  witness  statement  in  his  decision  and  that  his
    statement covers all the issues raised  by  the  First-Tier  Judge  for
    finding the appellant not to be credible.


11. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision.


12. The Presenting Officer made her submissions first of all  referring  to
    ground 1 and paragraph 35 of the decision.  She  submitted  that  there
    clearly was no inherent unfairness in the  appellant  not  being  asked
    about this letter.  It was a letter to him from his solicitors  and  it
    refers to an arrest warrant but the appellant told the Tribunal he  had
    not had an arrest warrant against him and the Judge proceeded  on  this
    basis.  The last sentence of paragraph 35 states "I also note that  the
    appellant has failed to furnish any such arrest warrant  or  an  expert
    report thereon in support of this appeal." The Judge  found  that  this
    went against the appellant's account.  He also gave other  reasons  for
    failing to believe the appellant's account.


13. I was referred to  paragraph  27  of  the  decision  which  deals  with
    credibility and in which the  Judge  states  that  he  has  taken  into
    account all the available evidence in the round and the contents of the
    documents produced by the appellant in support  of  his  account.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that there is nothing in the  decision  to
    indicate that the Judge closed his mind to anything  which  was  before
    him and he has given proper reasons for all his credibility findings.


14. I was referred to paragraph 39  of  the  decision  and  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Judge does not require to address everything
    before him, but it is clear  from  this  paragraph  and  the  preceding
    paragraphs that the Judge finds that the core of the account  does  not
    meet the lower standard of proof required.


15. At paragraph 30  of  the  decision  the  Judge  states  that  when  the
    appellant stated that "he would put himself at risk of being  shot  and
    killed by attending allegedly peaceful demonstrations where people were
    being shot by the authorities in order to take photographs/videos which
    he had no intention of publishing, but merely which he intended to keep
    for himself and for the future", was not plausible.  He is not  stating
    that it is not plausible that somebody would put  himself  at  risk  of
    being  shot,  what  he  finds  implausible  is  the  appellant   taking
    photographs and videos which he had no intention of publishing and thus
    putting himself in this vulnerable position.


16. The Presenting Officer referred to ground 3 and paragraph 9 in which it
    is stated that the Judge failed to take into account paragraphs 12, 17,
    18, 19 and 21 of the appellant's witness statement. She submitted  that
    it is clear  that  the  Judge  has  considered  everything  before  him
    including the points raised in the refusal letter which were dealt with
    in the appellant's statement.


17. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  Judge  has  found  that  the
    appellant was not credible, he was vague. She submitted that the  Judge
    has given proper reasons for all his  findings  and  his  findings  are
    therefore sustainable.


18. Counsel submitted that the Rule 24 response refers to it being  unclear
    what documents were in the appellant's bundle and he submitted that the
    document which was not put to the appellant was not in the  appellant's
    bundle, it was only in the Tribunal's file.  He  again  submitted  that
    this letter, relating to  the  arrest  warrant,  was  not  put  to  the
    appellant  and  as  it  contradicted  the  appellant's  evidence.   The
    appellant should have had an opportunity to give an explanation and  to
    address whether there is an arrest warrant and if so where it  is.   He
    submitted that this is where the unfairness comes in. I  was  asked  to
    find that this is a material error of law.

Decision and Reasons

19. With regard to ground 2 it is clear that the Judge finds that it is not
    plausible that someone who is not  taking  photographs  and  videos  to
    publish would put himself at risk of being shot and killed,  purely  to
    keep these photos and videos for himself.  Paragraph 30 of the decision
    makes it clear what the Judge finds to be implausible and there  is  no
    error in this finding.

20. With regard to ground 3 there is nothing before me to suggest that  the
    Judge did not consider the appellant's statement.  At paragraph  27  he
    states that he has taken into account all the  available  evidence  and
    whether the appellant's account may or may not be consistent  with  the
    evidence. He has found that, having considered all  the  evidence,  the
    core of the account is vague and lacking in clarity.  At  paragraph  29
    the judge refers to the appellant being asked  questions  about  taking
    the photos and videos and the appellant avoiding answering.  The  Judge
    then refers to contradictions in the appellant's evidence and  goes  on
    to find that some of the appellant's account in itself  is  improbable,
    e.g. that he gave his friend the photographs and videos.  At  paragraph
    34 the Judge again refers to the appellant's evidence  being  vague.  I
    find that based on the evidence before the Judge he was entitled to the
    findings referred to in ground 3. Even with the  appellant's  statement
    before him the Judge found that the  appellant  had  failed  to  submit
    satisfactory evidence to establish even to the standard of a reasonable
    degree of probability, that the appellant's factual account is true.

21. The main ground of appeal relates  to  paragraph  35  and  whether  the
    letter in the Tribunal file should have been put to the appellant.  The
    appellant denies that there was  an  arrest  warrant  but  this  letter
    contradicts  that.   The  appellant's  wife  is  the  only  person  the
    appellant has been in touch with in Egypt since he came to  the  United
    Kingdom, and I accept that it would have  been  sensible  to  put  this
    letter to the appellant but the appellant must have been aware  of  the
    letter as it was sent to him by his representative.  I find  that  this
    is an error of law but taking into account the other issues  which  the
    Judge finds to lack credibility, I do not find that this is a  material
    error of law.  It does not make the decision  unfair.   The  Judge  has
    made it clear that he finds the appellant's account  to  be  vague  and
    inconsistent and he  has  given  proper  reasons  for  his  credibility
    findings.


Notice of Decision


22. There are no material errors of law in the Judge's decision promulgated
    on 21 July 2017.  The  Judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  must
    stand.

23. Anonymity has not been directed.







Signed                                  Date 05 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
