
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13366/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 6 March 2019                      |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr Zrj
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Z R J.  For the purposes of this decision and reasons I refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr Z R  J
    was the appellant.

 2. In a decision on error and law and directions sent on 3  January  2019,
    the Upper Tribunal found an error of law in a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anthony in allowing the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  That decision is appended to this decision and reasons.

Remaking the Decision

 3. In response to my directions, the respondent's  solicitors  provided  a
    comprehensive separately tabulated bundle of evidence, running to  some
    900  pages,  containing  the  written  submissions  of   Counsel,   the
    additional evidence relied upon on behalf of the respondent, the bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the objective  material  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State did not file  any  further
    evidence.  It emerged for the  first  time  at  the  hearing  that  the
    Presenting Officer had not received the appellant's bundle, despite the
    fact that this had been received by the  Upper  Tribunal,  from  Duncan
    Lewis, on 29 January 2019.  Ms  Akinbolu  confirmed,  following  taking
    instructions, and Ms Kenny did not dispute, that this bundle  was  also
    served by e-mail on the respondent on 28 January (and a  named  officer
    was given).

 4. Ms Kenny confirmed, in light of the  fact  that  the  bundle  had  been
    served and that the respondent had not  filed  anything  in  compliance
    with directions, that it was fair for the proceedings  to  proceed.   I
    allowed Ms Kenny additional time to review the documentary evidence.

 5. As indicated in the decision  of  error  of  law  and  directions,  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Anthony were misconceived in
    relation to asylum as the appellant's fear had always been on the basis
    of an alleged blood  feud  which  was  not  accepted  by  the  previous
    Tribunal.  I set aside Judge Anthony's findings that the appellant  was
    at risk of persecution as someone who is perceived  as  westernised  in
    his home area of Nangarhar.

 6. I remain satisfied, and such was not specifically disputed  before  me,
    that the appellant cannot succeed on Refugee Convention grounds.

Article 3/Humanitarian Protection - Article 15(c) Qualification Directive

 7. The appeal was relisted before me  in  order  to  hear  submissions  in
    relation to whether the appellant qualified for  subsidiary  protection
    under Article 15(c)  and  the  appellant's  human  rights  case,  under
    Articles 3 and 8.

 8. Although Ms  Akinbolu  made  submissions  and  relied  on  evidence  in
    relation to an Article 3 medical claim, she did not do  this  with  any
    great force.  I have considered the relevant  guidance  including  J  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and MP (Sri Lanka) Case C-353/16 of the  CJEU,
    including that  the  "removal  of  a  third  country  national  with  a
    particularly serious mental or physical illness constitutes inhuman and
    degrading  treatment,  where  removal  would  result  in  a  real   and
    demonstrable risk of significant and  permanent  deterioration  in  the
    state of the health of the person concerned."

 9. However the evidence relied on by the appellant,  albeit  that  he  has
    diagnosed mental health difficulties and as considered  below  this  is
    relevant  to  his  risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan,  fell  short   of
    establishing that removal would reach the still high threshold in  this
    regard.  In reaching this finding I take  into  account  that  although
    there was evidence in relation  to  the  absence  of  adequate  medical
    support for mental health in Afghanistan and it was accepted  by  Judge
    Anthony and preserved in my findings  that  he  would  have  no  family
    support on return and may well  face  a  deterioration  in  his  mental
    health if returned; none of this establishes that it  would  reach  the
    threshold.  I am not satisfied that the appellant's Article  3  medical
    case can succeed.

10. With relation to the appellant's  Article  15(c)  case  for  subsidiary
    protection, the Secretary of  State  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  1
    December 2017  considered  return  to  the  appellant's  home  area  of
    Nangarhar Province.  The Secretary of State took into consideration the
    Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN) - Afghanistan  Security  and
    Humanitarian Situation August 2017 which provided the then most  up-to-
    date information  in  relation  to  Nangarhar.   This  also  took  into
    consideration the country guidance of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) which finds that at that date, that even in the
    provinces worst  affected  by  violence  the  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence did not reach the Article 15(c)  threshold.   It  was  however
    noted in the CPIN  that  the  worst  affected  areas,  at  that  stage,
    included Nangarhar.

11. The refusal letter went on to reiterate that relatively few people  are
    affected by generic violence and in summary the CPIN policy note, which
    the respondent relied on in the  refusal  letter,  confirmed  that  the
    humanitarian situation in  Afghanistan  had  not  deteriorated  to  the
    extent that represented in general a real  risk  of  harm  contrary  to
    Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive/Article 3 of ECHR although
    individual factors must be taken into account and that country guidance
    case law established that  the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Afghanistan taken as whole was not as such a high risk to mean,  within
    the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, that there
    are substantive grounds for believing a civilian faced a real  risk  to
    his life or person solely by being present in the  country.   The  CPIN
    then went  on  to  state  that  despite  a  32%  increase  in  civilian
    casualties since 2011, the violence varied significantly and it was not
    at such a level in general that there was a general Article 15(c)  risk
    but that a person's individual circumstances might  nevertheless  place
    them at risk and each case must be considered on its facts.

12. Ms Akinbolu took me to evidence in relation to the deterioration in the
    security situation, particularly in the appellant's  home  province  of
    Nangarhar, including that civilian casualties had greatly increased and
    that the Taliban and other  insurgent  forces  had  a  wider  and  more
    tangible presence.  The appellant also relied on the expert  report  of
    Jawad Zadeh, provided to the First-tier Tribunal as well as the  recent
    August 2018 UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines (which were not  available  to
    the Upper Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan) documenting the
    ongoing civilian casualties in the appellant's home area.  The European
    Asylum Support Office (EASO) Afghanistan country  guidance  and  common
    analysis, at page 246 of the appellant's  consolidated  bundle  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, concluded at May 2018 that:

         "Looking  at  the  indicators,  it  can  be  concluded   that   the
         indiscriminate violence taking place in the province  of  Nangarhar
         reaches such a high level  that  minimal  individual  elements  are
         required to show substantial grounds for believing that a civilian,
         returned to the province, would face a real risk of serious harm in
         the meaning of Article 15(c)."

13. Applying the guidance in AK (Afghanistan), considered in line with  the
    respondent's CPIN (including as set out in the refusal letter), I  must
    consider the appellant's individual  circumstances  and  whether  those
    individual circumstances would place him at risk on the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case.  I have considered  all  the  factors  including  the
    appellant's age,  gender,  health  condition,  social  and  educational
    background together with family and social ties, language etc.

14. As set out in the error of law decision, I preserved  the  findings  of
    Judge Anthony including in relation to the medical  evidence  and  that
    the appellant does not  have  family  support  in  Afghanistan.   Judge
    Anthony adopted the findings of  Dr  Chisolm  who  confirmed  that  the
    appellant, although he did not at the date of the assessment  in  March
    2018 meet the criteria for diagnosis of PTSD, his PTSD having resolved,
    had mental  experiences  consistent  with  derealisation.   Dr  Chisolm
    concluded that the appellant had a  moderate  depressive  disorder  and
    that his symptoms were  consistent  with  derealisation  and  co-morbid
    depressive disorder.  The appellant met the criteria  of  derealisation
    because he had subjective difficulty in vividly recalling past memories
    due to childhood trauma.  Although the  appellant  is  a  young  man  I
    accept that he has some mental health difficulties.  Although I  accept
    there is no evidence of current access of mental health  facilities  in
    the UK (other than medication) the report of Dr Chisolm confirmed  that
    the  appellant's  "condition  is  likely  to  worsen  if  returned   to
    Afghanistan".  There was nothing  before  me  that  might  specifically
    contradict that expert view, which I accept.

15. In considering the situation that the appellant would find  himself  in
    in Nangarhar I accept, as Judge Anthony did, that  the  appellant  does
    not have family in Afghanistan and although now an adult, he  would  be
    returning as a young man, with mental health issues and without  family
    support.  I preserved Judge Anthony's findings that he  does  not  have
    any contact with family.

16. I take into consideration that although  Judge  Anthony's  findings  in
    relation to allowing the appellant's  appeal,  essentially  because  he
    would be perceived as westernised, were misconceived, I must  consider,
    in the  round,  the  background  country  information  in  relation  to
    westernisation  including  as  relied  on  by  Ms  Akinbolu.   I   have
    considered this in the context of an appellant who has now been in  the
    UK for ten years having left Afghanistan at the age of 14.

17. I take into consideration that the UNHCR eligibility guidelines (August
    2018)  at  pages  75,  76  of  the  appellant's  bundle   outline   the
    difficulties for those perceived  as  westernised  including  that  the
    Swedish Network of Refugees Support Groups reported in 2017 that as did
    the Danish Refugee Council that suspicion of returnees from the  Europe
    or the "west" more generally was greater the longer returnee has stayed
    outside Afghanistan and the further away the returnee has been and that
    young returnee boys and men  are  particularly  at  risk  including  of
    recruitment by extreme  or  criminal  networks  as  a  result  of  high
    visibility and social isolation.  In Taliban held areas  in  particular
    for example it is noted that individuals would not  want  to  be  heard
    speaking English or to be seen to be having international  contacts  on
    their phone.  The appellant had provided, contrary to  the  submissions
    of Ms Kenny, evidence to the First-tier Tribunal of private life in the
    UK, and it is accepted that he  has  no  current  contact  with  family
    members  in  Afghanistan.   There  is  some  weight  therefore  in   Ms
    Akinbolu's submission that the only contact that  the  appellant  would
    likely to have on the phone would be international contact  in  English
    with individuals in the UK.

18. Background country information  also  shows  that  Nangarhar  has  both
    Taliban and Islamic State elements, with regular  clashes  between  the
    groups as well as with Afghan and international forces.

19. I have taken into consideration the country expert report provided  for
    the First-tier Tribunal by Jawad Zadeh, which detailed the difficulties
    and risks for individuals perceived as westernised  and  also  detailed
    the difficulties in Nangarhar including that it  is  one  of  the  most
    volatile provinces of Afghanistan.  Although therefore the  appellant's
    westernisation, which I accept (including given that the appellant  has
    been in the UK for over ten years since the age of 14) is not a  stand-
    alone risk that would in itself found a successful protection claim,  I
    am satisfied that it is a factor to be considered in assessing the risk
    to the appellant  on  return  to  Afghanistan  including  to  his  home
    province.

20. There was much discussion, both at the error of law hearing and at  the
    remaking stage, as  to  the  meaning  of  the  medical  report  in  its
    conclusion that the appellant had  a  good  prognosis  "if  his  asylum
    status is resolved.  Once he feels safe, it is likely that his symptoms
    will spontaneously resolve."  Although the Secretary of State  asserted
    that  this  resolution  could  equally  include  the  appellant   being
    unsuccessful and being returned  to  Afghanistan  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker, I am not satisfied that such a conclusion is available from the
    medical  evidence,  including  that  the  clinical   psychologist   who
    completed the report was of the  view  that  the  appellant's  symptoms
    would resolve "once he felt safe" and, importantly, that his  condition
    was likely to worsen if he returned to  Afghanistan.   Again,  although
    not a stand-alone reason that  would  lead  to  the  appellant's  claim
    succeeding, it is a factor that I must consider in the round: that  the
    appellant's vulnerability would be heightened.

21. I have considered these factors in the light of the background  country
    information including in relation to the volatility of  Nangarhar,  the
    inadequacy of mental health services and that the UNHCR guidelines  now
    cite Nangarhar as  one  of  the  provinces  where  "minimal  individual
    elements" are required to show  substantial  grounds  for  believing  a
    civilian would face a real risk of serious harm in  that  area,  within
    the meaning of Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  (at  the
    date of the most recent UNHCR guidelines, 30 August 2018, Nangarhar was
    one  of  the  provinces  with  the  highest  levels  of  indiscriminate
    violence.

22. Taking all these factors into consideration and applying  the  guidance
    in AK Afghanistan and the respondent's CPIN,  considering  the  current
    background  country  information   and   the   appellant's   individual
    circumstances I am satisfied on the facts of the appellant's case  that
    he has established that there are the 'minimal individual elements'  in
    his particular case, where he would be at  an  Article  15(c)  risk  on
    return to his home area of Nangarhar.

23. Considering then, whether the appellant could  internally  relocate  to
    Kabul I have considered, what remains at the date of this decision  the
    current guidance, in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC).

24. This provided  including  in  the  headnote  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation:

         "(ii)    Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation
             in Kabul as well as the difficulties faced by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout many other parts of Afghanistan); it will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male and good health to relocate to Kabul even if he does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.

         (iii)    However, the particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions and the place of relocation, including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health and  their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above."

25. AS Afghanistan is currently under appeal to the Court of Appeal, but it
    was not disputed that it remains the extant country guidance before me.
     Although I accept therefore that a single adult male  in  good  health
    can generally relocate to Kabul, even without any specific  connections
    or support network and that it will not generally  be  unreasonable  or
    unduly  harsh,  that   guidance   highlighted   that   the   particular
    circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken into account.

26. I rely on my findings and those preserved  findings  of  Judge  Anthony
    that this individual, although not in serious ill-health at the moment,
    does suffer from  a  moderate  depressive  disorder  and  suffers  from
    derealisation disorder and the  psychologist's  report  confirmed  that
    there would be an increase in symptoms  and  an  increase  in  distress
    relating to concerns about safety if the appellant were  to  return  to
    Afghanistan.

27. Therefore I accept that although the appellant's condition  in  the  UK
    appears to be under control (and the evidence indicates  the  appellant
    is currently taking Quetiapine and sleeping  pills)  I  further  accept
    that there would likely be a  deterioration  if  he  were  returned  to
    Afghanistan.  Whilst that in my findings could not bring the  appellant
    within the higher threshold of an Article 3  medical  claim,  it  is  a
    factor that must be considered when considering whether it  was  unduly
    harsh or not for the appellant to relocate to Kabul.

28. I take into consideration that the appellant when he  left  Afghanistan
    at the age of  14  had  limited  educational  history.   Such  was  not
    specifically disputed before me and I accept to the lower standard,  as
    set out in the appellant's witness statement, that he  did  not  attend
    school in Afghanistan at all.  Although he was enrolled  at  school  in
    the UK for 2 years, I accept that his attendance was  affected  due  to
    his mental health issues, although he was able to  obtain  certificates
    in IT, English and Maths in the UK.

29. As indicated, I rely on the findings that the appellant has  no  family
    in Afghanistan and I accept, and such was  not  specifically  disputed,
    that he has no friends or network to return to in Kabul or  Afghanistan
    in general.  I take into consideration that  he  has  been  outside  of
    Afghanistan for over ten years and  left  as  a  child.   I  take  into
    consideration that although in Kabul there is better access  to  health
    care, as highlighted at [143] of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan there
    remains a shortage.

30. In  relation  to  mental  health  difficulties  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan (at 142 and following) highlighted that there are very high
    levels  of  mental  health  problems   in   Afghanistan,   particularly
    depression, anxiety and PTSD, which has created significant  needs  but
    that  there  are  a  lack  of  trained  professionals  and   inadequate
    infrastructure.  Although the  Public  Health  Minister  reported  that
    psychological services were available at some 1500 health centres  with
    300 dedicated mental health  clinics,  there  was  only  one  dedicated
    mental health hospital in Kabul and a 2016 study referred to there only
    being three trained psychiatrists and ten psychologists in the whole of
    Afghanistan.

31. Although, therefore AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan confirmed that  it
    was not essential for a person relocating to have an  existing  support
    network in Kabul to access housing or employment, that is the case  for
    single males in good health.  At paragraph 234 the Tribunal highlighted
    that it was reasonable to infer that poor  physical  or  mental  health
    could be relevant to  the  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul and 'would need to be carefully considered'.

32. I take into account that it was not suggested that  the  appellant  can
    speak Pasthto (although equally  his  evidence  that  he  cannot  write
    Pashto was also not disputed) and he  therefore  would  speak  a  local
    language on return.  However, as a young adult, who may be perceived as
    westernised (notwithstanding that  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan
    indicates that there is  generally  a  higher  tolerance  in  Kabul  of
    westernisation than in rural areas), without  any  support  network  at
    all, and with  existing  mental  health  conditions  and  with  limited
    possibilities and limited availability of treatment in the event  of  a
    deterioration (which I accept, on the medical evidence,  is  likely  to
    occur) together with very limited educational/skills attainment,  I  am
    satisfied that internal  relocation  would  be  unreasonable  for  this
    appellant. I am satisfied to the  lower  standard  that  the  appellant
    would be at an Article 15(c) risk in his home province  and  could  not
    relocate.

Article 8

33. Further and in the alternative, in relation to Article  8,  it  was  Ms
    Akinbolu's submission that the appellant would  face  very  significant
    obstacles.  Although the appellant's mental health difficulty in itself
    could not lead to the appellant's appeal  succeeding  under  Article  8
    (see including Akhalu (health claim ECHR Article 8) [2013]  UKUT  400).
    I take into consideration the appellant has been in the UK for over ten
    years, since the age of 14 and there was evidence of his private  life,
    including in witness statement form,  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    from one of his friends in the UK (and who attended the Upper  Tribunal
    hearing) who forms part of his support network, including reminding the
    appellant in relation to medication.

34. Although the appellant does not have any right of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his private life claim under the immigration rules,  I  have
    considered his Article 8 appeal through the prism  of  the  immigration
    rules, specifically paragraph 276ADE(vi) and I am  satisfied  for  this
    particular appellant on the facts, relying on my findings  in  relation
    to  both  his  home  province  and  Kabul  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration in Afghanistan.

35. Factoring that consideration into the general Article 8 consideration I
    have applied the five-stage test.   The  appellant  has  established  a
    private life in the UK during the decade  he  has  lived  here.   I  am
    further satisfied, given that  low  threshold,  that  the  respondent's
    decision may interfere with that private life.   Such  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law and  is  for  the  legitimate  purpose  of  the
    maintenance of immigration control.

36. Turning to the final proportionality question I have considered all the
    factors.  I have taken into consideration the public interest including
    the Section 117 provisions and that little weight should be attached to
    such private life.  I have also considered, that despite  obtaining  an
    English certificate there was no adequate evidence that  the  appellant
    could speak English or  that  he  is  financially  independent.   I  do
    therefore consider these factors add to the public interest.  However I
    take  into  account  that  the  appellant  in  my  findings  meets  the
    requirements of the immigration.  I take account  of  all  the  factors
    including the appellant's particular circumstances and that although  a
    young adult he is, in my findings, a vulnerable one including given his
    mental health difficulties and that he would be returning  without  any
    support.  I am satisfied therefore that there  are  compelling  reasons
    and that in the alternative the appellant's appeal falls to be  allowed
    under Article 8.

Conclusion

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside (other than  preserved  findings).   I  remake  the  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   I  allow  the
    appellant's appeal  under  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated:  20 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  20 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

                                  APPENDIX

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-cj-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13366/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2018                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mr Z R J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors


                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

Background

 1. The appellant, who was born on 16  September  1994,  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision  of  the  respondent,  of  1  December  2017,  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.  In a decision promulgated on 29 August 2018 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Anthony allowed the  appellant's  appeal.   The
    appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent  is
    Mr Z R J.  For the purposes of this decision and reasons I refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr Z R J  was
    the appellant.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal.  The  appellant
    (who claimed asylum on 8 April 2009) had previously  been  unsuccessful
    in his first  asylum  appeal  and  was  found  not  credible  by  Judge
    Eldridge, in a decision promulgated on 22  April  2014.  The  appellant
    made further submissions which were refused  by  the  respondent  on  1
    December 2017.  Judge Anthony found that the appellant's claim  engaged
    the Refugee Convention on the basis of his  imputed  political  opinion
    due to a fear of the Taliban.  The judge went on to find, at [22], that
    the appellant, who had lived in the UK since 2009 when he was a  child,
    would on return be  perceived  as  westernised  in  his  home  area  of
    Nangarhar which would make him a target.  The judge  went  on  to  find
    that even proceeding on the basis that the appellant's blood  feud  did
    not  happen  the  appellant  would  be  returning  in  very   different
    circumstances.

 3. It was the grounds of the Secretary of State that:

         Ground 1: the judge erred in the approach to AS (Safety  of  Kabul)
         Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118;

         Ground 2: the judge erred in the approach to the appellant's mental
         health issues and his  findings  were  inadequate  given  that  the
         appellant's PTSD, if it existed, had resolved  and  he  experienced
         moderate depressive disorder and that he had a  good  prognosis  if
         his asylum status was resolved;

         Ground 3: it was argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning
         was inadequate in concluding that there was a Convention reason  in
         the context of a localised threat from non-state agents.

Error of Law Hearing

 4. In relation to the Convention reason,  as  noted  in  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter, the appellant's claim was based on  a  land
    dispute and this was not considered to be a Convention  reason  whereas
    the judge found that the appellant had a political opinion due to  fear
    of the Taliban.  Although the individual that the appellant feared,  in
    respect of what was claimed to be a blood feud, worked for the Taliban,
    there was no suggestion of Taliban involvement and the  judge  had  not
    given any adequate reasons for finding imputed political opinion  as  a
    Convention reason.

 5. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on the respondent's 2009 decision which,  in
    the refusal letter, set out what exactly the appellant  feared;  at  no
    point was there any suggestion that he feared Taliban interest  in  him
    or in his family.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that in any event  the
    judge did not make any findings as to why the appellant was at risk and
    the Convention ground was not  made  out.   The  claimed  fear  of  the
    Taliban was mere speculation on the part of the judge  given  that  the
    entire account was based on non-state actors.

 6. In respect of ground 2, in relation to the  medical  evidence,  it  was
    submitted that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  particularly
    in light of the fact that the medical evidence suggested that  much  of
    the problem was in relation to the uncertainty of the asylum claim.  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe pointed to the fact that the judge  recorded  at  [13]
    that the appellant's counselling had finished.  Although  he  had  been
    referred again it would suggest the current situation was not critical.
     Although the judge  referred  to  a  diagnosis  of  Derealisation,  in
    relation to the appellant recalling the past memories and trauma, there
    was still a good prognosis if his status was  resolved.   Therefore  it
    was submitted that  the  judge's  findings  were  inadequate.   It  was
    further submitted that the judge also failed to consider, as set out in
    the refusal letter, what other factors were relevant to the appellant's
    ability to reintegrate on return,  including  possible  employment  and
    accommodation and assistance  he  might  get  from  the  respondent  on
    returning.

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge did not  engage  with  how
    the medical evidence affected the appellant's ability or  otherwise  to
    engage with support services.  What the  judge  did  was  look  at  the
    medical evidence without looking at what was available  on  return  and
    what the appellant would not be able to do.  The judge  simply  stopped
    at his findings at [33].  It was Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission  that
    the judge did not adequately address the humanitarian protection  issue
    and Article 15(c) due to the error in relation to  the  asylum  grounds
    and no assessment was made under Article 3.

 8. Although it was submitted in the grounds that there was no challenge to
    the judge's findings on Article 3 she submitted it was all bound up  in
    the judge's findings on asylum.  If the Upper Tribunal found that there
    was no Convention reason there would have to be  a  further  assessment
    including on relocation and whether there was a breach of Article 2  or
    3.

 9. Looking at AS (Safety of Kabul) [2018] the Upper Tribunal at paragraphs
    180, 181, 183 and paragraph 184 confirmed there was no  risk  from  the
    Taliban and at paragraph 187 no risk in  terms  of  westernisation  and
    paragraph 194 addresses safety in Kabul and that a support  network  is
    not necessarily required.

10. Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed to the raft of information that  was  taken
    into consideration by the Upper Tribunal in AS.  It  was  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe's submission that although the  judge  took  into  account  the
    expert report before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this  appeared  to  be
    predicated on less up-to-date information than was  considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in AS Afghanistan.  For example, at paragraph 23 of  the
    report the expert is dealing with 2014 evidence.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    referred me to the annex in AS which set out the  significantly  larger
    body of expert evidence relating right up to  the  end  of  2017.   She
    relied on what was said in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 94  at  paragraphs
    47, 50 and 67 that there needs to be very strong grounds for  departing
    from country guidance and that one expert report based  on  out-of-date
    evidence did not amount to such grounds.  In  respect  of  the  medical
    evidence Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that it did not address the fact
    that there is treatment available which was addressed at paragraphs  58
    and 59 of the refusal letter.

11. Ms Akinbolu submitted that it was incorrect to say that  there  was  no
    reason for finding a Convention reason whereas it was because he  would
    be perceived as a westerner and would be a target and the judge  relied
    on the report from the expert Mr Zadeh and found that  this  particular
    appellant who had lived in the UK since 2009 would be a target  in  his
    home area and that was sustainable on the evidence.  In respect  of  AS
    Afghanistan Ms Akinbolu submitted that the AS Afghanistan  concentrated
    on Kabul whereas the Tribunal was concentrating on the home area.

12. Ms Akinbolu submitted that Judge Anthony  specifically  had  an  expert
    report before her exclusively on this issue and relied on paragraphs 17
    to 19 of that report and following (at  page  55  and  onwards  of  the
    appellant's bundle).  However she was unable to point me to any  cogent
    evidence that the expert identified which was such could  overcome  the
    finding of the lack of such evidence in AS.  Ms Akinbolu submitted that
    the judge found that the appellant specifically returning to  Nangarhar
    with no family was the cogent evidence and he  would  be  perceived  as
    westernised and this would cause him harm  personally  whereas  AS  was
    looking at the more generalised position and  she  submitted  this  was
    sufficient to depart from the country guidance.

13. In respect of relocation AS Afghanistan, although the  starting  point,
    relates to a normal healthy single male whereas the  judge  dealt  with
    relocation for  someone  like  the  appellant  who  had  mental  health
    difficulties.  She submitted that Ms Willocks-Briscoe was taking a very
    narrow version of the medical evidence.  This is an  appellant  with  a
    major  depressive  disorder,  night  terrors   and   other   associated
    difficulties.  Although he has  improved  he  still  suffers  from  the
    condition and it was in this context the judge made her findings.

14. In reply it was submitted that the judge had not  made  clear  on  what
    basis she could depart from  AS  Afghanistan  and  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    reasserted that part of  the  expert  report  was  based  on  the  2014
    argument.  Although Ms Akinbolu had referred to paragraphs 20 to 22  of
    the expert report which relied on an August 2017 document this was just
    one document and certainly not the cogent evidence which the  panel  in
    AS found to be lacking and this is in  the  context  of  a  panel  that
    considered extensive evidence.  What the expert report does confirm  is
    the position in AS was insufficient evidence to show the  risk  due  to
    westernisation and Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that in any event  the
    report does not appear to address the country guidance and in light  of
    what was said in SG departure was not properly warranted.

15. In respect of reintegration which was dealt with by the  judge  in  the
    context of the asylum claim, leaving aside Article 3 issues, whether or
    not relocation to Kabul or somewhere else was reasonable, the judge did
    not take into account the factors and did  not  give  adequate  reasons
    that the appellant is not currently receiving counselling and  even  if
    the expert was of the view that there was no family it does not address
    the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  that  there  are  medical  facilities
    available.

16. Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that  if  I  was  with  her  then  further
    findings were needed on the risk  on  return.   Ms  Akinbolu  submitted
    there was further UNHCR evidence which would need to be considered.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17. The judge's reasoning in relation to the Refugee Convention  reason  is
    wholly inadequate.  It is entirely unclear  on  what  basis  the  judge
    finds that the appellant is at real risk of persecution given that  the
    appellant had not previously  raised  a  fear  of  persecution  by  the
    Taliban.  As indicated the appellant's prior fear had  always  been  on
    the basis of an alleged blood feud which was a claimed localised  issue
    and in any event had not been accepted by the previous  Tribunal.   The
    judge failed to give any adequate reasons for finding imputed political
    opinion as a Convention reason

18. That error was compounded by the fact  that  the  judge  comes  to  the
    erroneous  conclusion  that  the  appellant  would  be   perceived   as
    westernised in his home area  of  Nangarhar  which  would  make  him  a
    target.  That appeared to be based on  what  was  said  in  the  expert
    report which considers westernisation.  However that is to  ignore  the
    extensive  consideration  undertaken  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   AS
    Afghanistan which found that a person  on  return  to  Kabul,  or  more
    widely  to  Afghanistan,  would  not  be  at  risk  on  the  basis   of
    westernisation on the lack of any  cogent  or  consistent  evidence  of
    incidents of such harm on which it could be concluded there was a  real
    risk to a person who had spent time in the west to be targeted for that
    reason.

19. The Tribunal considered the evidence at paragraphs 90 to 94 and reached
    the  finding  at  paragraph  187  having  considered  the  evidence  of
    targeting due to westernisation as follows:

         "187.    We do not find a person on return to Kabul, or more widely
             to  Afghanistan,   to   be   at   risk   on   the   basis   of
             'Westernisation'.  There is simply a lack  of  any  cogent  or
             consistent evidence of incidents of  such  harm  on  which  it
             could be concluded that there was a real risk to a person  who
             has spent time in the west being  targeted  for  that  reason,
             either because of appearance, perceived or actual attitudes of
             such a person.  At most, there is some evidence of a  possible
             adverse social impact or suspicion affecting social and family
             interactions, and evidence from a very small  number  of  fear
             based on 'Westernisation',  but  we  find  that  the  evidence
             before us falls far short of establishing an objective fear of
             persecution on this basis for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
             Convention."

20. There is nothing in the expert report which was before the judge  which
    Ms Akinbolu could point to which amounts to strong  grounds  to  depart
    from  those  findings.   Indeed  the  judge,  although  she  cited   AS
    Afghanistan, did not properly  direct  her  mind  to  the  findings  in
    relation to westernisation.  Although the headnote of  AS  Afghanistan,
    at (ii) and (iii), was cited by Judge Anthony and confirms that  regard
    has to be had to  the  circumstances  of  a  particular  individual  in
    relation to internal relocation, what  the  judge  did  not  take  into
    account was that the particular circumstances of westernisation was not
    a factor which could establish an objective fear  of  persecution,  and
    therefore internal relocation was not an issue.

21. The judge correctly directs herself that the findings of Judge Eldridge
    are a starting point (Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT  00702).   Judge  Anthony
    noted that Judge Eldridge found the appellant not credible  because  of
    the large number of inconsistencies  in  his  evidence.   Although  the
    judge found that there was  'some  support'  within  the  psychological
    medico-legal report for the claim  that  the  appellant's  difficulties
    recalling past traumatic events affected his ability to  give  a  clear
    and consistent account  of  his  asylum  claim,  she  made  no  further
    findings that might displace Judge Eldridge's findings on  asylum.   On
    the basis of Judge Anthony's findings of fact, although the finding  in
    respect of the convention ground and westernisation is  in  error,  the
    remaining findings, viewed holistically, amount to  a  confirmation  of
    Judge Eldridge's rejection  of  the  appellant's  'blood  feud'  asylum
    claim.

22. Judge Anthony went on to note that Judge Eldridge also found that  even
    if the blood feud did happen this was a localised  dispute.   This  was
    accepted  by  the  appellant's  representative  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I note that although the grounds of appeal  to  the  first
    tier Tribunal pleaded asylum, the appellant's skeleton argument  relied
    only on the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  and
    Humanitarian Protection (the Human Rights Convention).

23. Although it is difficult to see how an asylum claim could prosper given
    the findings of fact of both Judge Eldridge  and  Judge  Anthony,  what
    Judge Anthony failed to do was to make any further findings in relation
    to humanitarian protection and Article 15(c) and Articles 2, 3 or 8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  This was accepted by Ms Willocks-Briscoe.

24. The First-tier Tribunal  also  failed  to  make  adequate  findings  in
    relation  to  the  impact  of  the  appellant's  mental  health  issues
    including the availability or otherwise of support services  on  return
    to Afghanistan.



Notice of Decision on Error of Law

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set  aside.    I  preserve  Judge
Anthony's findings of fact at [13], [14], [16], [25],  [26].   The  decision
on appeal will be remade by a single judge or  deputy  judge  of  the  Upper
Tribunal.



Directions

      a) The parties confirmed that no further oral evidence is required and
         is relisted  for  submissions  on  remaking  on  Human  Rights  and
         Humanitarian Protection.  The appellant is  to  file  and  serve  a
         consolidated bundle of evidence so that it  is  received  no  later
         than 29 January 2019. The bundle is to separately tabulate: (i) the
         evidence relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal; and, (ii)  any
         additional evidence that it is now sought to rely upon  before  the
         Upper Tribunal; (iii) written submissions on remaking the  decision
         in respect of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
         and Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

      b) The Secretary of State is to file and serve, by  no  later  than  5
         February 2019, any evidence  relied  upon  that  is  not  contained
         within the bundle relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal.

Any failure to comply  with  these  directions  may  lead  the  Tribunal  to
exercise its powers to decide the appeal without a further oral hearing,  or
to conclude that the defaulting party has no relevant information,  evidence
or submissions to provide.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

