
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13006/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 5, 2019                          |On 22 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Fawad Behboudi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  January  28,  2016  and
    claimed asylum the following day.  The respondent refused his claim  on
    November 24, 2017 under paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395.

 2. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  December  8,  2017  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   I
    note that on page 9  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  the  appellant  made
    reference to Article 8 ECHR but the detailed grounds of appeal attached
    to those grounds did not make any reference to either family or private
    life.

 3. His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birrell on July
    18, 2018 and in a decision promulgated  on  July  31,  2018  the  judge
    dismissed a claim for protection and dismissed his human rights claims.



 4. The appellant appealed that decision and whilst  permission  to  appeal
    was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Froom,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds granted permission on November 20,  2018,  finding
    that it was arguable the Judge should have considered  the  appellant's
    Article 8 family life claim in light of the fact there was DNA evidence
    that he had family in this country.  Permission to appeal  was  refused
    on all other grounds.  The respondent  filed  a  Rule  24  response  on
    December 5, 2018 in which he opposed the application and submitted that
    it was far from clear that the appellant had actually advanced a family
    life claim at all.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.

    The Hearing

 6. At the hearing the appellant appeared in person.   I  raised  with  him
    whether he was happy to conduct  the  hearing  in  English  as  he  had
    previously used an interpreter.   Having  discussed  matters  with  the
    appellant in English over a  few  minutes  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    hearing could properly proceed without an interpreter.

 7. I thereafter outlined to both the appellant and  Mr  McVeety  what  was
    recorded in the Judge's Record of Proceedings.  In particular, I  noted
    that there were no submissions made on family  life  grounds  and  that
    there was no evidence that this issue was pursued in oral  evidence  by
    any of the witnesses.  I also looked at the  witness  statements  which
    were contained on the file and these were also silent as to  the  issue
    of family life.

 8. A DNA report had been obtained but this in part was to  demonstrate  he
    was related to his sister, an Afghan national, who was already in  this
    country.

 9. The appellant was represented by experienced Counsel  at  the  original
    hearing and the Judge's decision made no reference to  any  submissions
    on family life from him.  As I stated above, the Record of  Proceedings
    also recorded no submissions on family life.

10. Mr McVeety submitted that in the absence of such argument there was  no
    error in law.  The Judge could not be criticised for not dealing with a
    family life claim where no such argument was  advanced  either  by  the
    appellant or his counsel.   It  goes  without  saying  that  not  every
    protection claim involves an Article 8 claim.

11. In any event, any Article 8 claim, now advanced, was based on an  adult
    relationship with siblings and  considerably  more  evidence  than  was
    currently on the file would have been required if such  an  application
    would have had any chance of success.

12. Looking at the  Record  of  Proceedings,  statements  and  the  Judge's
    decision I am satisfied that the Judge was never asked to deliberate on
    an Article 8 family life claim and accordingly she cannot be criticised
    for not doing so.  This was not a  "Robinson"  obvious  argument.   The
    issue had never been  raised  in  any  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  or
    statements and I therefore find there is no error in law.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeal and uphold the decision.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

