
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13663/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2019                     |On 28 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   M R o a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  who  appealed  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent refusing him international protection. His appeal was  heard
    by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 January 2019, dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien on 11 February 2019. His reasons for so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time, against a
         Decision of First tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro who, in a Decision
         and Reasons promulgated on 10 January 2019, dismissed the
         Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse her
         asylum claim.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in the following ways.
         The Judge failed to consider the country expert evidence and/or
         medical expert evidence and/or scarring evidence before rejecting
         the Appellant's credibility. The Judge failed to exercise adequate
         caution before rejecting the Appellant's account on the basis of
         inherent probability. If the Judge rejected the Appellant's account
         of participating in protests in the KRI, that was an error of law.

         3.   The Judge's approach to the expert evidence is arguably
         erroneous. At paragraph 59, it appears as if the Judge has placed
         no weight on Dr George' report because of adverse credibility
         findings against the Appellant rather than weighing up all of the
         relevant evidence before making findings on credibility
         (AM(Afghanistan) [20171 EWCA Civ 1123). The Judge appears to have
         mistaken the evidence before the medico-legal experts and has not
         given any basis for the proposition that only psychiatrists can
         diagnose PTSD.

         4.   All grounds are arguable."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. The Appellant's claim focused on his participation in  protest  against
    the KRI authorities as a child and feared  the  KRI  authorities  as  a
    result. Secondly that he had been  involved  in  a  culturally  illicit
    relationship with a girl called Sara (of  his  own  age)  who  was  the
    daughter of a Peshmerga commander. They had been found out; he had been
    beaten up by the family and almost killed; but he had escaped them  and
    fled the country.

 5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal  assert  that  "significantly"
    the Judge rejected the Respondent's case for disbelieving the Appellant
    at paragraph 47 of her decision. There she states, "I do not find  that
    his credibility is undermined by any of the inconsistencies  raised  by
    the Respondent". Nonetheless the Judge rejected the Appellant's account
    and credibility, and dismissed the appeal.

 6. The grounds go on to assert that the Judge firstly erred in failing  to
    consider the country expert evidence before rejecting  the  Appellant's
    credibility and account, thereby  erring  as  per  the  authorities  of
    Mibanga  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  6367  as  recently   affirmed   in   AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.  At paragraphs 54 to  57  of
    her decision the Judge rejects the Appellant's claim as a "fabrication"
    but only then goes on to consider the  expert  report  of  Doctor  Alan
    George. The Judge erred in her decision to attach  no  weight  to  this
    report having firstly found that the Appellant had not  been  truthful.
    In short, her conclusion on  credibility  was  made  prior  to  a  full
    consideration of the totality of the evidence. Within  Doctor  George's
    report was  an  assessment  of  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account. This was positive, plainly relevant and not taken into account
    by the Judge.

 7. Secondly, the Judge erred in relation  to  medical  evidence  that  the
    Appellant suffers from post-traumatic stress  disorder  (PTSD)  and  by
    failing to consider this  evidence  before  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    credibility and account she has once more erred in similar terms to her
    approach to the evidence of Doctor George.  The  Judge  also  erred  in
    rejecting the medical evidence on the basis that there was no reference
    to  the  Appellant's  medical  records.  She  makes  reference  to  BMA
    guidelines requiring that the expert  witness  to  have  sight  of  the
    Appellant's medical records and that this was not the position in  this
    appeal. Ms Kiai submitted that not only were the guidelines  silent  on
    such a requirement, but by referring to them, and not raising the issue
    at the hearing, procedural  unfairness  had  prevailed.  Moreover,  the
    Judge was simply wrong in what she said  about  what  the  experts  had
    seen. For example, within the report of Alice Rogers is  evidence  that
    she assessed the Appellant's medical records which were, in any  event,
    part of the Appellant's  bundle.  The  Judge  similarly  erred  in  her
    approach to the medical evidence by finding that neither of the medical
    experts are psychiatrists and  therefore  do  not  have  the  training,
    qualifications and experience qualifying them to make  a  diagnosis  of
    post-traumatic stress against recognised diagnostic criteria. This,  it
    is  asserted,  is  simply  wrong  with   reference   to   the   British
    Psychological Society Professional Practice Board "diagnosis  -  policy
    and guidance".

 8. Thirdly, the Judge again erred in  failing  to  consider  the  scarring
    evidence before rejecting the Appellant's credibility and account.

 9.  Fourthly,  the  Judge  failed  to  exercise  adequate  caution  before
    rejecting on the grounds  of  inherent  probability.  For  example,  at
    paragraph 54 of the Judge's decision she  gave  her  first  reason  for
    rejecting the account stating: "it is not credible in  a  society  like
    Kurdish Iraq where honour crimes still exist that the Appellant and his
    girlfriend, Sara, who would know the consequences that would  arise  if
    they were found to be engaging in  a  sexual  relationship  outside  of
    marriage, would blindly start a relationship". It is asserted that this
    amounts to an unqualified finding that no teenagers in  the  KRI  would
    ever have a sexual relationship outside of marriage, and that it is not
    credible or plausible that any teenager would ever do  so.  This  is  a
    conclusion that was not rationally open to  the  Judge.  Moreover,  the
    Judge has failed to engage with the fact that  expectations  about  the
    Appellant's decision making must be set into context and the fact  that
    he was a child/teenager at material times. The Judge has failed also to
    consider the evidence regarding the Appellant's ability to "reason non-
    verbally" and that he is in the "low-average range" whilst having other
    identified cognitive impairments. These conclusions and others  of  the
    Judge fail to take into account  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr  George.
    Finally, the Judge erred in law in rejecting the Appellant's account of
    his participation in protests in the KRI by again failing to take  into
    account the content of Dr  George's  report,  irrationally  relying  on
    country evidence about the situation in the KRI  in  2016  and  in  her
    approach to credibility on this particular issue.

10. Mr Whitwell referred me to several of the Judge's self-directions.  For
    example, at paragraph 38 where she indicates that she has looked at the
    evidence in the round and at paragraph 39 where she states that she has
    evaluated it against the country background.  Similarly,  she  reminded
    herself at paragraph 44 of AM. The challenges to the  medical  evidence
    have some substance in relation to the issue of the Appellant's medical
    record. But even  if  the  Judge  has  erred  in  this  respect  it  is
    nonetheless not material.

11. I indicated at the hearing my rejection of Mr  Whitwell's  submissions.
    Whilst  the  Judge  may  have  made  appropriate  self-directions,   as
    indicated above, she has erred in her approach for all the reasons  set
    out in the Appellant's grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  Those
    errors  are  material.  Her  credibility  findings  cannot  stand   and
    accordingly the only way forward is for this  appeal  to  be  heard  de
    novo. Fresh findings of fact have to be made and it is  accordingly  my
    intention to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge O'Garro.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 25 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

