
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13039/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th December 2018                  |On 16th January 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     t n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss S Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Marsh &
Partners
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Shaw  who
    dismissed his appeal following a hearing at Taylor House on  25th  July
    2018.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He claimed asylum on the basis
    that he would be at risk on return as a consequence of his  involvement
    with the LTTE and on account of having been detained in Sri Lanka for a
    period of four years and ill-treated there.

 3. The judge made positive findings of fact, accepting that he  had  shown
    to the required  standard  of  proof  that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    detention and worse if returned to Sri  Lanka.   Nevertheless,  in  the
    Notice of Decision the judge recorded that the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision and permission was  granted
    by Judge Lambert on 13th September 2018.

 5. Mr Tarlow, for the Secretary of State, said that it  was  obvious  from
    the findings of fact made by the judge that he intended  to  allow  the
    appeal.  He confirmed that none of those findings are challenged by the
    Secretary of State. He agreed that the judge had erred  in  law  and  a
    fresh decision allowing the appeal should be made.

Notice of Decision

 6. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows:-

    The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 4 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


