
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13424/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                    D R T
                         (anonymity direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India  who  made  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and she appealed and following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 7 February 2018,  Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal Maka dismissed  her  appeal.  In  so  doing  he
    found, that her evidence was not credible.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    but a renewed application was subsequently granted, in part,  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb. His reasons for so doing were: -


         "1. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maka) dismissed the appellant's
         appeal against a decision to refuse her international protection,
         humanitarian protection and human rights claims.
         2. Grounds 2 and 3 are arguable. The judge has arguably provided
         irrational reasons for rejecting the appellant's account and failed
         properly to consider the supporting expert and medical evidence.
         3. Grounds 4 and 5 are not arguable. The judge did not wrongly
         apply Deveseelan and the finding that the appellant's removal would
         not breach Art 8 was not arguably irrational.
         4. Ground 1 is also arguable and would be material if the other
         Grounds are made out.
         5. For these reasons, permission is granted on Grounds 1, 2 and 3
         but refused on Grounds 4 and 5."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Youssefian put before me the  authority  of  Safi  and
    others (permission  to  appeal  decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  00388  (IAC).
    However, the submissions he wished to make, relying on  that  authority
    and in relation to all grounds seeking permission to appeal bar grounds
    two and three, became redundant for the reasons given below.

 5. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 February 2008 with  entry
    clearance as a student. She made  further  applications  for  leave  to
    remain which were refused. Ultimately,  she  made  an  application  for
    asylum on the basis that she feared if returned to India she  would  be
    forced to marry and if she were to  object  she  would  be  subject  to
    serious ill treatment and harm.

 6. Ground two asserts that the Judge made a series  of  perverse  findings
    against the Appellant  without  taking  into  account  the  context  of
    background information relating to her country of  origin.  The  ground
    goes on to provide seven such examples and Mr Youssefian submitted that
    they were made without any,  or  any  proper,  reference  to  evidence.
    Further  that  they  are  speculative  in  nature  and   some   "wholly
    irrational". The finding that an educated  man  would  not  be  violent
    towards his daughter, for example, "is  plainly  a  non-  sequitur  and
    demonstrably wrong". Further the Judge  has  failed  to  refer  to  any
    evidence  supporting  his  conclusion  that  those  who  suffer  brutal
    mistreatment would not or could not go on to  complete  their  studies.
    The Judge has failed to refer to the Appellant's considerably  detailed
    witness statement which addressed many of these findings. For  example,
    at paragraph 51 of the Appellant's witness statement  she  stated  that
    "studying and going to school was my only escape from my miserable  and
    torturous life". These findings played a material part in  the  Judge's
    conclusion to ultimately dismiss the appeal. Such findings are vitiated
    in all material respects in light of the above.

 7. The third  ground  relates  to  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  expert
    evidence. The Appellant relied  on  both  medical  and  country  expert
    evidence in support of her claim. It is submitted that  the  Judge  has
    engaged  in  a  "wholesale  dismissal"  of   all   experts   based   on
    misunderstandings, assumptions and mistakes. For example, at  paragraph
    54 of his decision the Judge concludes that  he  does  not  accept  the
    report of Dr Sinha for a number of reasons. The Judge goes on  to  find
    that the expert was not aware of the Appellant's immigration status and
    that the expert had referenced an injury involving a laceration to  the
    Appellant's hand which she had not mentioned to the experts. The  Judge
    has failed to have regard to the fact  that  the  expert  set  out  the
    Appellant's  immigration  history  within  the  report  and  that   the
    Appellant's own witness  statement  detailed  that  history  which  was
    provided to him. Further the Judge failed to consider paragraph  59  of
    the Appellant's witness statement in respect of the injury to her  hand
    which expressly states, "I did not mention this incident to the  Doctor
    as I did not remember this at the time and the physical examination did
    not trigger the memory, as fortunately I have no scar as a result". The
    ground is then further particularised.

 8. In response to grounds two and three  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the
    Judge had applied the correct burden and standard of  proof  throughout
    and had given reasons for coming to the credibility  findings  that  he
    did. Read as a whole  the  decision  is  sustainable  and  contains  no
    material error of law as asserted.

 9. I disagree with Mr Lindsay's conclusion. This is a decision that cannot
    stand.

10. I find the Judge has materially erred for all the reasons  put  forward
    in grounds two and three. The Judge's approach to both credibility  and
    expert  evidence  contains  perversity  and  irrationality  within  the
    findings and takes account of irrelevant matters. His approach  to  the
    expert evidence is flawed for the reasons asserted. It is an  error  to
    give no weight to a report of an expert which has clearly indicated the
    expertise of the report writer and the sources of information.

11. Both parties accepted given my findings in relation to grounds two  and
    three that the appeal should be reheard de novo.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Maka.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                 Date:   17   December
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
