
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/13659/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 24th July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Azil (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buckley, promulgated on 6th March 2019, following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 28th February 2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born  on  4th  July
    1994.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent refusing  his
    claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection pursuant to  paragraph
    329C of HC 395, in the decision that was dated 23rd November 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his father was working for
    the Iraqi military and was a member of the Ba'ath  Party.   He  himself
    was a university graduate in environmental sciences.  He began  working
    as a volunteer for a non-governmental organisation in 2016.  One of the
    organisations he worked for  was  Oxfam.   He  continued  working  with
    Shabang to help poor people who needed food and clothes.  In  2017  the
    Appellant went to help with the  emergency  response  team.   In  March
    2018, however, a member of the Haashd Al Shaabi ("HAS") came  to  visit
    the Appellant with four bodyguards.  They asked the Appellant  to  work
    for them.  The Appellant said he would get back to them.  He  told  his
    manager.  The manager could not  do  anything  to  help  the  Appellant
    because the HAS was part of the PMF, which had  powerful  influence  in
    the area.  The PMF was the Popular Mobilisation Forces.  The  Appellant
    relocated to another area.  He took his father's military book and  the
    Garmain Shabang certificate when he left  the  area  of  Tuz  Khurmatu,
    where he was based.  The personal documents, including books, were  put
    in a bag which the  Appellant  left  at  his  friend  Howre'y's  house.
    Howre'y subsequently posted  the  documents  to  the  Appellant  before
    arriving in the UK.

 4. The Appellant now claims  that  he  could  not  return  because  of  an
    inability to obtain his CSID card, given that his home is  a  contested
    area and he will not be able to approach the civil registry  office  in
    Tuz Khurmatu.  He is likely to face destitution.  This  is  because  of
    the lack of a CSID card.  He will not secure employment.  He  will  not
    be able to return directly to the IKR.  In fact, it is not likely  that
    he would be able to board a flight from Baghdad to the IKR.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  He accepted that there was
    no challenge to the evidence that the Appellant was a voluntary  worker
    when  he  was  in  Iraq  (see  paragraph  27).   However,  it  was  the
    Appellant's case that there was an arrest warrant out in his  name  and
    he could not return.  The judge observed that, "the evidence  is  clear
    that the Appellant never had sight of this, and seeks to rely  on  what
    his mother told him over the phone."  The judge went on to explain that
    "I do not have statement from the Appellant's mother, or a copy of  the
    arrest warrant."  He went onto say that, "... I  am  being  invited  to
    accept the Appellant's own narrative for this,  with  no  corroborating
    evidence" (paragraph 30).  Second, the judge was not satisfied that the
    Appellant would not be able to procure his CSID card which he had  left
    at his friend's home in Sulaymaniyah.  This is because he had,  by  his
    own admission, left documents in a bag with his  friend,  and  many  of
    these had then been sent over to him in the United Kingdom.  That being
    so,  the  strictures  of  the  latest  country  guidance  cases,  which
    culminated in the case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq
    CG UKUT 00212 were not violated because the appellant  would  have  the
    means of getting a duplicate CSID card on the basis of the  information
    that was already known to be in existence.

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred materially in his
    findings because he had said (at paragraph 30) that "I am being invited
    to accept the Appellant's own narrative for this, with no corroborating
    evidence", when referring  to  the  existence  of  an  arrest  warrant,
    because it is well-known  in  asylum  law  that  corroboration  of  the
    evidence is not a requirement.  The  grounds  also  asserted  that  the
    judge was wrong in coming to the conclusion that the Appellant would be
    able to relocate internally because he would  have  access  to  a  CSID
    card.  This was  wrong  because  "the  appellant  clarified  in  cross-
    examination that his CSID card was not in the bag  of  safe  documents"
    (see paragraph 11 of Ground 3).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 9th April 2019.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, on 11th June 2019, Mr  Azil,  emphasised  the
    grounds of application and stated that these amounted to three separate
    claims of the judge having erred in law.  First, there  was  the  issue
    about the judge requiring corroboration of the existence of the  arrest
    warrant.  Second, there was  a  question  about  the  Appellant  having
    access to his CSID card when in cross-examination he had made it  quite
    clear that he did not have a CSID card and would not be in  a  position
    to return on  account  of  his  absence.   Third,  the  latest  country
    guidance case of AAH (Iraq)  makes  it  clear  (at  paragraph  26)  the
    process that must be followed before a CSID card  can  be  obtained  by
    proxy.  One such requirement is the production of the appellant's Iraqi
    passport which he does not hold and proof of the status in the  country
    where he is applying, namely the UK.  (See paragraph 15).

10. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that first, the judge  had  not  asked
    for corroboration at all.  What he had said was that in the absence  of
    there being no documentary evidence of the arrest warrant  before  him,
    he had no way of being able to ascertain  the  veracity  of  the  claim
    being made before him, in circumstances where he did  not  believe  the
    Appellant in any event.  Second, that it was  not  the  case  that  the
    Appellant did  not  have  his  CSID  card  because  during  his  asylum
    interview he had made it quite clear (see question 30) that he did have
    a CSID card in Iraq.  That meant that he would  now  be  able  to  have
    access to it.  Third, if this was the  case  then  there  would  be  no
    difficulty at all in the Appellant being able to acquire the  necessary
    documentation to enable him to travel in Iraq and the issue of a use of
    a proxy for the purpose of a CSID card did not arise.



No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

12. First, it is indeed not the case that the judge required  there  to  be
    corroboration of the existence  of  an  arrest  warrant.   It  was  the
    Appellant's claim that there was an arrest warrant in existence.   This
    had not been produced before the Tribunal.  All that was being said was
    that the Appellant's mother had sight of it.   However,  as  the  judge
    made it quite clear "I do not have a  statement  from  the  Appellant's
    mother".  The judge then, in that context, went on  to  say  that  "I'm
    being invited to accept the Appellant's own narrative for this".  It is
    not the case that required corroboration in order to be able to come to
    that conclusion.  This is because as the judge made it only too  plain,
    "as I have found the Appellant to be evasive, vague and inconsistent, I
    cannot accept on the evidence that such a warrant  existed"  (paragraph
    30).  All too often in appeals before the Upper Tribunal, the very fact
    that a judge below has made reference to 'uncorroborated'  evidence  is
    used as a  basis  to  appeal  that  decision.   The  use  of  the  word
    "corroboration" does not necessarily mean that the judge is seeking  to
    decide the matter before him only on the  basis  of  the  existence  of
    corroborative evidence or not.  This is a case in point.  The judge was
    simply making the observation that  there  was  no  arrest  warrant  in
    existence.  There was no statement from  the  mother.   All  there  was
    before him was the Appellant's  own  narrative.   That  narrative,  the
    judge had found to be "evasive, vague and inconsistent".   It  is  this
    that formed the basis of the judge's decision.  The judge was  entitled
    to make that decision.

13. Second, there is the issue of the Appellant having access to  his  CSID
    card.  Despite what has been stated (see paragraph 11 of  the  grounds)
    subsequently, when the Appellant was first questioned during his asylum
    interview, he made it quite clear that he did have  both  his  passport
    and his CSID card.  The question that was put to him (question 30)  was
    "what identity documents did you have in Iraq?"  The Appellant  replied
    "passport and Iraqi CSID card".  It is only subsequently  that  he  had
    then gone on to say that he had not used his own passport  but  used  a
    false passport in order to leave Iraq (question 34).

14. In any event, the judge was correct in  summarising  the  fact  on  the
    basis that

         "He reports that he took a bag of important documents - including a
         passport and his CSID card - to his friend's home in  Sulaymaniyah.
         The Appellant confirmed in oral evidence that it  did  contain  his
         CSID card, and that he maintains in contact with his friend, Horey,
         who has sent the Appellant documents since he arrived  in  the  UK"
         (paragraph 32).

15. It was in these circumstances, that the judge came  to  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant was not a person without the necessary documentation
    that would be required for him to be able to return to  Iraq.   Indeed,
    the judge observes that,

         "I also find that the Appellant has not been honest  regarding  the
         whereabouts of his CSID card.  The Appellant has confirmed in  oral
         evidence that the CSID was in the bag that he took to  his  friends
         and left there; however, he has not asked for this to be sent, only
         the certificate and the father's military book.  As  stated  above,
         it is inconsistent that the  Appellant  would  not  take  steps  to
         request that CSID card if sent to him also, to assist in returning"
         (see paragraph 42).

16. That is how the matter fell to be decided by the judge.  The  judge  so
    decided on the evidence that was before him.  It is simply not possible
    to see how the decision arrived at  was  not  in  compliance  with  the
    latest country guidance case.  The decision is entirely sustainable and
    there is no error of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve an  error  of  law.
The decision shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is refused.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

