
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/13029/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 September 2018                    | On 8 October 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Young, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 2 February 1959.  She is
    appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain
    promulgated on 20 June 2018 to dismiss her appeal against the decision
    of the respondent on 17 November 2016 to refuse her application for
    asylum.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that she is a lesbian and
    would be at risk on return to Uganda as a consequence.  The respondent
    did not accept that she was telling the truth about her sexuality.  Nor
    did Judge Hussain, who found the appellant's account to not be
    credible.  Judge Hussain described various aspects of the appellant's
    account as being inconsistent or implausible, and on that basis
    dismissed her appeal.

 3. The appellant submitted in support of her claim a report from a
    clinical psychologist, Sarah Kasule, and a psychiatrist, Dr Hajioff.
    This evidence was considered by the judge at paragraph 58 where the
    judge stated that he accepted the medical evidence that the appellant
    suffers from depression and posttraumatic stress disorder, but found
    that this did not meet the high threshold for an Article 3 or Article 8
    claim on the basis of her health.

 4. Seven grounds of appeal were advanced, but it is not necessary for me
    to consider these in detail as at the error of law hearing it was
    accepted by Mr Deller that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    should be set aside.

Analysis

 5. There was clear evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to indicate
    that the appellant had memory and concentration problems.  The
    psychologist, Dr Kasule, in a letter dated 31 October 2016, stated that
    the appellant has memory and concentration problems.  In his report
    dated 25 March 2018 Dr Hajioff, a consultant psychiatrist, stated that
    the appellant's concentration is impaired.  The judge himself refers to
    the appellant claiming to have memory lapses and concentration issues
    and her inability to give coherent answers to certain questions.  There
    are also references in the decision to the appellant not understanding
    questions and giving an incoherent answer.

 6. Despite the medical evidence before the Tribunal, the judge determined
    the issue of the credibility of the appellant's account without
    considering her mental health and concentration/memory difficulties.
    Both Mr Deller and Ms Young were of the view, which I accept, that the
    judge fell into error by failing to have regard to the medical issues
    when considering credibility and only addressing them as a separate
    matter in respect of whether they were of sufficient gravity to meet
    the threshold for Article 3 or Article 8 as a basis in their own right
    to resist removal from the UK.  The medical issues needed to be
    considered in the context of credibility and taken into account so that
    the overall assessment of credibility was made having regard to the
    mental health of the appellant.

 7. Having delivered my decision as to there being an error of law I
    invited the parties to comment on whether the appeal should be remade
    in this forum or remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Young
    strongly advocated for remittal on the basis that credibility would
    need to be considered afresh, that evidence may need to be taken from
    multiple witnesses, and that the appellant would feel more comfortable
    in the setting of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Deller did not give a
    strong view either way but indicated that given the level of fact-
    finding required the First-tier Tribunal may be a more appropriate
    forum.  I am satisfied, in light of extent of further fact finding that
    will be required, that this is a matter that should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision

      a) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error
         of law and is set aside.




      b) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be head afresh
         before a different judge






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 1 October 2018                |

