
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13299/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2018                         |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Brown.  Counsel instructed by Greater
Manchester
     Immigration Aid Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  SL is granted anonymity
      throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to
      the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is SL.   However
      for ease of reference, in the course of  this  determination  I  shall
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I shall  in  this
      determination, refer to SL as the  appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of
      State as the respondent.


   3. The respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge Austin promulgated on 7th August 2018, allowing the
      appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.


   4. The appellant is a Chinese national.  She claims to have entered the
      UK in 2007 and on 2nd June 2016, she claimed asylum.  The background
      to that claim is set out at paragraphs [29] to [39] of the decision of
      the FtT Judge.  The appellant was the subject of a referral to the
      National Referral Mechanism ("NRM") on 2nd June 2016. On 8th June
      2016, the Competent Authority reached a positive 'reasonable grounds'
      decision.  That is, the Competent Authority suspected, but could not
      prove, that the appellant may have been trafficked to the UK.
      Subsequently, on 1st February 2017, the Competent Authority reached a
      negative 'conclusive grounds' decision.  Having considered all of the
      material available, including the referral to the NRM, the information
      provided by the appellant at interview, and information from other
      sources, the Competent Authority concluded that the appellant is not a
      credible witness and no weight could be attached to her evidence.


   5. The Judge of the FtT declined to reach a decision as to whether the
      decision of the Competent Authority was irrational or perverse, as a
      preliminary issue.  At paragraph [13] of the decision, the Judge
      stated that in hearing the appeal, it was possible that the Judge
      would reach the same conclusion as the Competent Authority, or that he
      may reach a different view of the appellant, or decide that the
      decision of the Competent Authority had been irrational or perverse.


   6. The Judge's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at paragraphs
      [57] to [68] of the decision. Having heard the evidence, the FtT Judge
      found the appellant to be a credible witness, relying upon his own
      individual assessment of the appellant as a witness.  The Judge
      stated, at [61]:


         "I do not find that the decision of the Competent Authority was
         irrational but I do come to a different view on more extensive
         evidence available to me."


   7. The FtT Judge concluded, on the particular facts of the appeal, that
      the appellant is vulnerable to re-trafficking and that there is not a
      sufficiency of protection for her if returned to China.  The FtT Judge
      found that there is a real risk of the applicant being exploited in
      the same way that she had been previously.


The appeal before me


   8. The respondent advances two grounds of appeal, although they both
      relate to the approach adopted by the Judge in respect of the
      'conclusive grounds' decision of the Competent Authority.  The
      respondent claims that the FtT Judge made contradictory and irrational
      findings in respect of the decision of the Competent Authority.  The
      respondent refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MS
      (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art.4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT
      00226 (IAC) and claims that it is only where there is a finding that a
      'negative trafficking decision' is perverse, that a Tribunal is
      empowered to make its own decision of whether an appellant was a
      victim of trafficking.  Alternatively, a Tribunal is empowered to
      review a trafficking decision on the grounds that it has been reached
      in breach of the respondent's policy guidance.  Here, the respondent
      claims that the Judge did not find the decision of the Competent
      Authority to be irrational or reached in breach of the respondent's
      policy guidance, but nevertheless, went behind the decision of the
      Competent Authority, by finding the appellant to be a credible witness
      as to her experiences since she left China, working as a beautician
      and masseuse, leading to several years of being exploited and
      trafficked to France and onward to the UK as a sex worker.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Adio on 4th
      September 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not
      the decision of FtT Judge Austin involved the making of a material
      error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the
      decision.


  10. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I announced that in my
      judgement, the decision of the FtT is not infected by a material error
      of law and that I dismiss the appeal.  I said that I would give the
      reasons for my decision in writing.  This I now do.


Discussion


  11. Permission to appeal was granted on 4th September 2018.  The Upper
      Tribunal has since promulgated its decision in ES (s82 NIA 2002;
      negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC) and in my judgement that
      decision provides the answer the respondent's grounds of appeal.  The
      headnote to that decision states:


         1. Following the amendment to s 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
            and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), effective from 20 October
            2014, a previous decision made by the Competent Authority within
            the National Referral Mechanism (made on the balance of
            probabilities) is not of primary relevance to the determination
            of an asylum appeal, despite the decisions of the Court of
            Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 and SSHD
            v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.


         2. The correct approach to determining whether a person claiming to
            be a victim of trafficking is entitled to asylum is to consider
            all the evidence in the round as at the date of hearing,
            applying the lower standard of proof.


         3. Since 20 October 2014, there is also no right of appeal on the
            basis that a decision is not in accordance with the law and the
            grounds of appeal are limited to those set out in the amended s
            82 of the 2002 Act.


  12. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch drew a distinction between an appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse a protection claim under
      the new statutory framework, and an appeal against a decision to
      remove an individual from the United Kingdom, under the previous
      statutory regime setting out rights of appeal.  She noted in
      particular that under the statutory framework as it is now, the only
      issue before the FtT is whether the appellant qualifies for protection
      under the Refugee Convention. Therefore, when reaching a decision, the
      FtT Judge is obliged to look at the evidence in the round and, give it
      due weight before reaching a decision as to the credibility of an
      appellant's account.


  13. In ES, the Upper Tribunal also found that the fact that the Government
      decided to adopt a balance of probabilities as the appropriate
      standard of proof for a conclusive decision within the National
      Referral Mechanism, as opposed to the far lower standard of proof
      applicable in Refugee Convention decisions, indicates that the
      Government recognised that the two processes were to be distinguished
      from each other.   The Upper Tribunal concluded that the fact that the
      Competent Authority did not find, on a balance of probabilities, that
      the appellant was a victim of human trafficking does not prevent the
      Tribunal finding that she is entitled to asylum as a person who has
      been subject to human trafficking on the lower standard of proof and
      in the light of all relevant evidence.


  14. In my judgement, the decision of the Upper Tribunal in ES provides a
      complete answer to the grounds of appeal advanced by the respondent
      and, rightly in my judgment, there was no real attempt by Mr Tan to
      persuade me to the contrary.  In my judgment, the decision of the FtT
      Judge is not infected by an error of law.


  15. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


  16. The decision of the FtT Judge is not infected by the making of an
      error of law and the respondent's appeal against the decision of FtT
      Judge Austin is dismissed.


  17. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date          30th October 2018

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


 TO THE RESPONDENT


 FEE AWARD


      I have dismissed the respondent's appeal.  As set out by the FtT Judge
      previously, no fee was paid and there can be no fee award.




     Signed                                  Date              30th October
2018


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







