
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13961/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2018                               |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    A M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, instructed by Howells, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AMS, is a citizen of Somalia who was born in 1984.  By a
    decision promulgated on 19 January 2018, I found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons for reaching that decision were as follows:
         "1.  The appellant, AMS, is a citizen of Somalia who  was  born  in
         1984.  He appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
         to refuse his application for asylum.   The  decision  is  dated  2
         December 2016.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shergill)  in  a
         decision promulgated on 7 July 2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.
         2.   I find that Judge Shergill fell into legal error and that  his
         decision should  be  set  aside.   My  reasons  for  reaching  that
         decision are as follows.
         3.   First, the judge  considered  in  the  course  of  the  appeal
         evidence from the appellant's partner  (P).   P  has  been  granted
         status as a refugee in the United Kingdom until 23  November  2020.
         It is apparent that Judge Shergill took a  very  dim  view  of  the
         evidence he received, both written and oral, from P  and  concluded
         that she was an untruthful witness.  He found  that  the  appellant
         and P had colluded in giving untruthful evidence  to  the  Tribunal
         and the Secretary of State.  However, Judge Shergill  went  further
         than that.  He considered that P had been granted refugee status by
         the respondent (her application for asylum had been granted;  there
         had  been  no  appeal)  on  a  false  premise.   He  considered  it
         appropriate to notify  the  Secretary  of  State  that  she  should
         reconsider the grant of refugee status of P.
         4.   I find that Judge Shergill was fully entitled to make findings
         in respect of the evidence of a witness who  gave  evidence  before
         him.  He was also entitled to find  that  P  had  given  untruthful
         evidence to the Tribunal.  He was entitled to find that the account
         which  P  may  have  given  to  the   Secretary   of   State   was,
         notwithstanding the Secretary of State's apparent acceptance of the
         account, untrue.  It was, however, no part of Judge Shergill's role
         as a First-tier Tribunal Judge to  recommend  that  the  respondent
         look again at P's grant of status  with  a  view  to  revoking  it.
         However, that recommendation did not in itself constitute an  error
         of law.  Had  the  judge  left  matters  at  that  point  and  then
         proceeded to assess the Article 8 ECHR appeal on the basis of facts
         as at the hearing (including the fact that P had been  granted  and
         continued to enjoy refugee status) then  the  judge  may  not  have
         fallen into error.  However, Judge Shergill did not  leave  matters
         at that point.  At [79], in his analysis of Article 8 ECHR and,  in
         particular, the application of Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  (as
         amended) he recorded the fact that the appellant has a genuine  and
         subsisting relationship in the United Kingdom with P (I note  that,
         as at the date of the Upper Tribunal  hearing,  the  parties  agree
         that she is pregnant with the  appellant's  child)  and  considered
         (albeit in general terms) the possibility of the family  separating
         and the appellant applying to rejoin P in  the  United  Kingdom  at
         some future date.  It seems to have occurred to Judge Shergill that
         such a scenario  was  potentially  unsatisfactory.   He  sought  to
         resolve any difficulties as follows:
         However, given my concerns about [P's] credibility it may  well  be
         that her status is in question and/or in the alternative given  her
         re-establishment connections with her family members and  with  the
         appellant now being the head of the household her risk factors have
         diminished.  There are therefore material differences in  the  case
         put forward now to what the position was when she first arrived  in
         the United Kingdom.  Therefore, I see no reason why  the  appellant
         could not move back to Somalia and continue his family life with  P
         there.
         5.   As at the date of the hearing before Judge Shergill, P  was  a
         refugee.  There is nothing to suggest that the Secretary  of  State
         had sought to reconsider her status.  It was not open to the  judge
         to find that it was at that time reasonable  for  P  to  return  to
         Somalia.  If the family returning together to  Somalia  is  removed
         from the analysis as a possible and  acceptable  scenario,  one  is
         left with the fact that the removal of the appellant would separate
         the family.  Whilst the  judge  has  acknowledged  that  separation
         might occur, he has not attempted to assess the proportionality  of
         such a separation.  His failure to do so constitutes  an  error  of
         law.
         6.   Secondly, it appears that the judge was given a  copy  of  the
         "asylum grant minutes" which  recorded  the  reasons  of  the  Home
         Office for granting asylum to P [10].  Mr McVeety, who appeared for
         the  respondent,  helpfully  extracted  these  minutes   from   his
         electronic file.  The minutes make it clear that the grant to P had
         been, at least in part, on the basis of the danger she  faced  from
         Al-Shabab and her husband.  The judge appears to believe  that  the
         sponsor had sought and been granted refugee status  on  account  of
         the fact that she would be  a  lone  woman  returning  to  Somalia.
         Whilst that may have been a factor in her claim, the judge also had
         before him evidence that showed that the respondent  accepted  that
         she was a danger from other, specific  agents  within  Somalia.   I
         find that the judge was entitled to make findings in respect of P's
         credibility but those findings need to be read in the light of  the
         fact that she had been granted refugee status in the United Kingdom
         for a number of reasons and not simply  on  account  that  she  may
         return to Somalia as a lone woman.  At [77], the  judge  considered
         that  the  untruthful  evidence  which   he   had   received   went
         "significantly towards the weight attached to the  public  interest
         against  the  appellant  [in  the  Article  8  assessment]".   That
         observation may stand but only subject to the qualification which I
         have detailed above.
         7.   In my opinion, the judge's analysis is generally sound.  There
         is no reason for the Upper Tribunal to revisit the asylum claim  or
         the credibility findings (subject to the proviso  detailed  above).
         The judge primarily fell into error at  [79]  where  he  sought  to
         resolve  the  problems  arising  from  separating  the  family   by
         concluding that P could return to a country where she has  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution and/or ill-treatment.   The  Article  8
         assessment, therefore, will need to be reconsidered  at  a  resumed
         hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal will  expect
         to receive fresh written and oral evidence  concerning  the  family
         life of P and the appellant.  If  the  Secretary  of  State  wishes
         during  the  period  before  the  resumed  hearing  to  review  the
         immigration status of P, that is a matter for her.  If she  decides
         not to review the status or, indeed, if she has made no decision by
         the date of the resumed hearing, the Upper Tribunal will proceed on
         the premise that P is a refugee and that  the  Secretary  of  State
         will not seek to revoke P's status.
         Notice of Decision
         8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 July 2017 is set aside.  The  findings  of  fact  shall  stand
         subject to the qualification which I  have  detailed  above  in  my
         decision.  The Upper Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane)  will
         remake the decision following a resumed hearing at  Bradford  on  a
         date to be fixed.  The resumed hearing is  limited  to  considering
         the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Permission to  both  parties
         to adduce additional evidence and for the appellant  to  call  oral
         evidence at the resumed hearing.
         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 3 April 2018, Mrs Pettersen,  for
    the Secretary of State, told me that no decision had been taken by  the
    Secretary of State  in  relation  to  the  immigration  status  of  the
    appellant's partner  (P)  (see  [7]  of  my  error  of  law  decision).
    Further, the Secretary of State was aware that the  appellant  and  his
    partner had a further child  born  in  February  2018.   Mrs  Pettersen
    accepted that the relationship between the appellant and P and the  two
    children is genuine and subsisting.  She told me that the Secretary  of
    State considered that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life being pursued  outside  the  United  Kingdom  on  account  of  P's
    continuing refugee status.

 3. In the light of the helpful comments of  Mrs  Pettersen,  I  allow  the
    appeal of AMS on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  2
December 2016 is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 13 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 13 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
