
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13713/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 March 2019                              |On 1 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    j a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant, a Sri  Lankan  national,  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  R  Oliver  (the  judge),
    promulgated on 24 January 2019, in which he dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal, dated 29 November 2018, of his
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant had made a previous protection claim in 2014.  An  appeal
    against the refusal of this claim was dismissed in 2015.  It  is  right
    to say that the previous First-tier Tribunal Judge had  comprehensively
    disbelieved the Appellant's account in every  material  respect.   That
    account had been based on  a  claim  that  the  Appellant  had  held  a
    position at the airport in Sri Lanka, a position which he used,  albeit
    unwittingly, to facilitate the departure of LTTE  operatives  from  the
    country.  He had claimed that his role in this had come  to  light  and
    that he had been detained as a result.

 3. Following the dismissal of his  appeal,  further  representations  were
    submitted to the Respondent in  October  2018.   These  relied  on  the
    essential assertions put forward in the original claim but raised three
    additional issues: first, that the Appellant had mental health problems
    and that evidence  relating  to  these  was  relevant  to  whether  the
    findings of the previous judge in 2015 should be departed from; second,
    that the Appellant had been  engaged  in  diaspora  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom which would place him at risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka;
    finally, it was said that the Appellant had provided  written  evidence
    to the International Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of  Genocide
    (ICPPG) about his experiences in Sri Lanka, and that this evidence  was
    to be submitted to the United Nations and/or other  bodies.   In  turn,
    this would place him at risk on return as well.




The judge's decision

 4. In essence the judge concluded that the previous findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal in 2015 stood as the authoritative consideration  of  the
    Appellant's original protection claim having regard to  the  well-known
    principles set out in Devaseelan.  The judge deals with  a  psychiatric
    report produced in June 2018, but concludes that this evidence did  not
    have any material bearing on the Appellant's  case  as  a  whole.   The
    claimed diaspora activities were regarded as inconsequential.

 5. Finally, and importantly in the context of the appeal  before  me,  the
    judge had regards to a letter from the ICPPG but concludes  that  there
    was a considerable difference between any evidence  submitted  to  this
    organisation and that which might have been presented  to  the  Lessons
    Learned and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC).  On this last  point  the
    judge had been referred to the grant of  permission  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in KK (Sri Lanka) [2017] ECWA Civ 2412 in which it was said that
    there was force in the argument  that  individuals  who  had  submitted
    relevant evidence to United Nations OHCHR Investigation  on  Sri  Lanka
    (UNOSIL) may fall within a risk category.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. Three grounds were put  forward:  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of the psychiatric report;  that  he  had  erred  in  his
    approach to the diaspora activities in the  United  Kingdom;  that  the
    judge had erred in concluding that there was a considerable  difference
    between evidence given to the ICPPG and that presented to the LLRC.

 7. Permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes  on  19
    February 2019.  Significantly, the judge expressly restricted the grant
    of leave.  Whilst grants of leave are sometimes said to  be  restricted
    only by reference to comments made in the body of the reasons  for  the
    decision, in the present case Judge Boyes  clearly  stated,  above  the
    horizontal line in the decision notice that "Permission  to  Appeal  is
    Granted on Ground 3 only".




The hearing before me

 8. At the outset of the hearing I raised with Ms Revill the issue  of  the
    scope of the grant of permission.  I indicated  that  in  my  view  the
    restricted grant of leave was effective, so to speak, in light  of  the
    guidance provided in Safi and others (permission to  appeal  decisions)
    [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC).  In addition, it appeared as though there  had
    been no application directly to the Upper Tribunal in  respect  of  the
    grounds on which Judge Boyes had not granted permission.

 9. Ms Revill accepted that the grant of leave was  indeed  restricted  and
    that there had been, and was, no application to renew grounds 1 and  2.
    In light of this, she accepted that she was only able to rely on ground
    3.

10. However, as Ms Revill  acknowledged,  the  Court  of  Appeal  gave  its
    judgment in the substantive appeal in KK (Sri Lanka) on 1 February 2019
    (the full citation being KK (Sri Lanka) [2019] ECWA Civ 59).  In  light
    of  the  Court's  conclusions  on  the  question  of  risk  created  to
    individuals who are said to have given evidence to  UNOSIL,  Ms  Revill
    accepted, with consummate professionalism, that she could not  properly
    offer any arguments in support of ground 3.

11. She confirmed that she had explained the situation to the Appellant  in
    advance of the hearing and that he understood the situation.

12. In light of this stated position I did not need to call  on  Mr  Tarlow
    for submissions.




Decision on error of law

13. As I announced to the parties at the hearing,  there  are  no  material
    errors of law in the judge's decision.

14. As noted earlier, the grant of leave was properly  restricted  and  the
    appeal before me could only have ever  been  argued  on  the  basis  of
    ground 3, namely whether the Appellant would be at risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka on the basis of evidence purported  to  have  been  submitted
    through the ICCPG to the UNOSIL, and whether the judge had erred in his
    approach to that issue.

15. The relevant passages from KK (Sri Lanka) state:

         "34. Ms Harrison's submissions on this ground can be simply stated.
         There was no evidence before the F-tT to show the  detail  of  what
         the Appellant said or wrote to  the  ICPPG.  However,  Ms  Harrison
         submits that it would be  obvious  that  the  content  of  anything
         supplied by the Appellant  would  in  broad  terms  be  hostile  or
         condemnatory of the Sri Lankan authorities  and  their  actions  in
         2009-10. Although it is impossible to be more  specific,  I  accept
         that broad proposition.  However,  it  must  be  qualified  by  the
         consideration that the Appellant (and his brother)  were  found  to
         lack  credibility  about  the  traumatic  events  they   say   they
         themselves experienced. That factor might reasonably be thought  to
         reduce the likelihood, at least for the future, that their evidence
         will be adduced or relied on by anyone.

         35.  Further, Ms Harrison concedes that even now there is no  clear
         evidence that anything the First Appellant wrote or  said  will  be
         known or will become known  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  She
         emphasises that the "primary purpose" of giving such evidence  must
         be to stimulate further action. However, as will be clear from  the
         passage from GJ quoted above in relation to the LRRC, it is  only
         when the identity of the witnesses  is  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities that the relevant risk arises. In the  absence  of  any
         direct evidence, Ms Harrison's submission was that the known degree
         of penetration of Tamil opposition groups means that the Government
         of Sri Lanka would be likely to be aware of the content of anything
         that the Appellant said or wrote. She  was  frankly  unable  to  go
         beyond that broad proposition.

         ...

         39.  In the course of his judgment in MP and NT [2014]  EWCA  Civ
         829, Maurice Kay LJ noted that similar risks to those  arising  for
         witnesses to the LLRC might arise for those who wish to  or  do  in
         fact "give evidence to any future inquiry  or  investigation",  see
         paragraph 36.

         40.  He went on to observe:

             "37. At the moment, the evidence about these circumstances  is
             understandably vague and speculative. It may well be that,  if
             international pressure were to lead to the establishment of  a
             different form of inquiry, the position would call for further
             consideration in a case in which appellants  could  give  and
             adduce evidence about specific difficulties." [emphasis added]

         41.  At paragraph 38, Maurice Kay LJ  recognised  that  this  might
         mean that a further potential risk category should  be  recognised.
         He took the view  that  at  that  stage  "The  position  is  either
         hypothetical, un-evidenced, or both. It may need to be revisited by
         the UT in the future". I agree with this view.  There  is  material
         included in the UN  OISL  report  capable  of  the  inference  that
         identified witnesses to the UN inquiry, and potentially to criminal
         prosecutions or other inquiries, will  be  at  risk.  There  exists
         other evidence which might possibly bear the inference that such  a
         risk will persist beyond the recent change  of  government  in  Sri
         Lanka. I stress the word "identified" since  that  aspect  of  risk
         would be consistent with the ruling in GJ and accords with common
         sense. It would seem inherently unlikely that  anonymised  evidence
         channelled through  one  or  more  submissions  from  organisations
         feeding information to such an inquiry as the UN OISL  could  be  a
         proper basis for  establishing  the  necessary  level  of  risk.  I
         acknowledge that the UN OISL report itself emphasises a  continuing
         risk for those who give such  evidence  and  are  identified.  That
         appears to have determined their  approach  in  declining  to  take
         evidence from those still in Sri Lanka and  in  maintaining  strict
         confidentiality and  anonymity  for  those  who  provided  evidence
         whilst outside the country. However, all of this is for the  future
         if a suitable case or cases arise."

16. It is quite clear that the arguable point offered up in ground 3 is  no
    longer so in light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in KK (Sri Lanka).
     This is so for a number of reasons, amongst which are the following.

17. First, there was clearly no evidence before the judge to show that  any
    information that may have been provided by the Appellant to  ICCPG  had
    in fact then been submitted to the UNOSIL.

18. Second, there was nothing to suggest that, even if  such  evidence  had
    been submitted, that it either appeared in the final report of  UNOSIL,
    or that the Appellant's name  was  ever  stated  therein.   Indeed,  Ms
    Revill accepted that the relevant report was not even before the judge.

19. Third, any evidence the Appellant might have submitted would of  course
    have had to be assessed in light of the fact,  and  fact  it  remained,
    that his original account of past events in Sri Lanka had been found to
    be untruthful.

20. Fourth, and in light of the above, even if the judge might  potentially
    have been wrong to believe that evidence submitted to the  ICCPG  could
    never lead to a  risk  on  return  (if  that  is  indeed  what  he  was
    concluding), on the facts of the Appellant's case any such error  could
    not have made any material difference to the outcome.

21. Notwithstanding the fact that  the  substantive  judgment  in  KK  (Sri
    Lanka) postdated the judge's decision, there  is  clearly  no  material
    error in his consideration of this aspect of the Appellant's case.

22. I wish to emphasise my appreciation of  Ms  Revill's  conduct  in  this
    appeal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 28 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
