
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/13347/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 16 January 2019         |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    P K T
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Theva
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge J C Hamilton  promulgated  on  25  October  2018  ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  1  December  2017
      refusing his protection claim.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  Having  come  to  the
      UK as a student in 2012, he applied to remain as the  extended  family
      member of his EEA national uncle, "MK".  That application was refused.
       On 1 June 2017, the Appellant was arrested as  an  overstayer  and  a
      decision made to remove him to Sri Lanka whereupon he claimed asylum.

3.          The Appellant claims to  be  at  risk  on  return  due  to  past
      assistance given to the LTTE in 2006.  He claims that, in early  2012,
      whilst still  in  Sri  Lanka,  he  was  arrested  by  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities, detained and ill-treated.  He says that he  was  released
      when his uncle paid a bribe and he then left Sri Lanka.  He also  says
      that he will be at risk from the authorities in Sri Lanka  because  he
      has taken part in protests against the Sri Lankan government whilst in
      the UK and has  joined  the  Transitional  Government  of  Tamil  Elam
      ("TGTE").  He has also given evidence to the ICPPG about human  rights
      abuses by the Sri Lankan authorities.

4.          The Judge did not accept the Appellant's account.   Although  he
      accepted that the Appellant may have been involved in  some  low-level
      activities for the LTTE, those were not of a level  which  would  have
      generated interest from the Sri Lankan authorities in 2012. He did not
      accept that the Appellant had been detained or ill-treated.   Although
      the Judge accepted that the Appellant had attended some events in  the
      UK, he did not accept that the Sri Lankan authorities would  have  any
      interest in the Appellant on that account.  He did not accept that the
      Appellant's  attendance  at  such  events  was  motivated  by  genuine
      political interest or belief.  He  also  did  not  consider  that  the
      Appellant would be at risk based on mere membership of  TGTE  and  did
      not accept that the giving of evidence to the ICPPG would put  him  at
      risk.

5.          The Appellant raises a number of grounds.  The first  two  focus
      on the Judge's treatment of the medical  evidence  consisting  of  the
      reports of Dr Andres Izqierdo-Martin  dealing  with  scarring  and  Dr
      Dhumad dealing with the Appellant's mental health.  Various criticisms
      are made of the Judge's findings about what those  reports  show.  The
      third ground relates to the Judge's findings about the Appellant's sur
      place activities and the giving of evidence to the ICPPG.

6.          Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Grant-Hutchison on 21 November  2018.  He  concluded  that  all  three
      grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.

7.          The matter comes before me to assess whether the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Submissions

8.          Ms Benfield drew my  attention  to  the  medical  reports.   She
      submitted that the Judge, at [53] to [57] of the  Decision  failed  to
      give sufficient reasons for giving limited weight to the report of  Dr
      Martin.  By way of example, she pointed to what is said by  the  Judge
      at [53] of the Decision that there  is  no  record  of  the  Appellant
      telling Dr Martin about the injuries which he said during  his  asylum
      interview that he had suffered.  Although Ms Benfield  said  that  the
      Judge's comments are ambiguous in terms of who the Appellant  is  said
      to have failed to tell about what, the point is of no  moment  in  any
      event since the Judge goes on  to  take  account  of  the  Appellant's
      mental health difficulties.  I do not read that paragraph as  being  a
      reason why the Judge discounts Dr Martin's report and certainly not  a
      significant one.

9.          Ms  Benfield  also  focussed  on  other  criticisms  made.   She
      accepted that Dr Martin did not consider self-infliction by  proxy  in
      relation to the scarring but pointed out that, given the dating of the
      scars, it would be necessary to conclude that the Appellant took steps
      to have the injuries caused to him about six years ago and it did  not
      make sense that he would not thereafter bring himself to the attention
      of the authorities and claim asylum on arrival.  I  accept  that  this
      point makes some sense.

10.         She also pointed out that it was not necessary for Dr Martin  to
      deal with each and every scar, that the doctor made clear that he  was
      analysing the scarring in accordance with the  Istanbul  Protocol  and
      that just because the doctor had not  made  mention  of  some  of  the
      physical injuries which the Appellant claims to have suffered does not
      mean that he was not ill-treated as claimed and is not good reason  to
      discount Dr Martin's evidence.

11.         In relation to Dr Dhumad's report, the Judge had  not  expressed
      any significant concerns about the content of the report  and  it  was
      not clear therefore  why  the  Judge  had  not  given  weight  to  it.
      Although some reservations were expressed about the doctor's reasoning
      for why the Appellant had  delayed  in  claiming  asylum  and  why  he
      attended demonstrations notwithstanding the triggering of  flashbacks,
      the Appellant's mental health problems and  Dr  Dhumad's  opinion  are
      supported by the other letters from the NHS which pre-date the report.
       Those are consistent with the Appellant's case  that  he  has  mental
      health problems and Dr Dhumad's diagnosis.

12.         In relation to sur place activities, Ms Benfield drew  attention
      to what is said in the grounds about the Judge's failure to understand
      the nature of the ICPPG (International Centre for the  Prevention  and
      Prosecution of Genocide) when compared with the LLRC (Lessons  Learned
      and Reconciliation Commission).  The grounds  as  pleaded  take  issue
      with the Judge's lack of knowledge that ICPPG is an organisation based
      in London, initiated by the TGTE and closely associated with  it.   Ms
      Benfield accepted that the  pleaded  grounds  refer  to  a  number  of
      unreported decisions about the nature of the ICPPG.  She  informed  me
      that the Court of Appeal was about to deal with  a  case  of  KK  (Sri
      Lanka) v SSHD which deals with the potential risk to  those  who  give
      evidence to the ICPPG but that had yet to be decided.  The  point  she
      made though is that it was not open to the Judge  to  simply  discount
      the Appellant's case that he provided evidence to  the  ICPPG  on  the
      basis that ICPPG is a different organisation from LLRC  ([108]).   The
      Judge needed to engage with the Appellant's case that he  has  been  a
      witness to war crimes and has reported what he saw.  The Judge  failed
      to consider the documents and evidence on this point.

13.         Finally, Ms Benfield drew my attention to  [109]  to  [122]  and
      [152] to [154] of the Decision where the Judge sets out his  reasoning
      for not accepting the Appellant to  be  at  risk  on  account  of  his
      involvement with the TGTE.  One of  the  reasons  given  is  that  the
      Appellant lacks political motivation for that  involvement  and  would
      not therefore mention it if questioned.  That ignores his case that he
      is active, that his family members in Sri Lanka have  been  questioned
      about  that  involvement  and  have  been  shown  photographs  of  the
      Appellant at those demonstrations.  The Judge had also failed to  have
      regard to background  evidence  about  the  extent  of  monitoring  of
      demonstrations by the Sri Lankan authorities.  No distinction is drawn
      in GJ (Post-Civil War Returnees Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and MP
      and NT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
      EWCA Civ 829 between those who do or do not have political  motivation
      so far as the perception of the Sri Lankan authorities  is  concerned.
      Their interest would only be whether he  was  involved.   Ms  Benfield
      submitted therefore that the Judge had failed to consider  this  issue
      on the right footing and failed to take into account what is  said  in
      relevant case-law and background material.

14.         Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds are merely  a  disagreement
      with the Judge's valid and reasoned  findings.   The  Judge  dealt  at
      length with the medical reports.  Even if it is accepted that some  of
      the minor criticisms are made out (such as the one relating to [53] of
      the Decision), those, taken in the context of the overall  conclusions
      about Dr Martin's report do not affect the  Judge's  conclusion  about
      the weight to be given to that report.

15.         In relation to Dr Dhumad, Mr Tarlow again pointed to  the  level
      of detail with which the Judge dealt with that  report.   The  Judge's
      conclusion that the report should be  given  limited  weight  was  one
      entirely open to him.

16.         On the issue of sur place activities, the Judge found  that  the
      Appellant was a low-level activist and  it  was  therefore  improbable
      that  his  activity  would  give  rise  to  adverse  interest  by  the
      authorities.


Discussion and conclusions

Dr Martin's report

17.   I have already noted that I do not read the criticism of  Dr  Martin's
      report at [53] of the Decision as being significant, whether or not it
      is ambiguous.  However, read as a whole, I am not satisfied that there
      is any error of law in the Judge's reasoning at [53] to  [57]  of  the
      Decision.  The Judge does not discount the report entirely  but  gives
      it limited weight, essentially for the reason given  at  [57]  of  the
      Decision that it is  "inconclusive".   That  is  consistent  with  the
      comment at [55] that the doctor could not reach any  firm  conclusions
      about  causation  and  at  [56]  that  the  doctor  had  not  made  it
      sufficiently  clear  whether  the  limited  nature  of  scarring   was
      consistent with the extreme level of ill-treatment which the Appellant
      claimed to have suffered at these sites.

Dr Dhumad's report

18.   Similarly, I agree with Mr Tarlow that the Judge was entitled  not  to
      give weight to the report of Dr Dhumad.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to
      criticise that report for the reasons given at [60] and [61] (that  Dr
      Dhumad's opinion is unsupported by the Appellant's own case about  the
      reasons for the delay in claiming asylum) and at [62] to [64] (that Dr
      Dhumad had failed to reconcile the  Appellant's  account  of  his  sur
      place activities with the diagnosis which the doctor makes).

19.   The Judge considers Dr Dhumad's report in  the  context  also  of  the
      other NHS documents relating to the  Appellant's  past  treatment  for
      mental illness.  The Judge was aware that  the  Appellant  had  sought
      treatment previously but points out that this was not until  after  he
      claimed and was refused asylum.  Contrary to Ms Benfield's submission,
      I read what is said in this section of the Decision  as  being  highly
      critical of Dr Dhumad's report.  The Judge calls the report "vague and
      unhelpful"  in  its  consideration  whether  the  Appellant  might  be
      feigning his symptoms.  Dr Dhumad has discounted this as a possibility
      but as the Judge points out does not  apparently  recognise  that  the
      other documents showing that the Appellant has  sought  treatment  for
      his mental health come at the stage they do.

20.   What follows also criticises Dr Dhumad for failing to note  that  some
      of the opinions from other professionals are not consistent  with  his
      diagnosis (see [69] to [71] of the  Decision).   Similarly,  the  fact
      that Dr Dhumad was not given access  to  the  Appellant's  GP  records
      which might have supported the Appellant's case  to  have  had  mental
      health problems before he claimed asylum was reason to  undermine  the
      doctor's conclusions.  Taken in the context of other evidence set  out
      at [73] to [76] of the Decision and what the Judge says  at  [77]  and
      [78], it can reasonably be inferred that the Judge did not  accept  Dr
      Dhumad's conclusion that the Appellant is not feigning  his  condition
      due to the timing of that condition and the  lack  of  evidence  other
      than the Appellant's say-so that the condition began in 2015.

21.   In short, ample reasons are given for why  the  Judge  did  not  place
      weight on Dr Dhumad's report.

Sur Place Activities

22.   I begin with the Appellant's case that he is at risk  because  he  has
      provided evidence to the ICPPG.  As I have noted  at  [12]  above,  Ms
      Benfield drew my attention to the case of KK  (Sri  Lanka)  which  was
      about to be heard in the Court of Appeal.  I now have the advantage of
      the judgment in that case ([2019] EWCA Civ 59).  I have not thought it
      necessary to seek written submissions following that judgment as I was
      minded to reach the same conclusion as did the Court of Appeal in that
      case even before that judgment.   I  also  bear  in  mind  that  I  am
      concerned with the way in which Judge Hamilton dealt with the evidence
      and not the way in which the  Court  of  Appeal  dealt  with  it.   In
      considering that issue, though, I have regard to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant in that case relied on a  letter  the  material  content  of
      which bears striking similarities to the letter in this case and  that
      the Tribunal Judge in that case also concluded that the  assertion  of
      risk was speculative.

23.   Ms Benfield's complaint in this case is that the Judge discounted  the
      Appellant's case simply because the ICPPG is not the same as the  LLRC
      and therefore GJ does not apply.  However, that  submission  does  not
      bear scrutiny when [108] of the Decision is read as a whole:

           "GJ (above) sets out categories of those at a real risk of
           persecution or serious harm which includes individuals who had
           given evidence to the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation
           Commission ("the LLRC"), this is a wholly different organisation
           from the ICPPG and the Appellant's representatives have provided
           no evidence that there is any connection between them.  I was
           not provided with any evidence that expressly dealt with any
           risk based on having given such a statement to the ICPPG, there
           was no or no adequate evidence before me concerning this
           organisation.  Furthermore there is no evidence that the Sri
           Lankan authorities have been provided with information from this
           organisation nor has it been shown that there is any obvious way
           for the Sri Lankan authorities to connect any statement made to
           the Appellant.  The letter is unacceptably vague about how the
           Appellant's statement is actually going to be used for and when
           this will happen.  I therefore do not find the Appellant has
           shown providing sworn written evidence to the ICPPG would place
           the Appellant at risk."

23.   I agree with Ms Benfield that whether the ICPPG is linked to  LLRC  is
      nothing to the point.  The crucial issue is  whether  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities will  come  to  know  of  the  Appellant  having  provided
      evidence to that organisation.  The Judge was  entitled  to  note  the
      vague nature of the letter from the ICPPG and that the letter does not
      provide the link with how the provision of  evidence  which  might  at
      some future, undetermined date be used in a prosecution  of  some,  as
      yet unidentified, individual is reasonably likely to become  known  to
      the Sri Lankan authorities.  In  short,  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the Appellant had not provided  sufficient  evidence  to
      show a real risk arising from this source.

24.   I turn finally to the remaining sur place activities  and  involvement
      with the TGTE.  I begin by setting the Judge's  findings  in  context.
      The Judge was addressed about the risk from this source  by  reference
      to the risk, first, that the Appellant would be questioned about  TGTE
      involvement on return ([105]) and, second, that he would be identified
      by reason of participation in demonstrations ([106]).   As  the  Judge
      observed at [106] by reference to MP, whilst surveillance by  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities has increased in sophistication, it  is  still  not
      the case that the authorities are interested in "mere participants".

25.   The nature of the Appellant's evidence about his involvement with  the
      TGTE is set out at [110] of the Decision.  It amounts to attendance at
      two demonstrations whilst not a member of the  TGTE,  membership  from
      late 2015 and volunteering for that  organisation  and  attendance  at
      demonstrations thereafter from May  2016.   The  Appellant's  evidence
      about these activities is criticised on the basis that  the  Appellant
      is able to give precise dates despite claiming to have  problems  with
      his memory and also because no supporting  evidence  was  called  from
      friends who are also members.  Little weight is given to a letter from
      the TGTE's Deputy Minister of Sports and  Community  Health  who  says
      that the Appellant participates in TGTE  events  and  organises  them.
      The Judge also notes the lack of evidence supporting  the  Appellant's
      case to have joined TGTE in late 2015 and  points  to  the  membership
      cards being issued in July 2017, immediately after his asylum claim.

26.   The Judge takes note  of  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  attending
      demonstrations and a TGTE sports event  but  points  to  the  lack  of
      evidence about his organisational role. There was a discrepancy  about
      the Appellant's evidence that he was involved in fund  raising.   Some
      of the evidence is said to have been prompted.   The  Judge  concluded
      that the claim to have been a fundraiser was false ([122]).

27.   The Judge accepted at [146] of the Decision that the  Appellant  is  a
      "volunteer member" of TGTE.  However, the  Judge  made  the  following
      findings about the extent of the Appellant's activities as follows:

           "[144]      I also  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  began
           attending Tamil diaspora events in 2015.  I accept that at  some
           point in 2017 after his asylum application was made, he  started
           attending the events for which  photographs  of  his  attendance
           have been provided.  I do not accept he has attended the  number
           of events he claimed in his statement.   I  do  not  accept  the
           Appellant has shown he had any organisational role in the events
           he did attend.  I do  not  accept  he  has  shown  he  has  been
           photographed by the authorities at  the  demonstrations  he  has
           attended or that these activities have come t the  attention  of
           the Sri Lankan authorities."

28.   I accept that if what is said at [147] of the Decision  were  read  in
      isolation, that paragraph may be an error of law.  I accept  that  the
      perception of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  about  the  risk  to  the
      integrity of the government in Sri Lanka is unlikely to  be  fashioned
      by whether those who participate in activities  demonstrating  against
      the government genuinely believe in the  cause.   However,  the  Judge
      recognises that this is the position at [149] of the Decision. What is
      said about motivation at [147] and again at [150] to [153]  is  to  be
      read in the context of the Judge's conclusions  about  the  submission
      that the Appellant would be at risk of being questioned about being  a
      TGTE member.  In short, the  Judge  considers  it  unlikely  that  the
      Appellant would mention his involvement because  that  involvement  is
      found not to be genuinely motivated but used in order to  bolster  the
      Appellant's claim.   He would not therefore be required to lie (as the
      Judge finds at [152]).

29.   The other issue which  the  Judge  had  to  consider  is  whether  the
      Appellant's participation in other  activities  in  the  UK  would  be
      likely to come to the attention of the Sri Lankan  authorities.   That
      is dealt with as I have already noted at [144] of the Decision.    The
      Judge did not accept that the Appellant would come to the attention of
      the authorities as his attendance at demonstrations and the  like  was
      less than he had claimed and at too low a level to be noticed  by  the
      authorities.  That finding of course  has  to  be  read  also  in  the
      context of the Judge's earlier findings that  the  Appellant  had  not
      previously come to the attention of the authorities and had  not  been
      detained and tortured as he claimed ([140]).

30.   The Judge was therefore entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions  he  did
      about the sur place claim for the reasons he gave.

31.   For the above reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does  not
      contain any error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision does not involve the making of  a  material
error on a point of law. The Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  C
Hamilton promulgated on 25 October 2018 is upheld.

 Signed          [pic] Dated: 8 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

