
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13026/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2017                                |On 23 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A MONSON

                                   Between

                               ZS (SRI LANKA)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hawden-Beal  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  16
    February 2017) dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international human rights protection,  on  account
    of his alleged profile as a supporter and promoter of Tamil separatism.



 2.

The reasons for the grant of permission to appeal

 3. On 31 March 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge M J Gillespie  granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for the  following
    reasons:

         In a decision which is otherwise full, fair and supported by  sound
         reason, there is, as the grounds disclose, no mention of background
         evidence, post-dating the decision  in  GJ  and  Ors  (Sri  Lanka),
         referred to for the appellant at the hearing, that  is  potentially
         supportive of the appellant's cause.  It is fairly arguable,  given
         the favourable finding of the  Tribunal  as  to  past  torture  and
         persecution of the Appellant, that the material might not have been
         considered and that had this material been expressly  addressed,  a
         different conclusion as to present risk on return might  have  been
         arrived at.

Relevant background facts

 4. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1980.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2011  on  a  student
    visa.  In June 2012 he was excluded from his course for non-attendance,
    and his leave to remain was curtailed to May 2013.

 5. He contacted the Asylum Screening Unit on 27 April  2016,  and  claimed
    asylum on 12 May 2016.  He underwent  a  screening  interview  on  that
    date, and he attended a substantive  asylum  interview  on  1  November
    2016.

 6. His claim was that he met a Tamil called Vagnesh whilst  attending  AAT
    classes.  Vagnesh helped him  to  find  employment  at  Bureau  Veritas
    Consumer Products Services.  Vagnesh informed him that the  victims  of
    the civil war had become destitute and needed help.  He suggested  that
    the Appellant's  bank  account  could  be  used  to  conceal  financial
    transactions from abroad.  The money was destined for the victims.  The
    Appellant agreed to this arrangement.  Once  the  money  was  deposited
    into his account from abroad, he would withdraw the money and  give  it
    Vagnesh.  He did this from 2006 until either January or April 2011.

 7. On 20 June 2011, Vagnesh was arrested.  Two days  later  the  Appellant
    was taken to a police station for questioning.   He  was  released  two
    hours later.

 8. On 24 June 2011, he was at home when CID officers came to  arrest  him.
    They seized his bank statements, and took him to a  building  where  he
    was detained for eight days.  During this time he was tortured  and  he
    was sexually abused on two occasions.  On the sixth day he confessed to
    helping the LTTE.  On the eighth day he was released on  payment  of  a
    bribe by his father.  He remained at a friend's house until he left Sri
    Lanka.

 9. Following his release, the authorities had been to the family  home  to
    question his father about his whereabouts.  On one  occasion  they  had
    taken his father for further enquiries.  His parents had  informed  him
    there was an outstanding warrant for his arrest.  Since  being  in  the
    UK, he had taken part in two or three demonstrations for Tamils.

10. On 10 November 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing the Appellant's asylum claim.  He had a Muslim surname and  he
    identified his religion as Islam.  Given that Sri Lankan Moors were not
    recognised as Tamils, it was not accepted that his ethnicity  was  that
    of a Tamil.  His account of assisting Vagnesh, and  of  his  subsequent
    arrest, detention and release, contained inconsistencies and  therefore
    it was not accepted.

11. He claimed that after he left the country the authorities had continued
    to visit his family home in search of him, and that  so  far  they  had
    been 4 to 5 times, and that during this last year they had been to  his
    home three times.  Given that he had claimed his  release  occurred  in
    June 2011, it remained unexplained  why  the  authorities  waited  four
    years before  visiting  his  home  in  search  of  him.   It  was  also
    unexplained why  the  authorities  waited  so  long  to  ascertain  his
    whereabouts when his mother continued to reside in her own  house,  and
    therefore her location was known to the authorities.

12. As he had remained in Sri Lanka after his release for three months, and
    as he had exited from the country  using  his  valid  passport  at  the
    airport, it was not accepted the authorities  waited  until  after  his
    departure to issue a warrant for his arrest.

13. He had not provided  any  evidence  of  any  involvement  in  pro-Tamil
    political activism in the UK.

14. His credibility was also damaged by his delay in claiming  asylum.   It
    was further damaged by the fact that on 13 October 2015 he had obtained
    a passport from the Sri Lankan Embassy in  London.   This  conduct  was
    damaging to his overall credibility to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution by the Sri Lankan authorities.

15. Consideration had been given to risk on return to Sri Lanka  using  the
    most recent country guidance case of GJ  and  Others  (post-Civil  War:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). It was noted the Court
    of Appeal upheld this country guidance case and the  case  of  MP  (Sri
    Lanka) and Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.Commenting  on  the  risk
    categories in GJ, Lord Justice Maurice Kay stated  at  paragraph  [19]:
    "All this leads to the conclusion that it was rational and  permissible
    to narrow the risk categories."

16. The appellant was not on a stop list.  He was not a journalist  and  he
    had not given any evidence against the Sri Lankan  security  forces  or
    the Sri Lankan authorities.  He did not have a high profile and  so  he
    would not be at risk on return to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  a
    suspected pro-Tamil  separatist.  On  10  January  2015,  the  Guardian
    reported that  Mahinda  Rajapaksa  was  defeated  in  the  Presidential
    Elections by Maithripala Sirisena who promised "no more abductions,  no
    more censorship". On 19 May 2015 the BBC reported that the  Sri  Lankan
    President had promised to seek reconciliation on the sixth  anniversary
    of the Army's victory over Tamil Tiger separatists.




The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

17. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  Hawden-Beal.   Mr
    Malik of Counsel appeared on behalf of the Appellant.

18. The Appellant gave evidence through a Sinhalese  interpreter.   As  she
    noted at paragraph [6] of her decision, the Judge also had before her a
    746 page bundle compiled by the Appellant's solicitors.  This  included
    Counsel's  Skeleton  Argument,  the  Appellant's  most  recent  witness
    statement, a medical report from Dr Baha Al-Wakeel, a letter  from  his
    mother, a letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan  Muslim  diaspora  initiative,
    various reports and some authorities, including GJ.

19. In his Skeleton Argument, Mr Malik addressed the  question  of  whether
    the Appellant would be mistreated if he was returned to Sri Lanka.   He
    said that if the  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  suffered  ill-
    treatment in  2011,  then  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    effectively created a rebuttable presumption that the Appellant's  fear
    of persecution was well founded. The findings of the Tribunal in GJ and
    Others were clearly instructive on the issue of whether presumption had
    been rebutted.  But GJ was not conclusive, for there was other reliable
    material that post-dated the GJ decision, "which indicates  that  Tamil
    returnees to Sri Lanka who are suspected of association with  the  LTTE
    are still frequently subjected to ill-treatment  amounting  to  torture
    (See [88]-[99], and [171])".

20. The Judge set out Mr Malik's  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant at paragraphs [20] to [24].  So far as GJ was concerned,  she
    said that Mr Malik agreed that the Appellant was not on a  watch  list.
    But he submitted that there were documents  postdating  GJ  (paragraphs
    64.1, 6.53 and 6.6.1 of the country guidance at pages 88, 90 and 91  of
    the Appellant's bundle), "which show that there is a possibility of any
    Sri Lankan associated with the LTTE being persecuted".

21. The Judge's findings were set out  at  paragraphs  [31]  onwards.   She
    found that the Appellant was of Tamil ethnicity, and she  accepted  his
    account of helping Vagnesh, and as a result being  arrested,  detained,
    tortured and then released in June 2011.

22. However, she did not accept the authorities were still looking for him,
    as he and his mother and his wife claimed.  She  did  not  consider  it
    plausible that four years after he was detained and  then  released  on
    payment of a bribe, the authorities would  admit  to  having  "lost"  a
    detainee through corruption by looking for him again.

23. At paragraph [40], she commented on the fact that in  October  2014  he
    had obtained a passport from the Sri Lankan embassy in the UK.  She did
    not find it credible that, if there was a warrant out for his arrest by
    the CID, such a warrant would not have been noted by the embassy, given
    the acceptance of the fact that in GJ the approach to  the  authorities
    to identifying Tamil activists was based on sophisticated  intelligence
    both as to activities in Sri Lanka and in  the  diaspora,  and  that  a
    computerised watch list was maintained.  If the Appellant believed  the
    authorities were still looking for him, he would not jeopardise himself
    by renewing his passport, knowing full well the  type  of  intelligence
    which the authorities made use of to identify those in whom they had an
    interest.  Having been off the radar since 2011, she did  not  find  it
    credible the Appellant would focus the authorities'  spotlight  on  him
    again by applying for a passport unless the authorities were really not
    in the slightest bit bothered about him.

24. At paragraph [41], she said that  she  had  considered  his  sur  place
    activities and she had found there to be none.  He was not a member  of
    any of the high profile Sri Lankan Tamil groups here in the UK.  On his
    own evidence, the Appellant was not politically active.   At  paragraph
    [42], she said that, having considered GJ in the light  of  the  above,
    she was not satisfied that he met any of the risk categories set out in
    that case.  She cited MP at [50] where the Court of  Appeal  considered
    that the clear message of GJ was that a record of  past  LTTE  activism
    did not as such constitute a risk factor for Tamils  returning  to  Sri
    Lanka, because the government's concern now was only  with  current  or
    future threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka's unitary state.

25. At paragraph [44] the Judge said:

         Therefore in summary, although I  accept  that  he  was  indirectly
         involved with the LTTE through Vagnesh and was detained by the  CID
         because of that tenuous link, I am  not  satisfied  that  his  past
         history or even current history is such that the  authorities  have
         considered him to be risk to the  state  and  would  thus  have  an
         interest in him if he were to be returned to Sri Lanka.   Therefore
         I find the appellant has not discharged the burden of showing  that
         he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  any  convention
         reason.

26. At paragraph [45] the Judge noted that  past  persecution/serious  harm
    was said to be a good indicator  of  future  persecution/serious  harm.
    Although she accepted the Appellant had been tortured by the CID in the
    past, "the evidence before me now does not persuade me that he would be
    of interest [to] the authorities upon his return now."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

27. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Malik took me through the post GJ decision  evidence  which  he
    said he had drawn to the Judge's attention. This comprised not only the
    passages referenced  in  the  Judge's  decision  and  in  his  Skeleton
    Argument,  but  also  additional  passages  referenced  in   his   oral
    submissions.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  engage
    adequately with the substance of this material, and she had  failed  to
    explain why it did not dislodge the  guidance  as  to  risk  categories
    given by the Tribunal in GJ and Others.

28. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble submitted that  the  Judge  was
    fully aware of the post decision evidence relied on by  the  Appellant,
    as she expressly referred to it at paragraph [24] of her decision.  The
    Judge's finding at paragraph [45] covered the evidence referred  to  in
    paragraph [24]. Her finding on the issue could have been better worded,
    but there was no material error.  The post decision material  cited  by
    Mr Malik did not show that the risk factors identified by the  Tribunal
    in GJ and Others should be broadened.

Discussion

29. I do not find it necessary to comment on  every  passage  in  the  post
    decision background evidence cited by Mr Malik.  As I explored with him
    in oral argument, I consider  that  much  of  the  material  is  highly
    equivocal in its import.  It does not clearly  point  to  an  increased
    risk for returnees beyond that apprehended by the Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others, and Mr Malik showed me one report which, if  anything,  pointed
    to a diminution of risk. In the USSD country  report  on  human  rights
    practices for 2015 at page 128 of the Appellant's bundle, the following
    is stated:

         The  law  prohibits  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,  but   such
         incidents occurred although at a decreased rate  relative  to  2014
         (my emphasis).

30. I consider that the high watermark of the case advanced by Mr Malik  is
    represented by paragraph 6.56 of the country information  and  guidance
    on Tamil separatism in  Sri  Lanka,  Version  3.0,  dated  August  2016
    (Appellant's bundle pages 90 to 91) which Mr Malik set out in  full  in
    the permission application and of which I set out the gist below.

31. In an August 2015 study of 148 Sri  Lankan  torture  cases  perpetrated
    "since the end of the Sri Lankan Civil War in May 2009",  Freedom  from
    Torture recorded that 139 people  were  of  Tamil  ethnicity,  and  the
    majority (142) described an association with the  LTTE  at  some  level
    and/or said that they had been associated with  the  LTTE  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in some  way.   It  was  of  particular  concern  to
    Freedom from Torture that more than one third of the people whose cases
    were reviewed in the study were detained  and  tortured  in  Sri  Lanka
    after returning from the UK following the end of the armed conflict (55
    of 148 cases or 37%.  Most had been in the UK as students but three had
    claimed asylum and forcibly removed  after  their  asylum  claims  were
    rejected.  All but seven of the people were detained  within  weeks  of
    their  arrival  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  majority  were   specifically
    interrogated about their reasons for being in the UK, their  activities
    and/or their contacts in the UK. 21 people were  accused  of  attending
    particular protests and demonstrations in the  UK  and  11  were  shown
    photographs taken at those events.

32. Mr Malik's submission is that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
    explain why the information reported in this study did not  disclose  a
    real risk on return for the Appellant, even though  he  was  not  on  a
    watch list or stop list, and even though he had  not  engaged  in  pro-
    Tamil separatist activities in the UK.

33. However, I do not consider that the import of the Freedom from  Torture
    report (as summarised in paragraph 6.5.6) is clear with regard  to  its
    potential impact on the continued applicability of the risk  categories
    identified by the Tribunal in GJ and Others.

34. Firstly, no information is given as to the chronological spread of  the
    148 Sri Lankan torture cases perpetrated  since  the  end  of  the  Sri
    Lankan Civil War in May 2009.  There is nothing to indicate that  there
    is an even distribution of such cases over the period running from  May
    2009 to August 2015.  Having regard to the evidence considered  by  the
    Tribunal in GJ and Others, it is highly unlikely that  the  cases  were
    evenly distributed on a yearly basis, rather than being concentrated in
    the period 2009 to 2013, preceding the  identification  of  the  narrow
    risk categories in GJ and Others.

35. Secondly, there is nothing in the summary of the  report  at  paragraph
    6.5.6 which indicates the specific risk profile of the 55 returnees who
    were detained and tortured in Sri Lanka, beyond the  fact  that  21  of
    them were accused of attending particular protests  and  demonstrations
    in the UK.

36. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to Muse &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  [33],
    Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

37. The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant was  not
    credible in his claim that  the  authorities  had  an  ongoing  adverse
    interest in him when he left Sri Lanka in 2011 or in his claim that the
    authorities had issued a warrant for his arrest after his departure, or
    that the authorities had in recent times been making regular  enquiries
    of his mother about his whereabouts. It was also open to the  Judge  to
    find, for the reasons which she gave, that the Appellant's  actions  in
    seeking a new passport  from  the  Sri  Lankan  Embassy  in  2014  were
    inconsistent  with  both  a  well-founded  and  a   genuine   fear   of
    persecution.

38. Mr Malik submits that it was irrational of the Judge to  make  findings
    in  the  Appellant's  favour  with  regard  to  his  account  of   past
    persecution, but to reject his account of there being a warrant out for
    his arrest and his explanation for obtaining a new  passport  from  the
    Sri Lankan Embassy.  But there was nothing irrational  in  the  Judge's
    approach.  She applied the same anxious scrutiny  to  the  question  of
    ongoing and future risk,  as  she  applied  to  the  question  of  past
    persecution.  It was open to her to find in the Appellant's  favour  on
    the issue of past persecution, but  to  reject  his  claim  of  ongoing
    adverse interest in him on the part of the Sri Lankan authorities.

39. In the light of the Judge's sustainable findings  discussed  above,  it
    was not incumbent on her to explain why, nonetheless, the post decision
    material referred to at paragraph [24] did not avail the  Appellant  in
    establishing future risk. The Judge had to be satisfied that there were
    strong reasons to justify her  from  departing  from  country  guidance
    authority, and neither the case  advanced  by  Mr  Malik  on  the  post
    decision evidence, nor the post  decision  evidence  itself,  disclosed
    strong reasons for departing from country  guidance  authority  on  the
    particular facts of the Appellant's case, as the Judge had  found  them
    to be.

40. I consider that it is to be inferred  that  the  Judge  took  the  post
    decision evidence into account,  as  she  expressly  refers  to  it  in
    paragraph [24]  of  her  decision.  I  also  consider  that  the  Judge
    adequately engaged with the case on the post  decision  material  which
    was advanced by Mr Malik in his Skeleton Argument through the  findings
    which she made in paragraphs [39] to [45], and  in  particular  in  her
    specific finding at paragraph [45] that, the evidence did not  persuade
    her that he would be of interest "now"  to  the  authorities  upon  his
    return.

Notice of Decision

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.







Signed                              Date:  22 May 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
