


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/13635/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                  |      Decision and Reasons         |
|                                        |Promulgated                        |
|On : 24 April 2018                      |      On: 25 April 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     s n
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki, instructed by Sky Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Ms  N's  appeal
   against the respondent's decision to  refuse  her  protection  and  human
   rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  Ms  N  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  15  September  1983.  She
   arrived in the UK on 22 May 2011. On 23 November  2012  she  was  granted
   leave to remain as a Tier 4 general student  migrant,  but  a  subsequent
   application for further leave to remain on that basis was refused  on  30
   May 2014.  She made an asylum claim  on  12  June  2017.  Her  claim  was
   refused on 11 December 2017.


4. The appellant's claim was based upon  a  fear  of  persecution  from  the
   Pakistani authorities and from her own family as a result of being in  an
   unmarried relationship with a child born out of  wedlock.  The  appellant
   claimed that she had previously been in a relationship with  a  man  whom
   she married in the UK in 2012, to whom she was still married and who  was
   in prison in the UK serving a 23 year sentence for sexual  grooming.  Her
   husband was a former policeman and his case had been widely  reported  in
   the press. He had assaulted  her  prior  to  his  imprisonment.  She  had
   subsequently formed a new relationship with her current partner with whom
   she had had a child and  would  be  punished  by  Pakistani  law  if  she
   returned to Pakistan.


5. The respondent refused the appellant's  claim  in  a  decision  dated  11
   December 2017. The respondent accepted the  appellant's  account  of  her
   husband and his conviction and her account of  her  current  relationship
   with her partner and their child and also accepted that she had a genuine
   subjective fear of persecution. However the respondent did not accept the
   appellant's account of problems with her family and did not  accept  that
   her fear was well-founded. It was not accepted that she was  at  risk  on
   return to Pakistan or that her removal to Pakistan would breach her human
   rights.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright on 26 January 2018 and was allowed in  a
   decision promulgated on 5 February 2018.  Judge  Wright  found  that  the
   appellant was at risk on return to Pakistan on the basis  of  having  had
   extra-marital relations and having a child out of wedlock  and  that  she
   risked being charged and imprisoned by the authorities or being killed by
   her own family in an honour killing. The judge found that there were very
   significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Pakistan  as  a
   result of the risk of prosecution and honour-killing and that her removal
   would breach her human rights on Article 2, 3 and 8 grounds.  He  allowed
   the appeal.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had failed to have regard  to  the  country
   guidance in SM (lone women - ostracism)  Pakistan  (CG)  [2016]  UKUT  67
   which contradicted his findings on risk on return  and  paragraph  276ADE
   and that the judge had failed to conduct a proportionality exercise under
   Article 8.

8. Permission to appeal was granted on 21 February 2018.

9. At the hearing before me, Ms Solanki properly accepted that  she  was  in
   some difficulty in resisting the respondent's grounds in  regard  to  the
   judge's findings on the appellant's likely arrest  and  prosecution.  She
   asked that the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  if  the
   decision was set aside. Mr Tarlow also asked that the appeal be  remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal.


10. In the circumstances, given the judge's evident failure to consider  and
   address the country guidance in  SM,  I  advised  the  parties  that  the
   judge's decision was unsustainable and had to be set  aside  and  re-made
   afresh by another Tribunal. In view of the fact that there  were  various
   matters which needed  to  be  considered,  which  were  material  to  the
   question of risk on return and  to  a  full  proportionality  assessment,
   including the impact on the appellant  of  her  husband's  conviction,  I
   agreed with the parties that the case needed to be remitted to the First-
   tier Tribunal.

DECISION

11. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  to  be  heard  afresh,  with  no   findings
   preserved, before any judge aside from Judge Wright.












Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 24 April 2018
