
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13830/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Face to Face)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th May 2021                     |On 08th October 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Sardar Awais Farooq
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, instructed by Charles Simmons Immigration
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant a national of Pakistan born on 29th December 1986 appeals
    against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Carroll
    promulgated on 4th July 2019.  The judge heard the appeal on  4th  June
    2019 against the respondent's decision of 28th November  2018  refusing
    the appellant's claim on asylum and humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The grounds for permission to appeal asserted that the decision in  the
    appeal was given briefly and that the Tribunal erred materially in  the
    following regards:

      1) the Tribunal at paragraph 26 accepted that the  appellant  suffered
         from relatively poor mental health, particularly  poor  memory  and
         this was of course corroborated by clear evidence to  that  effect.
         The  Tribunal  however  failed  to  take  this  into  account  when
         assessing the credibility of the appellant's evidence both  in  his
         interview and orally before the Tribunal.

      2) at paragraph 28 the Tribunal clearly sought to decide the Article 8
         claim outside the Rules but in doing  so  failed  to  consider  the
         implications of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  (although  I  presume  the
         author meant (vi)), and in short whether the claim within the Rules
         was made out.  The Higher Courts have repeatedly  upheld  that  the
         requirement, even following the implementation of  the  Immigration
         Act 2014 to consider an Article 8 claim through the  prism  of  the
         Rules as per R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC  11.   This  was  particularly
         relevant in these  circumstances  because  there  was  demonstrably
         before the respondent substantial evidence of the appellant  having
         formed a relationship in the UK and the risk of separation of  that
         relationship was clearly a factor relevant for the Article 8  claim
         within the Rules.

      3) there were reasonable grounds to consider the appellant had been  a
         victim of trafficking rather than slavery.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Raza submitted that the Tribunal had failed
    to consider, as per the grounds, the  paragraph  276ADE  in  particular
    there was no reference to Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813.   Mr  Raza
    also made references to the medical evidence that was contained  within
    the papers although he  acknowledged  that  this  was  confined  to  GP
    records and a letter from the GP Dr F Shiner dated 22nd  January  2019.
    In that letter it was confirmed that the appellant had "a long-standing
    issue with his short-term memory  this  is  being  investigated.   This
    means that he struggles with time-keeping and also  has  reported  poor
    sleep and stress/anxiety, for which he is receiving treatment for".

 4. In submission, Mr Tufan relied on the submissions made in writing by Mr
    Clarke such that the first ground in relation  to  evidence  failed  to
    identify any evidence that could explain away the appellant's inability
    to record basic details from events some ten years ago and equally  the
    ground  failed  to  identify  evidence  that  could  explain  why   the
    appellant's 2018 disavowed the basis of the claim made in 2015 only  to
    rejuvenate it again at an appeal in 2019, as set out at paragraph 14 of
    the decision.  The judge noted that the GP letter only  referred  to  a
    short-term memory issue being under investigation and the ground  fails
    to identify any evidence of long-term memory  loss.   The  judge  noted
    that there was no corroborative evidence  of  the  appellant's  claimed
    head injury nor that he was receiving any form of  therapy  for  mental
    health problems and the judge stated "There is no credible evidence  to
    show that he is currently taking  any  form  of  medication".   It  was
    submitted that the  ground's  contention  that  there  was  corroborate
    evidence of poor mental health capable or  explaining  the  appellant's
    inability to recall historic events was not made out.

 5. In relation to the second ground the appellant argued that at paragraph
    28 the judge considered the appellant's Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules but failed to  consider  whether  the  appellant  met
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) and in the light of Agyarko the  Tribunal  was
    bound to consider Article 8 through the prism of  the  Rules.   It  was
    submitted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  this  ground  was
    misconceived because the judge expressly found that there was  in  fact
    no evidence to show that if returned to Pakistan the appellant would be
    unable to continue  with  his  private  life  in  respect  of  all  its
    essential elements and at paragraph 14 of  Kamara  confirmed  that  the
    idea of integration called  for  a  broad  evaluative  judgment  as  to
    whether the individual "will be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms  of
    understanding how life in the society in that other country is  carried
    on and a capacity to participate in it".

 6. In the light of the judge's finding that the appellant would be able to
    contract a private life and return is impossible to infer  a  different
    Article 8 conclusion had the  judge  expressly  referred  to  paragraph
    276ADE.  The reference to the appellant's  relationship  was  puzzling.
    The judge found at paragraph 28 that there was no family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom, and it was submitted that a failed relationship in  the
    UK would not preclude the appellant from contracting a private life  on
    return.

 7. In relation to the third ground it was argued that  the  appellant  was
    forcibly transported around Europe and was  abused  and  forced  to  do
    unpaid work and therefore a victim of trafficking  or  modern  slavery.
    However, at paragraph 4 the judge found that the appellant did not take
    up an offer to be referred to the national referral mechanism and there
    is no reference to any trafficking claim.

Analysis

 8. The appellant's claim was never put in terms  that  his  mental  health
    difficulty precluded him from giving evidence or that he was unable  to
    remember significant aspects of his account.  The skeleton argument  is
    framed such that his psychological  vulnerabilities  would  impede  his
    ability to start life afresh in an area away from where he  claimed  to
    have had his relationship in Pakistan and where he  had  no  family  or
    cultural ties.  Indeed this was what Mr Raza relied on in his challenge
    to the paragraph 276 ADE consideration by the judge.  That is important
    for the assessment of the evidence by the judge  and  as  submitted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State the judge  concluded  that  there  was
    limited evidence in relation to the appellant's mental health.  Indeed,
    the judge stated that at paragraph 26 the following:

         "26. There is very limited evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
             mental health.  A letter from a Dr Sinha, who I understand  to
             be a GP, is at page A1 of the  appellant's  bundle.   In  that
             letter it is said that the appellant  has  -  'a  longstanding
             issue with his short-term memory that is  being  investigated.
             This means that he struggles with  timekeeping  and  also  has
             reported  poor  sleep  and  stress/anxiety  for  which  he  is
             receiving treatment ...'.   There  follows  at  pages  A2  and
             following of  the  bundle  evidence  that  the  appellant  was
             referred to  an  organisation  called  'Healthy  Minds'.   The
             letter of 20th March 2019 at page A7  of  the  bundle  records
             that the appellant attended an assessment  with  Health  Minds
             and goes on to say  -  'As  discussed,  the  outcome  of  your
             assessment shows your needs are  more  suitable  for  specific
             support from  another  organisation  ...'.   The  letter  also
             records that the appellant reported -  'fleeting  thoughts  of
             suicidal ideation but stated no current  plans  or  intent  to
             act' and concludes by saying  that  the  referral  to  Healthy
             Minds is closed."

 9. The judge therefore did take into account the appellant had  stated  in
    examination-in-chief that he was stressed and unable to sleep but noted
    that there was no evidence that he had continued to take medication and
    there was no evidence that he had made  an  appointment  to  renew  his
    medication from 4th April 2019.  Those findings were open to the judge.
     The interview added little.  The judge also noted at paragraph 26 that
    the referral to Healthy Minds was closed.

10. The reference to issue with memory was the "short-term memory" and  not
    long-term memory.  This therefore did not explain, as the Secretary  of
    State, made out in her response,  the  alteration  of  the  appellant's
    claims over time or the appellant's ability to recall basic details  of
    his claim which were said, as the judge recorded, to have occurred many
    years ago and connected to hostility to a relationship and marriage  in
    Pakistan.  The appellant's claim, as the judge recorded,  was  that  he
    left Pakistan  in  2010  and  arrived  in  the  UK  in  2015.   In  the
    circumstances having found very little  medical  evidence  and  in  the
    context of the way the  claim  was  framed,  the  judge's  approach  to
    findings on credibility and the medical  evidence,  and  his  findings,
    thereon were sustainable in law and the judge was entitled the approach
    the credibility findings as he did.

11. As the judge records at paragraph 14 by the  time  of  the  appellant's
    substantive interview in 2018 he had "disavowed the basis of the  claim
    he made him in 2015 and his response was "unequivocal  in  response  to
    the Question 8 that his claimed marriage in Pakistan took place a  long
    time ago and - 'can be put to one side.'"

12. The question is whether the medical evidence before the judge  had  any
    weight and the judge clearly found that it did  not  in  terms  of  the
    effect on credibility.  As the judge noted at paragraph 27 it  was  the
    appellant own assertion that 'he had been hit by the police and had  an
    injury on his head'.  The judge addressed  this  adding  'there  is  no
    medical evidence to support this aspect of his claim'.

13. As stated in MN v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ 1746 at  paragraph
    123 Underhill JL stated:

         "The essential message of that possibly over  elaborate  discussion
         is that decision makers should in each case assess whether  and  to
         what  extent  any  particular  expert  evidence  relied  on  by  an
         applicant supports their case as a  matter  of  rational  analysis.
         Observations in the case law are useful  in  drawing  attention  to
         likely limitations on the value of particular  kinds  of  evidence,
         but they should not be treated as  laying  down  rigid  rules.   If
         there are qualifications to the value to be given to  a  particular
         piece  of  evidence,  that  is  not  a  reason  for  excluding   it
         altogether: if it has some weight  it  must  go  into  the  overall
         assessment".

    And further at paragraph 127

         "The term "credibility" is used a good deal in the context both  of
         asylum appeals and of decisions whether a person  is  a  victim  of
         trafficking, and we have detected a tendency to treat it as  having
         some special technical meaning. But in truth it  connotes  no  more
         than whether the applicant's account is to be believed.  In  making
         that assessment the decision-maker will have to  take  account  all
         factors  that  may  bear  on  that  question.  Likewise  the   term
         "plausibility" is not a term of art....".

14. Overall  the  judge  addressed  the  medical  evidence  throughout  the
    decision, and his reasoning was open to him.  Mere  disagreement  about
    the weight to be accorded to the evidence, which is a  matter  for  the
    judge, should not be characterised as an error of law, Herrera  v  SSHD
    [2018] EWCA Civ 412.  The judge engaged with the medical  evidence  and
    the appellant's evidence as to his health  difficulties,  recorded  the
    appellant presented an empty and out of date  packet  of  Amitriptyline
    (10mg only) and that he had made no further appointments at the medical
    centre.  At paragraph 26 the judge noted that the referral  to  Healthy
    Minds was closed. Overall the judge was entitled  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding  even  though  the  appellant  had  presented  some
    evidence in relation to mental health difficulties.

15. The judge concluded at paragraph 24 'In light of all of the evidence to
    which I  have  referred  above,  and  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent , I am not satisfied that the appellant is  credible  as  to
    the basis of the circumstances in which he claims he was  compelled  to
    flee Pakistan or as  to  his  claimed  fear  of  return  to  Pakistan".
    Although the judge went on to  discuss  the  medical  evidence  in  the
    paragraphs below, he does make clear that at paragraph 25 that 'at  the
    outset of the hearing' counsel referred to the  mental  health  issues.
    The judge evidently had in mind  these  submissions  when  drawing  his
    conclusions and on reading the decision as a whole it is clear that the
    judge factored the appellant's  mental  health  difficulties  into  his
    assessment.  I also note that counsel in fact was recorded  as  relying
    on the mental health difficulties in relation to the appellant's return
    on Article 8 grounds rather than the protection claim.

16. I turn to the consideration of paragraph 276ADE, and the criticisms  of
    the judge for failure to address the medical evidence or in  line  with
    Kamara which held at paragraph 14 that 'integration calls for a  'broad
    evaluative judgment be made'.

17. The judge, however,  clearly engaged with the limited medical  evidence
    and stated at paragraph 28, when considering Article  8,  "The  medical
    evidence does not show that the appellant is  currently  receiving  any
    form of therapy for mental health problems and  there  is  no  credible
    evidence to show that he is currently taking any form  of  medication".
    The judge made a finding at the close of paragraph  28  to  the  effect
    that "there is, in fact, no evidence  to  show  that,  if  returned  to
    Pakistan, the appellant would be unable to continue  with  his  private
    life in respect of all its essential elements".  That  would  encompass
    any element of Paragraph 276ADE.

18. As to very significant obstacles on return, it has been held by various
    legal authorities including Secretary of State v R (Kaur)  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1423 para [57], that it is for the appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to his return and a  bare  assertion
    will not suffice.   By  analogy,  the  same  must  be  true  for  'very
    significant obstacles' (which has been held in Agyarko to  equate  with
    'insurmountable obstacles').  The facts in this case and of  which  the
    judge was well aware was that the appellant came to the UK at  the  age
    of 26 years having spent most of his adult life in Pakistan  and  there
    had been adverse credibility findings against him. The  judge  did  not
    accept that he had mental health difficulties such as  to  prevent  his
    integration in Pakistan.  Nothing presented by the appellant and on the
    facts found by the judge could cross the threshold of very  significant
    obstacles.  Even if not specifically identified the  judge  effectively
    did address paragraph  276ADE.   The  lack  of  specific  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE was not, in this case, material.  The  judge  reasoned
    the matter outside the Immigration Rules as to whether the  refusal  of
    his human rights claim was proportionate and factored in paragraph 117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when that person's immigration is  precarious,  and   as  the
    judge stated "as that of the appellant has been since  his  arrival  in
    the UK".

19. Ground 3 has no merit whatsoever because the appellant  has  refused  a
    referral to the National Referral Mechanism and the claim was not based
    on trafficking.

20. I am mindful of the exhortation in UT (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ  1095
    at paragraph 19
         "'Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department at [30]:
             "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirections
             simply because they might have reached a different conclusion
             on the facts or expressed themselves differently."



Notice of Decision

I find no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision and the  decision
will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 15th July 2021.


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
