
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13947/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               mr abdul jabar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1992.  He arrived in the
    UK on 25 September 2016, ostensibly as a student.  He claimed asylum on
    29 January 2018.

 2. The respondent refused his asylum claim in a decision dated 30 November
    2018.  The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge M P W Harris ("the FtJ") at a  hearing
    on 17 January 2019 following  which  the  appeal  was  dismissed.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  and  his  appeal  thus  comes
    before me.

    The basis of claim

 3. The appellant's claim, as put before the respondent and the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is that he was born and raised in the Federally  Administered
    Tribal Area ("FATA") of Pakistan.  His father was what is  known  as  a
    Malakzada; a person who belongs to the family of chiefs of  the  tribe.
    His family was prominent in his home  area  and  they  were  active  in
    supporting the Awami National Party ("ANP").  Political opponents often
    made threats against the family, particularly at election times.

 4. In 2008 a leader of the Lashkar e Islam militant  group,  Mengal  Bagh,
    assembled a group of 1,000 men outside the appellant's family  home  in
    order to pressure  one  of  the  appellant's  uncles  to  withdraw  his
    candidacy for the ANP but his uncle refused.

 5. The  appellant's  father  was  active  against  Islamic  militants  and
    participated in the Government closure of a mosque run by a mullah with
    links to Tehrik I Taliban Pakistan ("TTP"), an organisation  containing
    many armed jihadist groups.  The TTP  are  hostile  to  the  ANP.   The
    appellant's father was also a commander in the Khyber Khassander  Force
    ("KKF") which is a militia group backed by the Pakistani Government.

 6. On 14 February 2011 the appellant's father was on patrol with three  of
    his men when they were ambushed by armed men.  His father  was  killed.
    Several days later the  jihadist  group  Abdullah  Azam  Brigade  Group
    claimed responsibility.  The appellant and his family began to pressure
    the Government into taking action, with the appellant sending a  letter
    to the Government.  He also knocked  at  the  doors  of  the  Political
    Administration, Governor and Member of the National Assembly ("MNA") of
    Khyber to persuade them to act.  This  resulted  in  militants  sending
    threatening letters, and sometimes people, to the appellant's family to
    dissuade them from continuing.

 7. Two of the appellant's uncles were targeted by bombs, in  2012  and  in
    2013.  His uncles were injured but  survived.   However  that  had  the
    effect of making them stop trying to make the  Government  take  action
    against  the  militants  although  the  appellant  was  determined   to
    continue.

 8. On 2 July 2013 he was kidnapped by members of Lashkar e Islam and  held
    for 10 days.  He was tortured by being beaten, starved, locked  in  the
    toilet, kept alone and  threatened  with  death.   He  was  accused  of
    conspiring  against  the  group  and  providing  information   to   the
    Government that had  led  to  Government  forces  killing  three  group
    members at a checkpoint.

 9. Through the tribal council, or Jirga, the  appellant's  family  secured
    his release on  condition  that  he  no  longer  conspire  against  the
    jihadist groups.  At the suggestion of his family he moved to live with
    his sister in Peshawar where he studied engineering at university.

10. However, when he was at one of the local shops a  shopkeeper  told  him
    that an unknown person was making enquiries as to his whereabouts.  Out
    of fear the appellant moved from his sister's address and  changed  his
    accommodation every three or four months.  However,  he  continued  his
    studies and became a student leader.

11. Every five or six months he returned  home,  remaining  active  in  and
    helping the ANP.  He was a political  adviser  and  used  to  introduce
    speakers, such as his uncle, at rallies.  He made  discreet  visits  to
    locals to persuade them to vote for the ANP.

12. After his graduation and at the suggestion of his mother, he decided to
    come to the UK to pursue his studies.  Whilst here he  hoped  that  the
    situation in his home area would improve so that  he  could  return  to
    Pakistan.  He remained in contact with his family who told him that the
    situation with the militants remained bad.

13. On 6 January 2018 in the UK the appellant was contacted  by  phone  and
    text by someone who said he was speaking on behalf of the  TTP  and  Al
    Qaida.  He was threatened that as soon as he came back to Pakistan from
    the UK he would be killed or he would  have  to  work  for  them.   The
    appellant reported the incident to the police  in  Coventry.   He  then
    claimed asylum.

14. His fear is that if he returns to Pakistan he would be at risk from the
    TTP, Lashkar e Islam, the Abdullah Azam Brigade group and Al Qaida.

    The FtJ's decision

15. At [2]-[3] the FtJ identified the documentary evidence  he  had  before
    him.  He set out in detail the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  and
    summarised the respondent's reasons for rejecting that claim.

16. At [38] he summarised the  expert  evidence  of  Dr  Antonio  Giustozzi
    contained in his report dated 31 December 2018.

17. At [40] he referred to a statement from Mr Shah Shinwari,  said  to  be
    the President of the ANP in the appellant's local  area.   At  [41]  he
    referred to that statement not limiting itself to giving details of the
    appellant's party membership, but going on to say  that  the  appellant
    belonged to a well-known political family and that his uncle was an ANP
    candidate during the 2008  and  2013  elections.  It  states  that  the
    appellant played a vital role in spreading awareness and educating  the
    youth in his  area  against  terrorism  and  radicalism.   Mr  Shinwari
    further mentions the  appellant's  father  being  killed  by  militants
    whilst on duty with the KKF on 14 February 2011.  The FtJ  referred  to
    the statement concluding by asserting that the appellant faces  "a  lot
    of hardship chasing his father's case and being a member of ANP".

18. At [42] the FtJ said that although Mr  Shinwari  presented  himself  as
    knowing about the circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  that  of  his
    family, and bothers to talk about the appellant facing hardship, it was
    noticeable that he made no mention of the  appellant  suffering  kidnap
    and torture in 2013.  The FtJ  said  that  that  was,  after  all,  the
    severest form of hardship which the appellant claims to  have  suffered
    in Pakistan and thus it was "very odd" that Mr Shinwari does not  refer
    to that event.

19. He went on to state that it was noticeable also that Mr Shinwari  makes
    no mention of the conditions imposed by Lashkar e Islam in relation  to
    the appellant's release secured through the Jirga, in  particular  that
    the appellant be required not to conspire against  the  jihadi  groups.
    He pointed out that it was nevertheless the appellant's  case  that  in
    defiance of that condition he continued to pursue his father's case  to
    make the authorities act against the jihadis and  was  also  active  in
    anti-jihadi ANP and student politics.  The FtJ said that  he  found  it
    odd that Mr Shinwari does not refer to this claimed significant ongoing
    active defiance on the part of the appellant.   He  concluded  at  [44]
    that those matters represented inconsistencies between the evidence  of
    Mr Shinwari and central parts of the appellant's account.

20. He referred to evidence in the  respondent's  bundle,  being  Pakistani
    newspaper reports with some English translations  in  relation  to  the
    killing of the appellant's father, as well as a written statement  from
    a journalist.  The FtJ accepted  that  that  was  evidence  capable  of
    supporting the claim made by the appellant about the  circumstances  of
    his father's death.

21. At [46] he referred to F17-18 of the respondent's bundle which is  said
    to be the release agreement issued by Lashkar e Islam on 12  July  2013
    ending the appellant's abduction after the  central  committee  of  the
    militant group held a tribal council.  He quoted from that document and
    what it says about the conditions of the appellant's release, including
    that he be disowned by his  family  or  having  to  pay  a  penalty  of
    Rs5,000,000 if he did not desist in participating in  activity  against
    Lashkar e Islam and the Abdullah Azam Brigade group.

22. At [47] he noted that Dr Giustozzi sought to emphasise the improvements
    in organisation made by Lashkar e Islam, and thus in their capabilities
    yet it was conspicuous in the  appellant's  account  that  despite  his
    claimed ongoing anti-jihadist activities there is  no  mention  of  any
    demand by Lashkar e Islam that the appellant and  his  family  pay  the
    penalty of Rs5,000,000 or that the appellant's family disown  him.   He
    noted that  Rs5,000,000  was  a  considerable  sum  that  would  be  of
    financial benefit to the group.  He also noted that there  was  nothing
    in the appellant's account of  any  militants  seeking  to  damage  the
    appellant's property after his release in 2013, that  being  a  further
    condition of his release.

23. Referring at [48] to the ruthlessness and violence of Lashkar e  Islam,
    and what is said about the group by Dr  Giustozzi  in  terms  of  their
    desire to demonstrate their power and authority, he said that the  lack
    of enforcement of the conditions by the militants raised serious doubts
    about the reliability of the (release) agreement  document.   He  found
    that it also raised significant doubts about the appellant's account of
    the kidnapping that led to the claimed terms of release, as well as the
    claim made by the appellant about being a target of the militants after
    his release because of ongoing anti-jihadi activity.

24. As regards the appellant's evidence, he  acknowledged  that  there  was
    "coherence" in the appellant's account of events  up  to  the  targeted
    bombings against his uncles.  He also found it plausible that the  2008
    incident in relation to the family home was primarily about  a  display
    of power by Lashkar  e  Islam,  rather  than  actual  violence  against
    political opponents.  He noted, however, that the focus of display  was
    in fact against the appellant's politician uncle in particular and  the
    appellant's family in general  rather  than  specifically  against  the
    appellant.  He found that the violent targeting in the FATA by  Islamic
    militants of political opponents, with reference to the killing of  the
    appellant's father and the bomb attacks on his uncles, was not at  odds
    with the country background evidence.

25. The FtJ rejected criticism made by the respondent in  his  decision  in
    terms of the appellant's involvement with the ANP.

26. However, he also concluded that there were difficulties about accepting
    the appellant's claim of being personally targeted  by  militants  from
    2013 onwards.  He referred again to the lack of action taken by Lashkar
    e Islam as specified in the written agreement.  He went on  to  say  at
    [54] that although the appellant's case was  that  he  was  continually
    under threat between 2013 after his kidnapping and up to  2016,  during
    this period people said to be his enemies never perpetrated any further
    serious harm on him.  He referred to paragraph  12  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report where it states that in much of Pakistan the presence of the TTP
    and similar groups was not so thick that they would immediately realise
    that the appellant was amongst them, and thus it was possible  for  him
    to spend short periods  in  Pakistan  without  being  detected  by  the
    militants.

27. However, the FtJ said that he was not persuaded to attach  much  weight
    to that opinion because it ignored that the appellant was  in  Pakistan
    continuously for over  three  years  following  his  release  from  the
    abduction.  That, he said, was more than short periods of time  and  Dr
    Giustozzi's analysis did not engage with  the  appellant's  claim  that
    during that period he was  primarily  spending  his  time  studying  in
    Peshawar or returning to spend time with his family in his  home  area.
    Those were  locations  where  Islamic  militant  groups  had  a  strong
    presence.

28. At [56] the FtJ also referred to the appellant's claim that  throughout
    that period he was openly participating  in  ANP  rallies  and  events.
    Although the appellant had emphasised that those events  had  security,
    the FtJ considered it significant  that  his  open  attendance  was  an
    opportunity for him to be monitored, traced and targeted, away from the
    security of such events.  In addition, at that time the  appellant  was
    openly  attending  university.   Although  he  claimed  he  was  moving
    accommodation  every  few  months,  his  regular  attendance   at   the
    university and his mingling  with  other  students  as  student  leader
    presented the opportunity for him to be traced and targeted, even if he
    moved accommodation.   On  the  appellant's  account  the  closest  his
    enemies seemed to have come to in confronting him physically  in  three
    years was when a stranger made enquiries about him at some local shops.
     Thus, the FtJ said that he found the claim of persistent  enmity  from
    the militants lacked credibility.

29. Furthermore, he referred to the appellant's account that  his  militant
    enemies managed to trace him through  his  phone  even  though  he  was
    thousands of miles outside Pakistan, in the UK.  That,  the  FtJ  said,
    raised significant doubt about the appellant's account that on the  one
    hand his enemies were able to track him down in  the  UK,  but  on  the
    other hand failed to target him whilst he resided for  three  years  in
    the areas of Pakistan where the militants have a presence.

30. He concluded that it weighed against the appellant that he remained  in
    Pakistan for so long if he was at real risk of serious harm and that he
    would have expected someone claiming  to  be  in  such  constant  great
    danger to have left Pakistan much earlier.  He noted  that  his  family
    currently had the resources to send him abroad to study.

31. Referring to the note said to have been made by the police  officer  at
    Coventry  Central  police  station  in  relation  to  the  threats  the
    appellant said he received in January 2018 (the FtJ gave  the  date  as
    January 2019), he said that the document did not state what the details
    of the complaint were or indeed that the complainant was the appellant.
     He said that in the end it was the appellant's  word  that  this  note
    related  to  a  complaint  he  made  about  threats  he  received  from
    militants.  He decided that  that  evidence  did  not  add  significant
    weight to that part of the appellant's claim.

32. At [60] the FtJ said that weighing up matters in the round,  there  was
    sufficient reliable evidence to accept that the appellant belongs to  a
    prominent family in his home area involved in ANP politics and that his
    father was killed whilst on  duty  with  the  KKF  in  2011.   He  also
    accepted that until warned off by the bomb attacks of  2012  and  2013,
    members of the appellant's family sought to make the  authorities  take
    action against the jihadists because of the death  of  the  appellant's
    father.

33. However, he concluded that there were such strong doubts arising  about
    the credibility of the appellant's claim as to what happened after  the
    bomb attack in 2013 that he did not accept that  he  was  kidnapped  or
    continued to be at real risk from the militants whilst he  remained  in
    Pakistan between 2013 and 2016.  He further rejected the claim that the
    appellant received threats in the UK in January 2018, noting that  that
    was the month in which his leave was due to expire.

34. He then went on at [62] to conclude that with reference to s.8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  the
    adverse credibility findings were reinforced by the  appellant's  delay
    in making his claim for asylum "until 2019", having arrived in  the  UK
    in 2016.  He further concluded at  [63]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that he has been perceived by the militants to  be  active
    in pursuing his father's case and thus being perceived as  an  opponent
    to be targeted.

35. He concluded that the appellant had not demonstrated that any political
    or student activity in Pakistan resulted  in  hostility  from  militant
    groups such as to put him at risk.  He found that even in  relation  to
    the events which he accepts as having occurred, the appellant would not
    be at risk on return.  He concluded that the appellant's  position  was
    little different from that of his brothers in Pakistan who  since  2013
    had remained living openly in Pakistan without being  targeted  in  the
    manner which the appellant says he has been targeted.   He  noted  that
    the appellant had not sought to argue that those relatives  at  present
    face a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  because  of  any  links  to  the
    appellant's father and  family  or  any  involvement  in  ANP  politics
    opposing the militants.

36. In those circumstances, he concluded that  there  was  no  need  for  a
    consideration of the issues of sufficiency of  protection  or  internal
    relocation.  He went on to reject the Article 8 aspect of the claim.

    The Grounds and Submissions

37. The grounds contend that in various respects the FtJ failed to  make  a
    proper assessment of the evidence adduced in  support  of  the  appeal.
    Thus, it is argued in the grounds that the statement from  Mr  Shinwari
    was not, and was never intended to be, a statement of all the facts  of
    the appellant's case.  The FtJ was wrong to read too much into lack  of
    details in that letter. The FtJ was also wrong, it is  said,  to  think
    that the Pakistani Taliban  do  not  come  to  agreements  with  locals
    because the Taliban are only  concerned  in  "killing  and  harshness".
    Because the TTP has  to  attract  followers  primarily  from  the  FATA
    region, they do need the support of  locals.   That  explains  to  some
    extent the Jirga system.

38. In relation to the appellant leaving Pakistan, he was at risk from 2015
    and left in  2016.   However,  during  all  that  time  he  was  taking
    "precautionary measures".  He applied for a UK visa which took time.

39. As regards the threatening phone  call  he  received  in  the  UK,  the
    details were provided to Coventry police and are copied at F11  of  the
    respondent's bundle.  The appellant was told by  the  police  that  the
    Home Office  should  contact  him  and  they  would  disclose  all  the
    information to the Home Office.  During  the  screening  interview  the
    appellant provided those details, being the contact name and number for
    the police, as well as the reference number.  The  Immigration  Officer
    kept the original piece of paper on which the information  was  written
    and said that they would "look at this".  Because  the  respondent  had
    not doubted the phone call received by the appellant it was not open to
    the FtJ to do so.

40. As regards the timing of the appellant's asylum claim in the UK, he was
    hoping that things would improve in Pakistan  but  they  did  not.   He
    applied for asylum about a week after receiving the  threatening  phone
    call on 6 January 2018.

41. The grounds also contend that the FtJ failed to consider the issues  of
    sufficiency of  protection  and  internal  flight.   There  was  expert
    evidence on the issue of internal flight which the FtJ  had  failed  to
    consider.

42. In his submissions, Mr Malik relied on the grounds.  In support of  his
    submissions I was referred to various aspects of  the  FtJ's  decision.
    It was submitted that the FtJ had failed to give adequate consideration
    to the release agreement dated 2013.

43. In the asylum interview at question 139 the appellant explained that he
    was trying to escape and living at different  accommodations.   It  was
    submitted that that explained how he was able to stay in  Pakistan  for
    three years until he left.  Reference was also made to the  appellant's
    witness statement in this respect which states that the law in Pakistan
    requires a person to show identification to a landlord who then  has  a
    duty to notify the authorities.  However,  because  the  appellant  was
    able to live with his sister he did not need to provide  identification
    and so the militias were not able to trace him.  Similarly, he did  not
    reside in his home town.

44. In relation to the 'section 8' point, dealt with by the  FtJ  at  [62],
    the FtJ was wrong to say that the appellant delayed  making  his  claim
    for asylum until 2019.  It was in January 2018 that he made the  claim.



45. As regards the details of the threatening phone call, this  was  not  a
    matter that the respondent had challenged in the  decision  letter  (in
    terms of a report to the police).

46. Mr Malik also relied on the grounds which criticise the FtJ for failing
    to consider internal flight.

47. It was also suggested on behalf of the appellant that  in  relation  to
    Article 8 the FtJ  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  medical
    condition.  However, it was accepted on the appellant's behalf that the
    grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision  do  not  refer  to
    Article 8 and no application had been made to amend the grounds.

48. Mr Bramble argued that, in essence,  the  complaints  about  the  FtJ's
    decision amount only to a disagreement  rather  than  pointing  to  any
    error of law in the decision.  It was submitted that he had  identified
    the key points from the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi, and  had  made
    findings on all relevant facts.

49. As regards the statement from Mr Shinwari, as the FtJ  had  said,  this
    was not simply a basic statement but was a  detailed  one  setting  out
    what were said to be the appellant's circumstances.

50. In terms of the content of the release agreement, the build up  to  the
    FtJ's conclusions starts at [53] and the expert's evidence was factored
    into the assessment.  Although it was claimed by the appellant that  he
    was moving around and therefore was able to escape being  targeted,  as
    the FtJ had pointed out he was openly participating in  various  events
    and the FtJ was entitled to find that those activities could  have  led
    to his being traced and monitored.

51. It was submitted that the FtJ had come to reasoned conclusions in terms
    of the delay in leaving Pakistan in circumstances where  the  appellant
    claimed that he was at such risk.  As regards  the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum, even if the FtJ did make an error in saying that  he  made  his
    claim in 2019, the appellant had still failed to claim  asylum  at  the
    earliest opportunity.  His case was that he left  Pakistan  because  of
    the threats but he could have applied for asylum at the outset  on  his
    arrival in the UK.

    Assessment and conclusions

52. I deal with the grounds in the order in which  they  are  pleaded.   In
    relation to the statement from Mr Shinwari, although the grounds assert
    that the letter was not, and was never intended to be, a full statement
    of the appellant's circumstances, the FtJ made  a  full  assessment  of
    that evidence between [40] and [44].  He pointed out, referring to  the
    detail of the statement, that Mr Shinwari  did  not  limit  himself  to
    giving details of the appellant's party membership.  The FtJ refers  to
    what is said in the statement about the  appellant  facing  "a  lot  of
    hardship chasing his father's case and being  a  member  of  ANP".   In
    those circumstances, the FtJ was entitled to conclude that  given  that
    Mr Shinwari presents himself as knowing about the circumstances of  the
    appellant along with his family and  refers  to  the  appellant  facing
    hardship, it was significant that he made no  mention  of  the  claimed
    kidnap and torture in 2013.  As the FtJ said,  that  was  the  severest
    form of hardship  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  suffered  in
    Pakistan.

53. Furthermore, the FtJ was also entitled to consider it  adverse  to  the
    appellant's credibility that  Mr  Shinwari  makes  no  mention  of  the
    conditions imposed by  Lashkar  e  Islam  on  the  appellant's  release
    secured through the Jirga.  Particularly  so  given  that  it  was  the
    appellant's case that he defied  the  conditions  of  his  release  and
    continued to pursue his father's case.

54. What is said in the grounds about [48] of the FtJ's  decision,  to  the
    effect that the FtJ was wrong to think that the  Pakistani  Taliban  do
    not seek to be on good terms with locals, makes no sense in the context
    of the FtJ's decision, in particular at [48].  The FtJ did not  in  any
    way raise doubt about militants engaging with the local community.  His
    point was that the appellant's  account  in  relation  to  the  release
    agreement was not credible, for the reasons he gave.

55. The complaint about what the FtJ said at [58] in terms of the length of
    time it took the appellant  to  leave  Pakistan  simply  amounts  to  a
    disagreement with the FtJ's decision.  The FtJ clearly explained why he
    considered that the appellant would have left much sooner than  he  did
    in the light of  his  claimed  fear.   What  the  FtJ  said  about  the
    appellant's family having had the resources to send him abroad to study
    is also pertinent.

56. As regards the details apparently recorded by Coventry police  of  what
    is said to have been a threatening phone call to the appellant, the FtJ
    made an assessment of that evidence in  the  context  of  the  evidence
    overall.  He was right to point out  that  the  bare  details  recorded
    (copied at F11 of the  respondent's  bundle)  do  not  state  what  the
    details of the complaint were, or indeed that the complainant  was  the
    appellant.  He was similarly entitled to point  out  that  it  was  the
    appellant's word that the note related to a  complaint  he  made  about
    threats he received from militants.  The conclusion that that  evidence
    did  not  add  significant  weight  to  the  appellant's  claim  was  a
    conclusion that the FtJ was entitled to come to.  The point made in the
    grounds about the respondent not having doubted the phone call does not
    advance  the  appellant's  argument  in  this  respect.   Even  if  the
    appellant did receive such a phone call, the issue as  to  its  content
    referred to by the FtJ still holds good.

57. As regards the 'section 8' issue, it  is  true  that  the  FtJ  made  a
    mistake at [62] in stating that the appellant delayed making his  claim
    until 2019, whereas in fact he made his claim in 2018.   However,  that
    is clearly simply a slip of the pen.  At [7] the FtJ  correctly  stated
    that the appellant claimed asylum on 29 January 2018.  Furthermore,  it
    is implicit from [61] that the FtJ was well-aware of the fact that  the
    appellant claimed asylum in January 2018, and that was the  basis  upon
    which he assessed the claim. Again, at [62] he referred to a  delay  of
    "a couple of years" in claiming, from 2016. In any event, the FtJ would
    have been entitled to make the point about delay in claiming asylum  on
    the basis of delay between 2016 and 2018; two years after his  arrival.



58. Lastly on this point, it is to be noted that the FtJ said at [62]  that
    his adverse credibility findings were "reinforced"  by  the  section  8
    point.  It was plainly not the only basis upon which  he  rejected  the
    appellant's claim, or indeed the main basis.  He referred  at  [62]  to
    the appellant's explanation to the effect that  he  wanted  to  wait  a
    couple of years to  see  if  matters  improved.   He  was  clearly  not
    impressed with that explanation.

59. As regards what is said in the  grounds  about  the  FtJ's  failure  to
    consider  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection   and   internal
    relocation, as the FtJ expressly pointed out at [66], there was no need
    for him to make an assessment of those issues given  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had established to the  required  standard
    that he would be at risk in his home area.

60. Neither the grounds nor the submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    persuade me that there is any error of law in the  FtJ's  detailed  and
    thorough assessment of the appellant's claim.

    Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 24/07/19
