
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/13741/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 October 2017                        |On 24 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between


                                     bna
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Worthington
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant BNA, is a female citizen of Eritrea who was born in 1987.
     She entered United Kingdom on a spouse  visa  on  2  June  2012.   She
    claimed asylum in May 2016 but her claim was refused by a  decision  of
    the respondent dated 25 November 2016.  The appellant appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which, in a decision promulgated on
    11 May 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are several challenges  to  the  judge's  decision.   First,  the
    appellant complains that the judge's reasoning was too brief.  Further,
    the appellant asserts that the judge failed to make findings in respect
    of the evidence of a witness (H).  The appellant also asserts that  the
    judge failed to have proper regard to a letter sent to the appellant by
    her mother and drew adverse inferences from the letter as  regards  the
    appellant's credibility as a witness which should not have been  drawn.
    Secondly, the appellant submits that the judge has not, on the basis of
    the factual matrix which he had established, completed an assessment of
    the risk of return to this appellant.  Unusually, the appellant  claims
    to have left Eritrea  legally  for  medical  treatment  and  not  as  a
    consequence  of  having  been  released  from  military  service.   The
    appellant claims that the judge assumed that, because the appellant had
    been given an exit visa for medical treatment, she  would  not  in  any
    event face risk on return.  The fact remains, however, the appellant is
    of military service age and could be re-drafted into the Eritrean Army.
     Such a possibility was acknowledged by the Upper Tribunal  in  country
    guidance case MST and  Others  (national  service  -  risk  categories)
    Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) at head note [11]:

         While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person  who
         had exited lawfully may on forcible return face having to resume or
         commence national service.  In such a  case  there  is  a  real  of
         persecution or serious harm by virtue of such service  constituting
         forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article 3 of  the  ECHR.



 3. As regards the first ground of appeal, I find it  has  no  merit.   The
    judge carried out a thorough analysis of the evidence.  He has set  out
    in some detail the evidence given by the witness.  The witness had left
    Eritrea some four years before the appellant herself let  the  country.
    The judge dealt with the discrepancy in the evidence given by  H  which
    did not match that evidence given by the appellant herself  [40].   The
    judge acknowledged at [40]  that  the  evidence  of  H  "supported  the
    evidence of the appellant."  It is difficult to see what else the judge
    might have said about the evidence of H given that  she  could  provide
    little assistance concerning  the  account  and  circumstances  of  the
    appellant after H herself had left Eritrea.  I find that the judge  has
    not erred in his treatment of the evidence of the witness.

 4. The judge dealt with the letter from  the  appellant's  mother  to  the
    appellant at [37].  The judge was entitled to make findings in  respect
    of the physical nature of the letter which he found to  be  "remarkably
    well preserved" for a letter which it was claimed had been  written  in
    2009.  At [54], the judge gives  sustainable  and  cogent  reasons  for
    rejecting the authenticity of the letter.  The challenge to the judge's
    findings  regarding  the  letter  represent   nothing   more   than   a
    disagreement with those findings.

 5. I note that there  is  some  uncertainty  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is still married.   What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  the
    appellant has children with her in the United Kingdom who  are  British
    citizens.  In practical terms, it  seems  unlikely  that  she  will  be
    returned to Eritrea in the foreseeable future.  However, as regards her
    asylum appeal, it is necessary to deal with the hypothetical  situation
    in which she is returned and  whether  or  not  she  would  be  thereby
    exposed to a real risk.  It is at this point that the judge's  decision
    becomes problematic.  Looking at the Record of Proceedings, it  appears
    that a submission was made that, notwithstanding the fact the appellant
    has left Eritrea legally, she is still of military service age and  may
    be exposed to risk on return.  That assessment has not been made by the
    judge.  Having established the factual matrix, the  judge  should  then
    have considered risk on return by reference to that matrix.  Because he
    did not do so, his decision is incomplete.  In consequence, I find that
    the judge has erred  such  that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside.
    However, in this particular case I find that, save for the challenge to
    the decision as regards risk on return, the judge's decision is  sound.
    I see no reason to interfere with his findings of fact,  including  his
    findings as  regards  the  credibility  of  the  evidence.   I  direct,
    therefore, that the decision is returned to the First-tier Tribunal and
    to Judge Turnock so that he may hear submissions in respect of risk  on
    return and complete his decision.  There will be no  need  for  him  to
    hear any evidence in respect of those matters upon which  he  has  made
    findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  11  May
2017 is set aside.  All other findings of fact are  preserved.   The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Turnock)
for that judge to remake the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




