
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13959/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2021                             |On 01 April 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S Z
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms K Renshaw, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    Dyer
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wolfson ("the judge"), promulgated on  23  March  2020,  by  which  she
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusals of his protection
    and human rights claims.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, arrived in  United  Kingdom  in  July
    2000. His original asylum claim was refused by the respondent and  then
    dismissed on appeal in March 2001. That claim had  been  based  on  his
    assertion that he was a Zoroastrian. A subsequent claim, this  time  on
    the basis that he had converted to  Christianity,  was  refused  and  a
    further appeal dismissed in January 2005. In April 2010  the  appellant
    was granted indefinite leave to remain on an exceptional basis  outside
    of the Immigration  Rules.  In  September  2017  he  was  convicted  of
    grievous bodily harm and sentenced to  40  months'  imprisonment.  Once
    deportation action was initiated, the  appellant  put  forward  another
    protection and human rights claim, re-asserting that he was a Christian
    convert and would be at risk on return to Iran.

 3. A deportation order was made against the appellant on 27 November 2018.
    By a decision of the same date, the respondent refused the  appellant's
    protection  and  human  rights  claims.  In  doing  so,  she  issued  a
    certificate pursuant to section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. She rejected the appellant's claim to be  a  Christian
    convert, concluded that there was no risk on return,  and  went  on  to
    conclude that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  with  reference  to
    Articles 3 (in respect of a hernia condition) or 8 ECHR.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant was not represented at the hearing before the judge. Oral
    evidence was given. The judge did not  expressly  state  that  she  was
    treating  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  under  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note  No.2  of  2010.  At  [59]  the  section  72
    certificate was upheld. For reasons set out at [61]-[68], the judge did
    not accept that the appellant was a genuine Christian convert, or  that
    he would practice Christianity on return to Iran.

 5. At [68] the judge stated an alternative finding, namely  that  even  if
    the appellant did practice Christianity on return to Iran, "he would be
    likely to do so in a way which is consistent with that of the  rest  of
    this family and that any such practice would be ad hoc and discreet."

 6. In respect of claimed activities in the United Kingdom, the  judge  did
    not accept that any such involvement (if it had occurred  at  all)  was
    such  that  it  would  have  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities, or would do so on return (see [70]).

 7. Applying the relevant country guidance decision of PS  (Christianity  -
    risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 00046 (IAC) ("PS"), the judge concluded  that
    in light of her primary finding that the appellant was  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert, he would not be at risk on return,  would  willingly
    renounce his claim to  Christianity,  and  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    prolonged questioning (see [71]-[74]).

 8. Articles 8 and 3 are considered at [80]-[92]. The judge concluded  that
    the appellant could not succeed by reference  either  to  the  relevant
    Rules or section 117C of the 2002 Act. Whilst the appellant  has  given
    oral evidence that he suffered from mental health problems and has made
    suicide attempts, the judge was not satisfied that, taken as  a  whole,
    the evidence indicated that there were significant difficulties in this
    regard. Further, the judge  concluded  that  there  would  be  adequate
    treatment available in Iran.

 9. The appeal was accordingly dismissed on all grounds.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. Three grounds of appeal were put forward, which can  be  summarised  as
    follows. The first asserts that the judge's  findings  on  the  claimed
    conversion to Christianity are unclear, with  particular  reference  to
    [65] and [68]. Second, it is said that the judge failed to take factors
    into account when considering whether the appellant would be  subjected
    to prolonged questioning on return. Third, it is said  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to the appellant's mental health problems  and/or
    alcohol dependency when assessing  credibility.  The  appellant  should
    have been treated as a vulnerable witness, but was not.

11. The upholding of the section 72 certificate was not challenged.

12. Permission to appeal was granted  on  all  grounds  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 5 November 2020.

13. Following the grant of permission, the respondent filed  and  served  a
    rule 24 response, dated 13 November 2020.

14. Ms Renfrew provided a skeleton argument in advance of the hearing.

15. Evidence was provided by the  appellant's  solicitors  which  indicated
    that he had attempted suicide in June 2020.



The hearing

16. Ms Renfrew relied on the grounds of appeal and her  skeleton  argument.
    In respect of ground 1, she submitted that the  judge's  findings  were
    unclear.  The  alternative  finding  that  the  appellant   would   act
    discreetly was unsustainable. The judge had failed to address the "why"
    question with reference to HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. On  ground  2,  it
    was pointed out that the factors relating to prolonged  questioning  as
    stated by the Tribunal in PS were not exhaustive.  In  this  case,  the
    judge  should  have  taken  account  of  the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances, including: his mental health; his alcoholism;  the  fact
    that his brother was a Christian, as were other members of his  family;
    that the appellant had been away from the Iran for a long time; that he
    had been attending churches in the United  Kingdom;  and  his  criminal
    history.

17. In respect of ground 3, the judge should have treated the appellant  as
    a vulnerable witness based on his oral  evidence.  This  was  the  case
    notwithstanding what the judge said at [88] and [91] and in the absence
    of a witness statement or other evidence post-dating the hearing  which
    indicated that the appellant had not been able to properly put  forward
    his  case  before  the  judge.  The  fact  that   the   appellant   was
    unrepresented was a relevant factor.

18. Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response. He submitted that the judge's
    findings on the conversion issue were sustainable.  He  submitted  that
    there was a lack of evidence to support the appellant's contention that
    other factors relating to the possibility of prolonged  questioning  on
    return. It was of note that the Tribunal in PS did not consider any  of
    these proposed factors to be significant. He also referred me to [150]-
    [151] of PS, submitting that the facts there  were  fairly  similar  to
    those in the present case. There was a lack of any real evidence as  to
    the appellant's family members in Iran. In respect of the  brother,  Mr
    Melvin referred me to [33] of the judge's decision. On  the  vulnerable
    witness issue, Mr Melvin submitted that the evidence before  the  judge
    simply did not support the contention that  she  erred  by  failing  to
    treat the appellant as such.

19. In reply, Ms Renfrew re-emphasised a number of points made previously.

20. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Decision on error of law

21. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the judge's decision such
    that my discretion should be exercised by setting her decision aside.

22. The reasons provided by  the  judge  at  [61]-[68]  for  rejecting  the
    central plank of  the  appellant's  protection  claim  are  sound.  The
    grounds simply do not identify an error of law in so far as the reasons
    stated deal with the evidence to  which  the  judge  properly  directed
    herself.

23. That the judge went on to state an alternative finding at [68] does not
    render  the  primary  findings   and   reasons   in   support   thereof
    unsustainable in any material way.  That  finding  was,  as  stated  in
    express terms, in the alternative to what preceded it.

24. In respect of  any  risk  on  return  by  virtue  of  a  conversion  to
    Christianity, the judge properly directed herself to PS. On  the  basis
    of her sustainable findings  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine
    convert and would not continue to practice Christianity  in  Iran,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that he would not be at risk  on  return
    on the basis of being a Christian (or for that matter having to conceal
    that faith in order to avoid persecution).

25. The "why" question arising from [3](ii) of the headnote to PS did  not,
    on the judge's primary findings, have any relevance to the  appellant's
    case.

26. Even if it did, it is apparent from [33] of the judge's decision  that,
    on  the  appellant's  evidence,  only  one  brother  was  a  "Christian
    believer" and he had never had any difficulties with  the  authorities.
    That the brother was not allowed to attend a church  in  Iran  did  not
    necessarily mean that he had wanted to, or  that  any  self-denial  was
    motivated in part by a fear of the consequences of doing so.

27. Turning to ground 2 and the issue of questioning on return, I  conclude
    that the judge once again correctly directed herself  to  PS.  She  was
    entitled to find that in light of her primary findings,  the  appellant
    would, if required, renounce his claimed Christianity.

28. The judge deals adequately at [74] with the relevant factors stated  by
    the Tribunal in PS in respect of whether an individual was at  risk  of
    being subjected to prolonged questioning. Plainly, none of  the  stated
    factors applied to the appellant.

29. There are two difficulties with the appellant's argument that the judge
    failed to take certain additional factors into account. First, none  of
    them were deemed worthy of setting out by the Tribunal in PS itself. It
    is of course the case that  the  list  provided  is  said  to  be  non-
    exhaustive. However, factors such as a lengthy  period  abroad  in  the
    United Kingdom  and  interaction  with  churches  abroad  and/or  being
    baptised would arise  in  a  relatively  regular  basis  in  protection
    claims. By definition, returnees will have come from the United Kingdom
    and, where found not to  be  a  genuine  convert,  will  commonly  have
    attended  churches  or  other  such  activities.  In  my  judgment,  if
    additional factors are to be relied on to supplement those set  out  in
    PS, evidence will need to be adduced to support the argument.

30. In my judgment, it is of note that the appellant in PS has  attended  a
    church in the United  Kingdom  and  had  in  fact  been  baptised.  The
    Tribunal found that the Iranian authorities would become aware of these
    matters. Notwithstanding that, it  was  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of ill-treatment for any reason. Further,  I  have
    not been referred to any evidence before the judge which indicated that
    those returning from the United Kingdom and/or those who  had  attended
    church and/or been baptised here would, for  those  reasons  alone,  be
    subjected to prolonged questioning.

31. In light of the foregoing, I conclude that the judge did not materially
    erred by failing to expressly consider these proposed factors.

32. In respect of the appellant's criminal history, again, I have not  been
    referred to any evidence before the judge indicating  that  this  might
    have constituted a relevant factor which might have  led  to  prolonged
    questioning. I conclude that  the  judge  did  not  materially  err  by
    failing to expressly consider this proposed factor either.

33. There is nothing in the assertion that  the  judge  should  have  taken
    account of the  appellant's  brother  as  a  relevant  factor.  On  the
    appellant's own evidence, that brother had  not  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities. Further, and in any  event,  I  have  not
    been referred to any evidence before  the  judge  indicating  that  the
    Christian beliefs of a family member who had  not  themselves  been  of
    adverse interest previously, might constitute a  relevant  factor.  The
    judge did not materially err in law by failing  to  expressly  consider
    this proposed factor.

34. It is difficult to see that there was any material evidence before  the
    judge relating to claimed alcoholism. In oral evidence,  the  appellant
    had stated that he had not drunk any since the New  Year  (the  hearing
    was 4 February 2020) although I note that at [91] the judge referred to
    the appellant attending "recovery sessions". In any event, I  have  not
    been referred to any evidence indicating that the  Iranian  authorities
    would take a sufficiently adverse view of problems with alcohol such as
    to  warrant  prolonged  questioning  on  return.  The  judge  did   not
    materially err in law by failing to expressly consider this factor.

35. Finally, there is the question of the appellant's mental health. I will
    deal with this  matter  in  detail,  below.  For  present  purposes,  I
    conclude that, on the evidence before the judge, she did not commit any
    material error of law by failing to regard any  claimed  mental  health
    problems as constituting a factor relevant to prolonged questioning.

36. I turn now to the final ground of challenge. I have no reason to  doubt
    that the appellant made a suicide attempt in June 2020. I  accept  that
    such an event could in principle be capable  of  constituting  evidence
    relevant to the  establishment  of  an  error  of  law  in  a  decision
    promulgated some months previously. However, the primary focus must  be
    on the evidence which was before the judge. I have carefully considered
    that evidence. It is clear that the judge did not  leave  any  relevant
    evidence out of account when addressing the question of the appellant's
    mental health. With reference to what she said at [88] and [91], it was
    open to her to conclude that  he  was  not,  at  least  at  that  time,
    suffering from relevant mental health problems  such  that  they  might
    have constituted a relevant factor on the prolonged  questioning  issue
    or requiring the judge to treat him as a vulnerable witness within  the
    meaning of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010.

37. The judge was entitled to take account of the fact  that  much  of  the
    documentary evidence made no reference to  mental  health  problems  at
    all, whilst another source confirmed only that the appellant  had  been
    referred to a primary care mental health  practitioner.  There  was  no
    indication in any of the documentary evidence that  the  appellant  had
    suicidal ideation.  In  these  circumstances,  and  given  the  overall
    findings made by the judge, she was entitled to in effect conclude that
    the appellant was  not  then  suffering  from  relevant  mental  health
    problems, notwithstanding the oral evidence.

38. I also take account of the fact that vulnerability does not  of  itself
    render adverse findings made by a judge  susceptible  to  challenge  on
    appeal (see SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT  00398
    (IAC)). In this regard, and as I pointed out at the hearing, there  has
    been no evidence from the appellant or any other source  following  the
    judge's decision to indicate that there had been difficulties in giving
    evidence at the hearing or that the appellant's ability to present  his
    case has been prejudiced in any other way. In the circumstances of this
    case, I do not accept that the incident in June 2020 goes  to  disclose
    an error of law on the judge's part.

39. All-told, I conclude that the judge did not err in law  by  failing  to
    expressly treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness.

40. The fact that the appellant  was  unrepresented  was  not,  of  itself,
    sufficient to show that the judge materially erred in law.

41. In light of all of my conclusions, the appellant's appeal must fail.

42. I add a final observation. It is open to the appellant to make  further
    representations to the respondent in the light of what may  be  changed
    circumstances as regards his mental health. That is entirely  a  matter
    for the appellant and his legal representatives.

Anonymity

43. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

44. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


45. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  24 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

