
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/13403/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2020                      |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    G S B
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Designated Judge Shaerf on 17 December 2019 against  the
          determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge N A Malik,  promulgated
          on 30 May 2019 following a hearing at Manchester on 14 May 2019.




                Background


       2. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo,
          born in 1994.  2000. In June 2010, she  made  an  entry  clearance
          application to enter the UK. That does not  appear  to  have  been
          successful.  She then  travelled  to  Belgium  where  she  claimed
          asylum. It is  not  clear  what  transpired  in  respect  of  that
          application. The appellant then returned to the DRC. She sought to
          enter the UK by road in March 2014 using a passport which did  not
          belong to her but leave to enter was refused. In  April  2015  she
          flew to the UK via Nairobi. It is not clear how she  entered.  She
          claimed asylum  some  three  weeks  later  on  the  basis  of  her
          political activities for the UDPS and her sexuality.


       3. The appellant gave different  names  for  herself  at  the  asylum
          screening interview and the substantive interview.  She  has  also
          used different dates of birth.


          The grounds


       4. The grounds are not presented in any succinct, numbered format nor
          has any summary of the  points  been  prepared.   Instead,  it  is
          maintained that insufficient  or  unsustainable  reasons  for  the
          judge's adverse credibility findings have been given  and  various
          paragraphs of the determination are selected for criticism.


       5. It is maintained  that  at  paragraph  23  the  judge  "makes  the
          disappointing assertion that the appellant  would  not  have  been
          happy with her sexuality" and that in  so  doing  she  displays  a
          materially flawed analysis.


       6. It is argued that the judge was  wrong  to  have  found  that  the
          appellant's  claim  to  have   stopped   being   a   lesbian   was
          determinative.  It  is  maintained  that  the  appellant  had  not
          understood the questions she had been asked and the judge erred in
          relying on her answers.


       7. The judge is said to have misrepresented the appellant's  evidence
          at paragraph 24. It is maintained that the appellant had disclosed
          her sexuality at the earliest opportunity.


       8. It is argued that at paragraph 25 the judge failed to consider the
          appellant's clarification with regard to her gay  relationship  in
          the DRC.


       9. The judge is accused of erring in her analysis of the  appellant's
          corroborative evidence at paragraph 26 and  of  giving  inadequate
          reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  political  activities  at
          paragraphs 28-31. It is argued that the judge did not give reasons
          as to why the photographic evidence of the appellant's  attendance
          at demonstrations was rejected at paragraph 32.




          The Hearing at Field House


      10. The appellant attended the hearing and I  heard  submissions  from
          the parties.


      11.  Mr Gayle took  me  through  certain  paragraphs  of  the  judge's
          determination which, in his view, contained flawed reasoning.


      12. He submitted that the judge had misrepresented what the  appellant
          had said about her state of mind at being gay, that her uncle  had
          not known about her sexuality whilst she was in the DRC, that  she
          had mentioned her sexuality at the screening interview,  that  her
          evidence as contained in the supplementary  bundle  had  not  been
          fully considered, that as her partner lived  in  Coventry  it  was
          reasonable to assume that she had been unable  to  travel  to  the
          hearing in Manchester, that there was supporting evidence that had
          been disregarded, that the appellant  could  not  be  expected  to
          recall events from an election held eleven years ago, that  people
          did engage in risky  activities  under  oppressive  regimes,  that
          details about  the  appellant's  escape  had  been  given  in  her
          evidence and that inadequate weight was  placed  on  the  evidence
          pertaining to her sur place activities.


      13. Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  appellant's  poor  immigration
          history was relevant to the assessment of  her  claim.  There  had
          been  an  obtuse  reading  of  the  judge's  observations  on  the
          appellant's sexuality; what he had meant was that  the  judge  had
          expected that the appellant would feel  disconcerted  at  being  a
          lesbian in the  DRC.  The  judge  had  been  sceptical  about  the
          appellant's assertion that she  had  changed  her  sexuality.  The
          judge had plainly been aware of what the appellant had said at her
          screening  interview  as  there  was  reference  to  it   in   the
          determination. Any misunderstanding by the  appellant  could  have
          been  cleared  up  after  the   interview   by   the   appellant's
          representatives.  There  had  been  proper   self-direction.   The
          appellant's partner  had  not  attended  and  there  had  been  no
          adjournment application to enable her to do so.  It  was  open  to
          the judge to take that into account.


      14. On the political aspect of the claim, Mr Whitwell  submitted  that
          several reasons had been provided by the judge as to why the claim
          had been rejected and he took me through these. He submitted  that
          the grounds were a disagreement with the decision and  asked  that
          the decision be upheld.


      15. Mr Gayle responded. He accepted that the appellant had claimed  to
          be attending a demonstration in the DRC when she was  actually  in
          Belgium but submitted that that did not undermine her credibility.
          He submitted that she had made her fear about return  to  the  DRC
          clear at her interview, that if the judge had seen the appellant's
          answers at the screening interview then it was unclear why she had
          claimed that her  sexuality  had  not  been  mentioned,  that  the
          appellant had signed the interview record but it had not been read
          back to her, that people could not alter their sexuality and  that
          she  may  have  misunderstood  questions  asked  about  that.   He
          submitted that she had been waiting a long time for her appeal  to
          be heard so may not have wanted an adjournment and  there  was  no
          guarantee her partner would be able to attend even if  the  appeal
          had been  relisted.  He  repeated  some  aspects  of  his  earlier
          submissions and concluded by submitting  that  the  appellant  may
          have known how  to  leave  the  airport  and  that  the  UDPS  had
          fragmented since  it  had  taken  power.  He  submitted  that  the
          findings were unsafe and that the decision should be set aside.


      16. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision  which  I
          now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      17. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  made,  I
          reach the following conclusions.


      18. Selecting phrases from the determination in isolation and  out  of
          context is not a helpful practice and does not  assist  in  making
          out a valid challenge. Having read the determination as a whole, I
          find that the criticisms of certain parts of the determination are
          not made out.


      19. Taking the criticisms in turn, I concur with Mr Whitwell that that
          the judge's observations of the appellant's sexuality at paragraph
          23 have been misrepresented.  It  is  plain  that  the  judge  was
          referring to how disconcerted a gay woman would feel  in  the  DRC
          where her sexuality would have been disapproved of.


      20. The judge found  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  between  the
          appellant's evidence that her uncle, with whom she  had  lived  in
          the DCR, did not know about her sexuality and the letter from  her
          representatives of 17 December 2017 where an adjournment had  been
          sought to enable her uncle, who had also come to the UK, to attend
          the hearing and give evidence as it is stated "he  is  aware  that
          the appellant is a lesbian". Mr Gayle  submitted  that  the  uncle
          (whom, I note the appellant referred to as having been  killed  in
          the DRC: A11), became aware of the appellant's sexuality after  he
          came to the UK, however there was no evidence led on this and  the
          uncle did not attend the hearing or provide a  supporting  witness
          statement. Nor did Mr Gayle refer me to any  evidence  to  support
          his submission.


      21. The judge found that if the  appellant  had  fled  to  the  UK  on
          account of her sexuality, then there had been no explanation given
          as to why she should have claimed at her interview  that  she  had
          "stopped" being a lesbian (A12:4.2) or why she should have  chosen
          to seek refuge here. Mr Gayle submitted that the appellant had not
          understood the  question  and  he  pointed  to  the  two  previous
          questions asked of the appellant where she had said  she  had  not
          understood  those.   His  submission,  however,   is   in   direct
          contradiction both to  what  the  appellant  said  at  her  asylum
          interview at a later date and in her  witness  statement.  At  her
          asylum interview when asked why she had said  what  she  did,  the
          appellant replied she had said this because she thought being  gay
          was not permitted in the UK either (at  E7).  She  gave  the  same
          explanation in  her  witness  statement  (at  paragraph  15).   Mr
          Gayle's submission offering  a  completely  different  explanation
          does not, therefore, assist. The judge was entitled to rely on the
          answer given by the appellant at her earlier interview and to find
          that had the appellant's explanation been truthful, there  was  no
          explanation offered as to why she  should  have  decided  to  seek
          asylum in the UK.


      22.  In  reaching  that  conclusion,  the  judge  had  regard  to  the
          appellant's claim to have  been  stressed  at  her  interview  but
          nevertheless she was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
          replies on the matter of her sexuality undermined the  claim  that
          she was gay.


      23. The judge is criticized for her finding that the appellant had not
          disclosed her sexuality at  the  earliest  opportunity.  Mr  Gayle
          submitted that this had been done but when the screening interview
          is read, it is plain that this is not the case. When asked why she
          had come to the UK, the appellant said: "I came to the UK  because
          I needed to help my father" (A5:1.20). when asked  again  to  give
          ALL the reasons why she could not return, she  stated:  "I  cannot
          return to the Congo because I do not have anyone to stay  with  in
          the Congo. The person I used to stay with died and my parents  are
          in the UK" (A11). It was only at the end of the interview that she
          eventually stated: "I was a lesbian and it is forbidden there so I
          cannot return". (at A12). The judge was,  therefore,  entitled  to
          find (at paragraph 24) that had the appellant  genuinely  been  in
          fear due to her sexuality, she  would  have  mentioned  this  when
          first asked.


      24. The judge also noted that the appellant had failed to mention  her
          political activities and fears on  that  basis  at  her  screening
          interview. Apart from maintaining that she had come here  to  look
          after her father, she failed to add that she feared for  her  life
          both because of  her  political  activities  and  because  of  her
          sexuality.  Indeed,  the  appellant  was  asked  at  a  subsequent
          interview (E6) why she had only given her father as her reason for
          coming here and had made no mention of her  political  activities.
          She said she was asked for short answers but however stressed  she
          may have been and however brief she may have been  asked  to  keep
          her replies, it is not credible that she would have failed to make
          any reference at all to her life being at risk when asked why  she
          had come here.


      25. Even at her asylum interview, when  asked  about  her  fears,  the
          appellant mentioned only her political claim (at C5).  When  asked
          if there was anyone or anything else she feared,  she  said:  "No"
          (C6). When asked for any other reasons she could not  return,  she
          gave none (C6) and when asked if her fear was related only to  her
          UDPS activities, she replied in the affirmative (C6).


      26. The judge rejected the claim of  the  relationship  the  appellant
          claimed to have had in the DRC largely on the basis  of  how  they
          were said to have met and the  inconsistencies  between  how  they
          conducted themselves in public (at paragraph 25). Mr Gayle  argued
          that the appellant's clarification on this had not been taken into
          account but the clarification in the witness  statement  does  not
          explain why a different account was given at the interview.


      27. The appellant claims to be in a  relationship  in  the  UK  and  a
          letter  from  her  alleged  partner  and  three  photographs  were
          submitted. The partner did not attend the  hearing,  however,  and
          the judge placed limited weight on the letter and photographs  (of
          which no details were provided) in the absence of other supporting
          evidence. Mr Gayle argued that no reasons were given for rejecting
          this evidence and that  it  was  reasonable  to  assume  that  her
          partner who lived  in  Coventry  had  been  unable  to  travel  to
          Manchester for the hearing. The  appellant's  claim  is  that  the
          relationship  has  been  ongoing  for  some  two  years.  In   the
          circumstances it is indeed strange that her partner would not have
          wanted to support her in her appeal by attending.  The  judge  was
          entitled to draw inferences from the failure of the  appellant  to
          ask  for  an  adjournment  to  enable  her  partner   to   attend;
          alternatively it would have been open for her  to  have  sought  a
          transfer of her appeal from Manchester to Birmingham  to  make  it
          more convenient for both particularly as the appellant claimed  to
          often visit her father and her partner  in  Birmingham.  Moreover,
          the reason given for non- attendance was vague; referred to as "an
          issue with her train ticket/railcard" (at paragraph 10). The judge
          was entitled to expect more supporting  evidence  of  the  claimed
          relationship and was entitled to note that the photographs did not
          establish anything and that no dates were given as  to  when  they
          had been taken and no details provided as to the circumstances  in
          which they were taken.


      28. The supporting letter from the Armistead Centre was, as the  judge
          pointed out, dated  October  2017.  No  updated  letter  had  been
          provided and the appellant's evidence about that was rather  vague
          (at 13). It was open to the judge to find that the letter did  not
          provide any helpful supporting  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
          sexuality (at paragraph 26). She also  noted  that  there  was  no
          supporting evidence from any of the LGBT friends the appellant was
          said to have made.


      29. On the political limb of the  claim,  the  judge  found  that  the
          appellant's failure to mention her party activities  and  fear  of
          return on account of it at her screening interview was  cause  for
          concern. I have set out the details ate paragraph  24  above.  The
          judge  fully  accepted  that  the  screening   interview   was   a
          preliminary interview and that applicants  were  not  expected  to
          provide all  the  details  of  their  claim  at  that  stage,  but
          nevertheless they can be expected to at  least  touch  upon  their
          main reason for leaving their country.


      30. The appellant gave details at the asylum interview of having  been
          at a demonstration in the DRC on 8 March 2013 when  she  had  been
          arrested and had suffered a burn to her buttock (C9). That  caused
          difficulties with her evidence as the records showed that she  had
          been in  Belgium  at  that  time.  Her  evidence  at  a  different
          interview was that she had been in Belgium from 31  December  2012
          until 30 May 2014 (D2). At a later interview when asked to explain
          the discrepancy, the appellant  blamed  the  interpreter  for  the
          inconsistency (at E4) but when it was pointed out that  there  had
          been several references to that  date  and  that  the  interpreter
          could not have mistranslated the date every time, she said she did
          not know why that date came to her mind. In her witness  statement
          said she had been stressed and had made a mistake  (paragraph  17)
          but it is not credible if that were the case  why  she  repeatedly
          gave an incorrect specific date.


      31. The judge is criticized for having given  inadequate  reasons  for
          rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  of  political  activities  and
          problems, but the judge has provided full and sustainable  reasons
          (at 28-32). The appellant's account of how she  escaped  from  the
          authorities is garbled at best  (at  interview)  and  her  witness
          statement does not  clarify  it.  The  judge  noted  that  despite
          claiming that the authorities had her photograph and were actively
          searching for her, she was able to leave through the  airport  (at
          31). Mr Gayle argued that the appellant may have known how to make
          her way through the airport but there is no  evidence  to  support
          that submission. It is not helpful to make submissions without any
          evidence to back them up.


      32. A few photographs said to be of the appellant at  a  demonstration
          at an unspecified location in London  have  been  adduced.  It  is
          unclear as to how these would place the appellant at risk  in  the
          absence of any other reliable evidence that she was involved  with
          the UDPS. IN any event, as the judge found, the Kabila  government
          feared by the appellant is no longer in charge and she has  failed
          to establish why her own party would  target  her  on  return  for
          assisting them.


      33. The judge also had regard  to  the  appellant's  poor  immigration
          history. Previous attempts to enter the UK using a false document,
          using a different name and date of birth were made. The  appellant
          also failed to  claim  asylum  on  entry  and  initially  did  not
          disclose her asylum claim in Belgium. She initially  claimed  only
          to have been fingerprinted in the DRC (A6) and  only  at  a  later
          interview did she admit to having been  fingerprinted  in  Belgium
          too (D2). No satisfactory explanation has ever  been  offered  for
          the appellant's use of so different names.


      34. It is also of note that the appellant initially claimed  that  she
          had never been detained  in  any  country  (A8),  but  then  later
          admitted to detention in Belgium (C2). It was not until  later  in
          her main asylum interview that she claimed detention  in  the  DRC
          (C7-8).


      35. For all these reasons I conclude that the judge properly  assessed
          and determined the appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  both  the
          political claim and the claim based on the appellant's  sexuality.
          I do not find there are any errors of law in the determination.


          Decision


      36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of
          law and it is upheld.


          Anonymity


      37. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 6 March 2020




