
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13249/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2017                      |On 22 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     UI

                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Frantzis    (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy         (Senior Home Presenting Officer)


                                                        DECISION AND
REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bagral hereinafter "the Judge") whereupon
she dismissed her appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  of
14 November 2016 refusing to grant international protection.  This decision
is brief because of a concession made before me on behalf of  the  Secretary
of State.

2.    The claimant is a national of Pakistan and had sought  asylum  in  the
United Kingdom on 19 May 2016 on the basis that she had been  a  previous
victim of domestic and sexual violence and would face further  ill-treatment
if she were to be returned to Pakistan.   Her  account  of  events  was  not
accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  being  a  truthful   one   and,
accordingly, her claim was refused and she appealed.

3.    As noted above, the claimant's appeal was  dismissed.   Quite  simply,
the Judge did not believe  her.   Further,  the Judge  gave  comprehensive
reasons for that  disbelief  which  appear  from  paragraphs 22-43  of  her
written reasons.  Permission to appeal, though,  was  obtained.   The  point
which secured permission was that whilst the Judge had  said  the  claimant
had failed to mention, in a witness statement, that she had been the  victim
of domestic violence and in particular sexual violence at the hands  of  her
former husband, and had taken a point against her as to that,  the  claimant
had indeed referred to it in that very statement.

4.    Permission having been granted there was a hearing before me in  order
to decide whether the Judge had erred in law.   I  had  imagined  that  the
matter would be contested but, after  some  discussion,  Mr Duffy  conceded
that the Judge had erred in the manner it was suggested she might have done
in the grant of permission and that such error was material.

5.    In my view there is much  to  commend  the Judge's  thorough  written
reasons.  Nevertheless, the above error was certainly made, no doubt due  to
an understandable oversight, and given that the above  concession  has  been
made there is no disagreement as to the  error  of  law  issue  between  the
parties.   In  those  circumstances,  whilst  I  am  not  bound  to   follow
concessions, it seems to me it is appropriate that  I  do  so.  Accordingly,
effectively by consent, I set aside the Judge's characteristically  careful
decision and, since the accepted error is concerned with  the  soundness  of
the credibility assessment, I remit for a complete rehearing  in  accordance
with brief directions which I set out below.


Directions

1.    There will be a complete rehearing of the appeal  before  a  judge  of
the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Bagral.

2.    Nothing shall be  preserved  from  the  findings  and  conclusions  of
Judge Bagral.

3.    The claimant is to be provided with an Urdu speaking interpreter.

4.    These directions may be replaced, amended or supplemented  by  further
directions issued by any salaried judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set  aside.   There  shall  be  a  complete  rehearing  before  a
different judge of the First-tier Tribunal so that the decision may be  re-
made.


Anonymity-Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  to  both
the Appellant and Respondent. Failure to comply could lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Signed:                           Date:  22 August 2017



Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                           Date:  22 August 2017



Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

