
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13346/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   Mr S Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E W B Fripp, Counsel instructed by Morden
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.   In  a  decision  dated  14
    November 2018 Judge Manyarara of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision by the respondent dated 29 November 2017 to
    refuse his protection claim.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim  was  that  he  is  a  Christian  in
    Pakistan and that  he  was  involved  in  charitable  and  welfare  and
    teaching activities there which began to  cause  difficulties  for  him
    when he allowed four Muslim students to join his class in the summer of
    2011.  Subsequently in July 2011 two men  visited  his  home  and  they
    started vandalising  things  and  accusing  him  of  teaching  children
    Christianity.  He said he was punched and kicked and that the scars and
    wounds are still visible.  His neighbours took him to the doctor and he
    was given painkillers.   The  police  accused  him  of  misguiding  the
    children. He discovered on the same day that some  Muslim  sympathisers
    had had a meeting at a nearby  mosque  accusing  him  of  teaching  the
    Christian faith to Muslim students.  A fatwa was  issued  against  him.
    He fled from his home area and went to Lahore with his family and lived
    there for two months.  He was then able to secure  a  student  visa  to
    come to the United Kingdom.  His claim was that there is an outstanding
    FIR in his name and he is afraid that he will be arrested on account of
    the blasphemy charges brought against him.

3.   The judge did not believe the appellant had given  a  credible  account
    and concluded that apart  from  the  fact  that  he  was  a  Christian,
    something the respondent had already accepted, he had not shown that he
    had had adverse experience at the  hands  of  Muslim  extremists  as  a
    result of his activities in Pakistan teaching children.

4.   The appellant's grounds are fourfold.  Firstly, they contend  that  the
    judge  failed  to  address  corroborative  material  in   relation   to
    credibility and they identify in particular the statement of Mr  Joseph
    Francis of the Centre for Legal Aid Assistance and  Settlement  (CLAAS)
    dated 2 October 2018.  In this letter Mr Francis, who is an MBE, stated
    that he had had an approach from the appellant's family in January 2018
    and was told that the appellant had faced difficulties at the hands  of
    extremists in Pakistan.  He stated in this letter:

         "I decided to verify the facts narrated by the  applicant's  family
         for which I contacted Mr Naveed Amir Jeeva a Member of the National
         Assembly Pakistan  who  was  residing  in  the  same  area  as  the
         appellant and his family.  According to Mr Jeeva Zia and his family
         were  facing  threats  from  radical  Muslims.   After  Mr  Jeeva's
         confirmation of the facts I am convinced that Mr Zia's life  is  in
         danger".

5.   The second ground contends that the judge made  errors  of  fact  which
    were material to the judge's assessment, in particular  it  is  alleged
    that the judge wrongly considered that the appellant had left  Pakistan
    as a result of a FIR brought against him.  It  was  contended  that  in
    fact the FIR was dated 3 September 2011 which  was  a  week  after  the
    appellant had left Pakistan.

6.   The third ground alleges that the judge failed to  address  freedom  of
    religious expression consistently with HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31,  and
    the fourth ground contends that the judge failed to address freedom  of
    religious expression consistently  with  HJ(Iran)  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's attitude to his religious faith.

7.   I am grateful to the submissions I had from both  parties.   Mr  Tarlow
    for the respondent indicated, having heard Mr Fripp's submissions, that
    he did not resist the application for permission.

8.   I have concluded  that  the  judge  did  materially  err  in  law.   In
    relation to the first ground  it  is  plain  that  the  judge  made  no
    reference whatsoever to the evidence of Mr Joseph Francis, somebody who
    has been referred to by the Home Office CIPN Report.   Albeit  hearsay,
    it was relevant evidence that the judge was required to consider as  to
    whether  or  not  the  appellant  and  his   family   had   experienced
    difficulties at the hands of extremists in Pakistan by  virtue  of  his
    Christian teaching.

9.   It was also an error of the judge not to have  considered  the  precise
    contents of the other letters that were before him, in particular  from
    the Reverend Canon Younis of The Parish of St Philip.  At paragraph  58
    the judge said that this letter  referred  to  the  appellant  being  a
    member of the  church  since  2016  and  went  on  to  state  that  the
    respondent had already accepted that the appellant is a Christian,  the
    implication being that there was nothing further to be gained from  the
    contents of this letter.  In fact, this letter identified the appellant
    as an active Christian, a very  committed  member  of  the  church  and
    someone who "is also actively involved  in  street  evangelism  through
    discussion and leafleting ...".

10.  The second ground alleges that the  judge  made  a  material  error  in
    relation to the chronology of events in respect of the fatwas  and  the
    FIR that was said to have been taken out against the appellant.   I  do
    not consider that ground 2 as such identifies an error of law since  it
    is not clear overall that the judge misunderstood  that  the  appellant
    departed Pakistan as a result of the actions of the  extremists.   That
    said, the judge's reason for rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  FIR  is
    questionable.  At paragraph 52 the judge  said  that  despite  claiming
    that there was a fatwa against him following the FIR the appellant  was
    nevertheless able to leave Pakistan via  the  normal  channels  without
    being apprehended. The judge said that "I find that this would  not  be
    so if he had been charged with blasphemy as opposed  to  an  allegation
    simply being made against him.  I therefore place no weight on the  FIR
    dated 2 July 2011 as a result of my findings on the credibility of  the
    appellant's account".

11.   Leaving  aside  that   this   last   sentence   appears   to   wrongly
    compartmentalise the FIR evidence from  the  other  evidence,  both  of
    which were relevant to the issue of credibility, the judge's  assertion
    is not supported by any of the Country of Origin Information  that  was
    before him.  In the  context  of  fatwas  by  local  clerics  and  FIRs
    relating to blasphemy, there was no evidence that  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan who conduct airport controls  would  apprehend  a  person  who
    faced such charges.

12.  Given my findings in relation to ground 1  and  ground  2,  it  is  not
    necessary for me to address grounds 3 and 4 in any  detail.   They  are
    premised on the judge having been found wanting in the findings of fact
    made that the appellant had not had charges or fatwas  brought  against
    him and had not been evangelical and proselytising in Pakistan.   Given
    that the difficulties with the judge's primary  findings  of  fact  are
    what have led me to find a material error of law it is unnecessary  for
    me to reach a view on these, save to say that on their face  I  am  not
    persuaded that they establish any further error  on  the  part  of  the
    judge.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and the judge's decision must be set aside.

14.  Given that the challenge  in  the  grounds  relates  primarily  to  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings, I see no alternative to remitting
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Manyarara.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 2 February 2019

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
