
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13578/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2019                              |On 29th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             Mr md ashraful alam
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Sarker (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D. Ross, promulgated on 20th February 2019, following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 8th February 2019.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was  born  on  20
    June 1991.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  for
    refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of HC  395.   The  decision  to  refuse  is  dated  20th
    November 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his family members were in
    a land dispute with the extended family, involving several uncles,  and
    that these family  members  were  affiliated  with  the  Awami  League,
    whereas the Appellant's own  family  were  members  of  the  Bangladesh
    National Party, the BNP.   The  attacks  that  the  Appellant  endured,
    together with his family members,  were  heightened  by  the  political
    dimension, which made it difficult for him to seek a state  of  redress
    in Bangladesh, causing him to eventually seek sanctuary in the UK.   As
    Judge Ross pointed out the Appellant's case is based  on  two  factors,
    namely, "the  land  dispute,  which  he  claims  is  ongoing  with  his
    relations, who have forced his  family  to  move  to  another  part  of
    Bangladesh" (paragraph 14) and the fact that "the Appellant would be at
    risk if returned to Bangladesh on account of his  political  views,  he
    being a member of the BNP" (paragraph 16).

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a detailed and wide ranging determination, the judge held  that  the
    claim with respect to the land dispute was not sustainable because "the
    Appellant has been very inconsistent in relation to the question of the
    incidents between him and his family" and that there had been a FIR  in
    2009, as well as an additional one, and the difficulty here  was  that,
    "One FIR shows his father being  attacked  and  one  shows  his  family
    attacking his relatives.  This does suggest friction between them,  but
    not that his family are intimidated" (paragraph 14).   Thereafter,  the
    judge  observed  how  the  Appellant  had  moved  to  another  part  of
    Bangladesh for two years before coming to the UK and did not suffer any
    harm (paragraph 15).

 5. In relation to the political aspect of the claim,  the  judge  observed
    that the Appellant's claim, being dependent upon his membership of  the
    BNP, was one where

         "He claims to have been the cultural secretary in his  region.   At
         the hearing I heard from Mr Raza who is the  general  secretary  of
         the BNP in London.  He stated that the Appellant was  the  cultural
         secretary in his region.  He confirmed that the Appellant  attended
         meetings in London."

 6. However, the judge went on to say that,

         "I notice that the witness did not say that the Appellant would  be
         at risk on return.  It  is  notable  that  the  Appellant's  family
         consisting  of  his  mother,  father  and  brother  are   all   BNP
         supporters, and they  have  not  felt  it  necessary  to  flee  the
         country" (paragraph 16).

 7. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.



Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge had  erred  in  law  by
    failing to have  regard  to  the  "whole  picture".   First,  when  the
    Appellant was asked in the screening interview  at  paragraph  4.1,  to
    give all the reasons why he could not return to his  home  country,  he
    had said, "I fear if I went back to Bangladesh,  my  uncles  will  kill
    me", and he had gone on to say, "I moved to a safer part of  Bangladesh
    for two years after this but I never felt  safe  due  to  my  political
    issues".

 9. Second, the grounds state that  the  alleged  inconsistency  about  the
    family residence that the judge  referred  to  was  also  unsustainable
    because the Appellant had stated at paragraph  9.7  of  his  SEF  that,
    "they always threatened them so they cannot live at home safely",  when
    referring to his family.

10. Third, it was said  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of the attacks of  the  Appellant  when  he  had  stated  at
    (paragraph 14) that "the FIRs are confusing".  This was because if  the
    judge took this view then "the judge may have placed little  weight  on
    the FIRs" (see paragraph 17 of the grounds).

11. Fourth, it was said that  the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's ability to internally relocate was flawed because the judge
    failed to have regard to what the Appellant had said  in  his  SEF  (at
    paragraphs 96 to 97) that, "they always threaten them, so  they  cannot
    live at home safely."

12. Fifth, it was said that the judge had also erred  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's supporting witness, when the judge stated at (paragraph 16)
    that Mr Raja, the general secretary of the BNP in London, "did not  say
    that the appellant would be on risk on return", given that he had  said
    exactly that in a letter of 14th October 2018 that, "Mr  Alam's  active
    presence in the party's activities makes his life  more  vulnerable  in
    Bangladesh".

13. Sixth, it was  said  that  the  judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's BNP supporting family did not leave Bangladesh  because  in
    the Appellant's SEF (from paragraphs 99 to 102) the Appellant had  said
    that his family had not moved "because we do  not  have  enough  money"
    (see paragraph 99).

14. Seventh, the grounds allege that there was an error in relation to  the
    evidence from the UK BNP  activity  as  not  being  indicative  of  the
    problems that the Appellant was subject to, because the judge  observed
    at (paragraph 17) that,

         "He  has  produced  evidence  of  activity  in  the  UK,  including
         attending demonstrations and writing critical comments on the  web,
         but I do not consider that the  government  would  be  particularly
         interested in his activities.  It is not  the  case  in  Bangladesh
         that anybody who is a member of the BNP is targeted".

    However, the judge failed to give due reasons why such activities would
    not attract attention of the Bangladesh authorities.

15.  Eighth,  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to   not   considering   the
    circumstances of the Appellant's exit from Bangladesh.  The judge found
    that the Appellant left Bangladesh using his  own  passport  (paragraph
    17), but the Appellant was allowed to exit because he  did  not  notify
    the authorities and they did not know about his leaving.

16. Ninth, there  was  an  error  in  relation  to  the  criticism  of  the
    Appellant's delay in claiming asylum, when it was  said  (at  paragraph
    18) that the Appellant had delayed for six years  in  claiming  asylum,
    and had made a student  application,  because  he  "did  not  know  the
    system" (see paragraph 37 of the grounds).

17. Finally, it is said that  there  was  an  error  in  attaching  adverse
    credibility to representations made in the Appellant's visa application
    (at paragraph 18) because the Appellant had lied  about  being  charged
    with any offences in another country when he applied originally for his
    visa, as this overlooks the fact that the Appellant was worried that he
    would not be able to enter the UK.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on 3rd April  2019  on
    the basis that the judge attached excessive  weight  to  the  screening
    interview,  that  the  judge's  conclusion  in  relation  to   internal
    relocation  had  been  affected;  that  the  evidence  of  the  general
    secretary, Mr Raja, had been given insufficient weight, and that  there
    had been an insufficient  analysis  of  the  relationship  between  the
    activities of the Appellant in the UK and the core of  the  Appellant's
    claim.

Submissions

19. At the hearing before me on  13th  May  2019,  Mr  Sarker  of  Counsel,
    appearing on behalf of the Appellant, also had a well compiled "written
    submissions"  document  for  the  Tribunal.  In  his  submissions,   he
    diligently  followed  through  these  written   submissions   for   the
    assistance of  the  Tribunal.   He  began  by  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellant's claim was  "interconnected  to  the  central  claim",  when
    reference was made to the land dispute, because this was connected with
    the political aspect of the claim.

20. The Appellant had mentioned that he feared his uncles  would  kill  him
    (see SCR4.1) and he had mentioned the political problems with his uncle
    (see question 33 of the SEF at B6 of the Respondent's bundle); and that
    he had expanded on the land dispute (see questions 38 to  59),  and  he
    had mentioned having fear of being killed  (question  33).   Mr  Sarker
    submitted that he would be the first to admit that  the  Appellant  had
    indeed been inconsistent in his evidence, but this was because  he  was
    confused, when relating the timings of the attacks  on  him.   However,
    the fact remained that he had  been  attacked  two  times.   The  first
    attack took place in 2008, the second took place in 2009.

21. The judge had been confused at paragraph  14  when  stating  that  "the
    Appellant has been very inconsistent in relation to the question of the
    incidents between him  and  his  family",  because  he  had  failed  to
    distinguish between the fact that there was a FIR only in  relation  to
    the attack on 12th August 2009.  There was no FIR for the 2008  attack.
    However, in 2009 there were  two  attacks.   Both  these  attacks  were
    mentioned in the 2009 FIRS.  The first of these attacks was "the second
    attack" that took place in the Appellant's house in his  village.   The
    first attack, was the one that took place on the road in 2008,  and  in
    relation to this there was no FIR.  When the judge  states  that,  "one
    FIR shows his father being attacked and one shows his family  attacking
    his relatives.  This does suggest friction between them, but  not  that
    the  family  are  intimidated",  this  overlooks  the  fact  that   the
    Appellant's family lodged an FIR against the  Awami  League  relatives,
    and had been subject then to abuse, threats,  and  harassment  to  have
    them killed, from those relatives.  The judge had not appreciated this.

22. Second, Mr Sarker went on to say that the judge had erred  in  relation
    to his assessment of the availability of internal  relocation  for  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant had attempted to relocate for two years,  but
    the risk of violence flaring up was very much on his  mind.   Moreover,
    his family were still threatened, and this is clear from  what  appears
    at B8 to  B9  of  the  Respondent's  bundle,  and  the  SEF  interview.
    Furthermore, the judge had found (at paragraph 16) that the Appellant's
    family did not leave the area, and this too was an  error  because  the
    SEF made it clear (see questions 99 to 102) that the Appellant made  it
    clear that they did not have enough money to leave, and so continued to
    face threats.

23. Third, Mr Sarker submitted that the judge  had  overlooked  the  letter
    from Mr Raja, of 14th October 2018, which had made it quite clear  that
    the Appellant would face risk on return, preferring instead  to  simply
    refer to the oral evidence of Mr Raja.

24. Finally, the judge had erred in relation to the risk on return for  the
    Appellant given his political profile, because the Appellant  had  been
    heavily involved in a lot of UK BNP activities,  attending  various  UK
    BNP events, protests, and demonstrations.  He had published in  Bengali
    newspapers.  He attended alongside the chairman  of  the  BNP  himself.
    There was  much  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  of  all  these
    activities.  The Appellant  mentioned  in  his  witness  statement  (at
    paragraph 9) that the new legislation in  Bangladesh,  of  the  Digital
    Security Act 2018, would bring  him  under  risk,  and  this  placed  a
    sentence of fourteen years' imprisonment  on  all  those  indicted  for
    publishing  primitive  content  on  the  internet.  The  Appellant  had
    produced evidence, covering a period of time, of his critical  comments
    against the Awami League (see the Appellant's bundle from pages  52  to
    103).  He had been promoted from being a general member of the  UK  BNP
    to  an  executive  member.   He  was  an  activist.   He   would   face
    persecution.  I should allow this appeal and remit the matter  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

25. For her part, Ms Jones submitted that the Appellant could not  succeed.
    This was a mere disagreement with the decision of the  judge.   By  his
    own admission, it was accepted by Mr Sarker,  that  the  Appellant  had
    been inconsistent.  If this was the case then any finding by the  judge
    in relation to the confusion  caused  by  the  FIRs  was  bound  to  be
    understandable.

26. Second, having decided that the first part of  the  Appellant's  claim,
    namely, the land dispute, was one which, "I am not  inclined  to  place
    much weight on ..." (paragraph 14), the judge did go on  to  deal  very
    specifically  with  the  political  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  claim
    (paragraphs 16 to  19),  and  had  given  ample  reasons  for  why  the
    Appellant's case could not succeed in this regard.

27. Third, it could not be overlooked that the Appellant had made a student
    application, knowing that he had an FIR in 2009 in the background,  and
    then still failed to apply for asylum for six years  after  arrival  in
    this country.  Finally, the Appellant had left on his own passport  and
    delayed considerably in applying for asylum, and only did so  after  he
    had been encountered.

No Error of Law

28. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law, such  that  I  should
    set aside the decision and remake the decision (see  Section  12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

29. First, in relation to the political  claim  that  the  Appellant  risks
    being persecuted on account of his political views,  there  is  nothing
    that the judge has left unconsidered, in rejecting this aspect  of  the
    claim:

      a) First, the judge notes that the Appellant claims to have  been  the
         cultural secretary of his region.  He notes that there was evidence
         from Mr Raja, who is the general secretary of the  BNP  in  London.
         He notes how there is evidence that the Appellant attended meetings
         in London.  The president of the London branch had been arrested in
         Bangladesh whilst he was on a family visit, and this too  is  taken
         into account.  However, the judge is not wrong in  saying  that  in
         looking at the oral evidence of Mr Raja, he "did not say  that  the
         Appellant would be at risk on return".  Mr Sarker submits that this
         overlooks the fact that there was a letter of 14th October 2018  in
         the Respondent's bundle where Mr Raja does say that there is a risk
         of ill-treatment.  Even if this is so, one has  to  read  the  next
         sentence of the judge's determination where he observes  that,  "it
         is notable that the Appellant's family consisting  of  his  mother,
         father and brother are all BNP supporters, and  have  not  felt  it
         necessary to flee the country" (paragraph 16).  This conclusion the
         judge was entitled to come to.  It is a conclusion arrived at after
         looking at the entirety of the evidence before the Tribunal, and it
         provides an insight into why the judge was not satisfied  that  the
         Appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment.

      b) Second, the judge observes that there is  an  allegation  that  the
         political landscape is marred by violence and  human  rights  abuse
         and that torture is prevalent, but his conclusion in  this  respect
         is that the Country Information Report makes it clear (at paragraph
         2.2.10) that "he is somebody who is an ordinary  party  member  and
         supporter who is not at risk.  I  do  not  consider  that  being  a
         cultural secretary would  be  somebody  who  the  government  would
         regard as a risk" (paragraph 17).  This shows that the judge did in
         fact take into account the fact that the Appellant was a  "cultural
         secretary".  This aspect of the claim was not  overlooked.   Having
         taken it into account, the judge rejected it  as  suggestive  of  a
         heightened risk to the Appellant.  The judge was entitled to so do.



      c) Third, with regard to membership of the BNP, the judge was  equally
         entitled to conclude that "the BNP is a legal party.  The Appellant
         left Bangladesh using his own passport, which again  suggests  that
         the authorities are not interested in him" (paragraph 17).

      d) Finally, and most importantly, the  judge's  conclusion  that  "the
         Appellant arrived in the UK in 2012, and did not claim asylum until
         after he had been detained  in  2018  undermines  his  credibility"
         (paragraph 18), is highly relevant.

30. Second, in relation to the non-political aspect of the  claim,  namely,
    "the land dispute" and the ongoing problems  with  his  relations,  the
    judge was entirely correct to say that the Appellant  did  not  mention
    this in the screening interview, and that if  the  Appellant  had  been
    genuinely frightened of his uncles and cousins setting out to kill him,
    that he would have done so.  But in any event, the judge  reasons  that
    the Appellant's father "who is the main protagonist", is a  person  who
    continues to remain in Bangladesh.  This is to say nothing of the  fact
    that the Appellant had  been  very  inconsistent  in  relation  to  the
    incidents between him and the family.  He could  not  even  decide  how
    many times he had been attacked.  The  judge  also  observes  that  the
    Appellant's involvement in a public order  offence  involving  a  large
    number of defendants nine years ago would not  place  him  at  risk  of
    persecution on return.  In the end, the  judge  properly  accepts  that
    there was "friction between them", but his family were not  intimidated
    by the relatives (paragraph 14).  The decision cannot be criticised.

31. Third, the Appellant did  internally  relocate  for  two  years  before
    coming to the UK and the judge was correct in saying that at that  time
    "he did not suffer any harm".  It was one thing for the  Appellant  not
    to  have  suffered  any  harm,  and  to  have  been  entirely  safe  in
    relocating, and quite another to say that he still believed that he was
    at risk.  The latter does not confirm the former.   Indeed,  the  judge
    makes it clear that "there is no  reason  to  believe  that  they  [his
    relatives] would have been able to track him down" (paragraph 15).

32. All in  all,  the  grounds  of  appeal  amounted  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the well compiled determination of Judge Ross.  There
    is no error of law.



Notice of Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law. The decision shall stand.

34. No anonymity direction is made.

35. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th May 2019

