







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13454/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|On: 23 April 2019                 |On: 01 May 2019                          |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                     K T
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, counsel, instructed by David Benson
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





      Direction Regarding Anonymity

      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 2 February 1984.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who dismissed his asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
      human rights claims in a decision promulgated on 18 February 2019.

   2. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin stated  that
      it is arguable that the First-tier Judge erred in  the  assessment  of
      the clinical findings of Dr Persaud. The appellant  had  relied  on  a
      psychiatric report prepared by Dr Raj Persaud.

   3. In his report before the First-tier Tribunal Dr Persaud stated that he
      had very serious concerns as to the ability of the appellant  to  give
      evidence, in  that  he  is  clearly  very  disturbed,  anxious,  lacks
      concentration and became visibly  very  upset  at  times  and  it  was
      difficult to extract  information  from  him.  He  observed  from  his
      clinical  findings  that  his  condition  would  deteriorate   in   an
      adversarial environment and his "fitness" to give evidence will depend
      upon how he feels on the day.

   4. In the event, counsel who represented the appellant before  the  First
      tier Tribunal decided not to call the appellant to give evidence.

   5. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal, counsel  who  represented
      the appellant before the First tier Tribunal  -  not  Ms  Jegarajah  -
      noted that  Dr  Persaud  specifically  records  having  sight  of  the
      appellant's GP medical records,  and  did  not  exclusively  base  his
      clinical findings on the GP's records. Further, Dr Persaud referred to
      the appellant's extremely high scores  indicative  of  serious  mental
      health issues as a result  of  having  secondary  care  mental  health
      treatment. He noted that the appellant  had  been  prescribed  various
      anti depressant medication and that the medication had changed over  a
      space of time resulting in the latest prescription of Mirtazipine.

   6. The First-tier Judge rejected the clinical findings of Dr Persaud.  At
      [18], the Judge stated as follows:

           "Although I accept Dr Persaud's medical qualifications,  and  am
           aware that he has provided numerous psychiatric reports for  the
           Tribunal, I note that in the paragraph in the  report  detailing
           his expertise he fails to mention the fact that in 2008  he  was
           suspended from practising for three months because of 'dishonest
           conduct' (he had admitted plagiarism)."

   7. The source of that information was not  disclosed  by  the  First-tier
      Judge Tribunal Judge. Mr Tarlow confirmed that there is no  indication
      in the presenting officer's minutes about this.

   8. At [25] the Judge stated that  her  concerns  regarding  Dr  Persaud's
      report  also  led  her  to  question  his  conclusion  regarding   the
      appellant's fitness to give evidence.  She  found  that  although  the
      medical evidence as a whole is that the appellant has  been  diagnosed
      with PTSD, anxiety  and  depression,  she  did  not  find  that  these
      diagnoses are in themselves  persuasive  of  the  credibility  of  his
      claim. There were other causes, such  as  the  detention  in  the  UK,
      uncertain immigration status and the separation from his family, which
      would also be likely causes.

   9. Ms Jegarajah produced a statement from Dr Persaud,  dated  1  February
      2015, in which he set out the history and context of his suspension by
      the GMC. Mr Tarlow did not object to its production.

  10. Dr Persaud states that he had been asked by solicitors  to  prepare  a
      response to the comments made by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Harries
      dated 15 September 2014 to his report dated 22 January 2014.

  11. He noted that Judge Harries stated in his determination at  [33]  that
      information in the public domain confirms Dr Persaud's claim  to  have
      been recently voted one of the top ten psychiatrists in the  UK  by  a
      survey of the  Institute  of  Psychiatry  and  the  Royal  College  of
      Psychiatrists published in  the  "Independent  on  Sunday"  newspaper,
      albeit in 2002, since which time he has been found guilty of  bringing
      his profession into disrepute such that the GMC found that his fitness
      to practice was impaired and he  was  suspended  from  practising  for
      three months in 2008.

  12. Judge Harries went on to state at [34] that the information,  also  in
      the public domain, about this episode is that the suspension  followed
      a finding of plagiarism in work that Dr  Persaud  had  published.  The
      panel therefore determined that his actions were dishonest.

  13. Judge Harries stated at  [35]  that  the  parties  did  not  have  the
      opportunity to address him on these matters at the hearing and did not
      contribute to his findings, which were then set out,  leading  him  to
      conclude that only limited weight can be attached to the  findings  of
      Dr Persaud.

  14. Dr Persaud stated that he is confused by the issue of the GMC  hearing
      as raised by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harries at the time. To go so
      far as to raise it and then say  that  it  is  not  relevant  is  very
      confusing.

  15. Dr Persaud stated that he was the subject of a GMC FTP hearing in June
      2008 and as a result was suspended for  three  months.  Following  the
      suspension, he was allowed to return to full time practice without any
      conditions or restrictions and without  a  re-hearing.  He  worked  at
      Surrey  and  Borders  NHS  Trust  'consequently'   as   a   consultant
      psychiatrist for over a year before  moving  into  full  time  private
      practice in Harley Street. He noted that it was confusing to him  that
      the Upper Tribunal Judge brought up the GMC hearing and  some  of  its
      findings but made no mention that he was allowed  to  return  to  full
      time practice without any conditions or restrictions and without a re-
      hearing.

  16. It was acknowledged that no patient harm had occurred and  there  were
      no concerns about his clinical practice that were raised. He  set  out
      an extract from the GMC Final Determination which could also be  found
      on the internet.

  17. The GMC in the final determination noted that he has  the  support  of
      his employers and that he has taken remedial action to ensure that  he
      does not find himself in a  similar  position  again.  The  allegation
      against him was with reference to a  book  written  by  him,  said  to
      amount to journalistic plagiarism. The complaint  was  made  from  the
      Church of Scientology. The panel accepted that he was under huge  work
      pressure at the time and had over committed himself.

  18. The panel was also impressed by the testimonial  references  submitted
      by eminent persons and colleagues.  The  misconduct  occurred  between
      three and five years ago and  there  has  been  no  evidence  that  he
      repeated this type of behaviour. The panel concluded that it is highly
      unlikely that he would ever repeat his actions in the future.

  19. Dr Persaud stated that he felt acutely  embarrassed  about  the  whole
      matter. He has full registration with the GMC and currently is not the
      subject of any current concerns. Nor is  he  aware  of  any  cases  or
      complaints against him in the pipeline.

  20. Having considered the report from Dr Persaud, Mr Tarlow stated that in
      the light of the finding by the GMC,  it  would  be  coronary  to  the
      interests of justice to seek to uphold the current decision.

  21. In the circumstances, the parties agreed that the decision  should  be
      set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
      to be made by another Judge.

      Assessment

  22. It is evident that the Judge was critical of the failure of Dr Persaud
      to mention that he was suspended in 2008  from  practising  for  three
      months because of dishonest conduct, having admitted plagiarism.

  23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated that her concerns  regarding  his
      report led her to  question  Dr  Persaud's  conclusion  regarding  the
      appellant's fitness to give evidence. The parties were  not  given  an
      opportunity to deal with any apparent  private  misgivings  she  might
      have had about his  suspension  from  practice  because  of  dishonest
      conduct. Dr Persaud  has  full  registration  with  the  GMC  and  has
      continued  to  practice  as  a  private   practitioner   without   any
      restrictions and without a re-hearing.

  24. I accept Ms Jegaragah's submission it cannot  be  concluded  with  any
      degree  of  certainty  that  the  Judge's  apparent  criticism  of  Dr
      Persaud's failure to disclose  his  full  background  might  not  have
      tainted and affected her approach to his  report  and  his  conclusion
      regarding the appellant's fitness to give evidence.

  25. I accept that in  the  circumstances  the  decision  cannot  stand.  I
      accordingly set it aside. The parties submitted that the  case  should
      be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  decision  to  be
      made.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.


      Having set it aside, I remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.






                                   Signed:


                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                      27 April 2019












