
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13838/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 4, 2019                             |On March 7, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                   mr R A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shea, Counsel, instructed by Fawad Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Pakistani national,  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    August 2012 as a student. On December 4, 2015  he  claimed  asylum  but
    before his claim could be decided he moved address and failed to notify
    the Home Office. His claim was closed. He  thereafter  made  a  further
    application for asylum on February 8, 2017. The respondent refused this
    application on December 8, 2017.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  Section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 22, 2017.

 3. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Juss  on  May
    18, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on  August  1,  2018  the  Judge
    dismissed his appeal on all grounds

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on August 13, 2018.  The  challenge  to
    the Judge's  decision  centred  around  paragraph  17  of  the  Judge's
    decision.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson refused permission on
    August 27, 2018. The appellant renewed his grounds  of  appeal  and  on
    August 27, 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal
    finding it arguable the Judge had erred by failing to apply the  fourth
    test set out in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 namely  to  consider  why  the
    appellant was living discreetly.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 6. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Shea adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge  had
    erred in finding the appellant  was  not  covered  by  HJ  (Iran).  The
    respondent and the Judge  had  both  accepted  the  appellant's  sexual
    orientation  including  the  fact  the  appellant  had  been  convicted
    outraging public decency for which he received  a  Community  Order  on
    November 11, 2015. This was evidence that the appellant would  not  act
    discreetly, and the Judge had erred in failing to  make  that  finding.
    There was evidence in the form of a newspaper report  which  the  Judge
    failed to attach weight to and the Judge had taken  his  answers  about
    living discreetly in the United Kingdom out of context and  had  failed
    to consider that he had been living in a Pakistani community where such
    behaviour was not tolerated.

 8. Mr McVeety submitted there was no error in law. The Judge had  rejected
    the newspaper article and the grounds of appeal had not challenged that
    finding. Whilst the appellant stated in his witness statement  that  he
    lived openly as a gay person and that he feared persecution were he  to
    be returned this had to be considered against his oral evidence that he
    gave at the hearing in which he denied living openly and when asked why
    he was unable to give a real reason. Mr McVeety submitted this was  not
    a case covered by HJ (Iran).

    FINDINGS

 9. When this appeal came  before  the  First-tier  Judge,  the  respondent
    accepted the appellant's claimed sexuality and the Judge was aware  the
    appellant had been convicted of outraging public decency in relation to
    an incident that occurred on June  24,  2014.  The  Judge  referred  to
    evidence provided by the appellant in his oral evidence which he stated
    contradicted what was contained in his witness statement. In  paragraph
    17 of the decision, the Judge set out aspects of the  cross-examination
    and recorded that the appellant was discreet about  his  sexuality  and
    when asked to explain why he was discreet, he had  said  there  was  no
    particular reason.

10. In submissions Mr Shea submitted that this  answer  was  taken  out  of
    context and failed to consider the fact the appellant was living within
    a Pakistani community where such behaviour would not be tolerated.

11. The issue the Judge had to deal with was whether  the  appellant  would
    choose to live discreetly in Pakistan through a fear of persecution. If
    he chose to live discreetly through  choice  rather  than  persecution,
    there would be no refugee claim.

12. At paragraphs 15-18 the Judge reminded himself of the appropriate tests
    to be applied. Whilst reliance was placed on the newspaper article  the
    Judge rejected that article and gave adequate reasons  which  were  not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal. The Judge went  on  to  find  that
    even if he was wrong about the newspaper the appellant could move  away
    from his own village although the question of internal  relocation  had
    to be considered against the question of why the appellant would choose
    to live discreetly.

13. The key issue for the Judge was whether he accepted the  appellant  was
    only living discreetly through fear of persecution.

14. In rejecting this claim the  Judge  placed  more  weight  on  his  oral
    evidence, as against his written statement, and in particular the  fact
    that he had chosen since being released from custody in  November  2015
    to live discreetly. The fact he may have had sex once in discreetly did
    not mean the appellant intended to live his life that way.

15. Having considered the submissions advanced by Mr Shea, I find there  is
    no error in the Judge's decision.

16. Mr Shea's argument of why the appellant had  stated  in  oral  evidence
    that he was living discreetly was contradicted by other evidence he had
    given in cross-examination. He had claimed he attended LGBT  clubs  and
    had registered himself on gay websites. Despite these claims he had not
    adduced any evidence of membership or pictures of him  with  other  gay
    men relying on the fact that he could not print out such information in
    a  library.  This  overlooks  the  fact  the  appellant   was   legally
    represented, and it would have been open to him to obtain such evidence
    through his solicitors. The Judge also  asked  a  number  of  questions
    about his relationship with a male called "I" and I am  satisfied  that
    it was open to the Judge to reach the conclusions he did  in  paragraph
    19 of his decision.

17. Whilst permission to appeal was given on the basis it was arguable  the
    Judge had failed to apply the test set out in HJ (Iran) I am  satisfied
    that he did follow the guidance in that case and found the case did not
    apply because his decision to live discreetly was through choice rather
    than a fear of persecution. In such circumstances,  the  appellant  was
    not covered by HJ (Iran).

    NOTICE OF DECISION

18. I find there is no material error in law and I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date 05/03/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date 05/03/2019

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
