
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13793/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th September 2017                 |On 26th September 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            Rawand Aris Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Pratt of WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal M Davies promulgated on 24th January 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born  11th  October  1994.   He
    originates from the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR).  He claimed  asylum  in
    the UK on the basis that he had been in a relationship with a  girl  to
    whom I shall refer as S, but his marriage proposals were refused as her
    family wanted her to marry a relative, which she  did  on  20th  August
    2015.  After her marriage the Appellant continued to  contact  her  and
    they met on two occasions, once when he gave her a lift  in  his  taxi,
    and secondly on 14th September 2015 when he went to visit her at  home.
    It was arranged that they would meet on the roof of the house while her
    husband was asleep.  After the meeting, the Appellant left, and  as  he
    did so, the husband appeared on the roof and fired a gun at  him.   The
    asylum and human rights application was refused on 5th  December  2016.
    The Appellant appealed to the FTT and the hearing took  place  on  11th
    January 2017.  The FTT  found  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  "wholly
    unbelievable",  describing  the   Appellant's   evidence   as   "wholly
    incredible."  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT  had  made  contradictory  and
    unsustainable findings.  The FTT had found that honour crimes do  occur
    in the IKR, but went on to conclude that it was wholly incredible  that
    two people would ignore the danger, and carry on a relationship outside
    marriage.  It was clear that such relationships  did  occur,  otherwise
    honour  crimes  would  not  occur.   It  was  contended  that  the  FTT
    assessment of credibility was flawed, and therefore the decision should
    be set aside.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Keane in the following terms;



         "The grounds disclosed an arguable error of law but for  which  the
         outcome of  the  appeal  might  have  been  different.   The  judge
         arguably gave weight to immaterial matters  in  characterising  the
         relevant claims  of  the  Appellant  as  'wholly  unbelievable'  if
         paragraphs 47 and 49 of his  decision  were  read.   For  the  same
         reason  it  was  arguably  an  error  of  law  for  the  judge   to
         characterise the appellant's  conduct  as  'wholly  incredible'  if
         paragraph 51 of the judge's decision was read.  It was  further  an
         arguable error of law for the judge not to  embark  on  a  holistic
         assessment of all the evidence before  arriving  at  a  finding  in
         respect of the Appellant's credibility.  The judge  stated  in  the
         first sentence at paragraph 50 of his decision that, 'as I  do  not
         believe the incident forming the basis of the Appellant's claim for
         asylum has occurred I do not accept that he was in hiding  for  one
         month before leaving Iraq with the assistance of an agent.

         Overall, it was arguably an error of law for the judge to have been
         influenced  by  his  own  understanding  as  to  what   constituted
         reasonable or credible conduct.  The application for permission  is
         granted."

 5. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended that the FTT had  not  erred  in  law  but  had
    comprehensively addressed the evidence and drawn reasonable  inferences
    which were open to it to make.  It was not accepted that  the  FTT  had
    artificially compartmentalised its credibility findings.

 6. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. Mr Pratt relied upon the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted, and the grant of permission.  Mr Pratt submitted that the
    FTT had given no adequate reasons for the conclusions reached.  The FTT
    had given an opinion as to what was  believable  conduct,  rather  than
    assessing and weighing up the Appellant's evidence.  Mr  Pratt  pointed
    out that what might seem incredible to a person in  the  UK,  might  be
    considered completely differently by a person living in the IKR.

 8. Mr McVeety submitted that the FTT had made findings which were open  to
    it to  make,  and  had  considered  the  background  evidence  and  was
    perfectly entitled to reach the conclusion that the Appellant's account
    was incredible.

 9. By way of response Mr Pratt contended that the FTT had failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings, and therefore the decision should be set
    aside in its entirety.

10. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

11. For ease of reference I  set  out  below  the  headnote  to  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

12. It is  common  ground  that  the  central  issue  in  this  appeal  was
    credibility.  The FTT accepted that honour crimes occurred in the  IKR,
    and this is expressed in paragraphs 46 and 47.  This does not mean that
    it is an error of law  to  find  the  Appellant's  account  incredible,
    simply because honour crimes do occur in the IKR.

13. It is clear that the FTT did not believe the Appellant's account.

14. The issue is whether the FTT has given adequate reasons,  so  that  the
    Appellant can understand, from reading the decision, why his appeal has
    been dismissed.

15. In my view  the  FTT  has  provided  reasons  which  are  adequate  and
    sustainable and explain why the Appellant's account was not believed.

16. At paragraph 49 the FTT finds it incredible, that the Appellant and  S,
    knowing the danger involved in a married woman  having  a  relationship
    with another man, would arrange to meet on the roof of S's house, while
    her husband was asleep in the house.  I find that the FTT was  entitled
    to find this claim to  be  incredible.   The  FTT  was  not  given  any
    adequate explanation why the Appellant and S  decide  to  meet  at  her
    home, in the knowledge that her husband was in the home.

17. The FTT noted  the  Appellant  gave  conflicting  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances of the meeting, stating that the meeting  took  place  at
    3am, but then in oral evidence, stating that S sent him a text  at  2am
    to confirm she was on the rooftop.  It was open to the FTT to  find  it
    unbelievable that S would wait  for  an  hour  on  the  rooftop  before
    meeting the Appellant, knowing that  her  husband  was  asleep  in  the
    house.

18. In my view it was also open to the FTT to find  the  Appellant's  claim
    not credible, in relation to the claim that after he left the  rooftop,
    the husband appeared on the roof and fired a gun at him.

19. The claimed meeting and the firing of a weapon  led  to  the  Appellant
    going into hiding and subsequently leaving the IKR.  It is not the case
    that the FTT has not considered the evidence in the round.  The FTT was
    entitled to find that as it was not accepted that the  claimed  meeting
    on the rooftop had taken place, it followed that it  was  not  accepted
    that the Appellant was in hiding for a month before leaving Iraq.

20. I do not consider that the FTT gave weight to immaterial matters and  I
    do not find that the FTT was influenced by its own understanding as  to
    what constituted reasonable or credible conduct.   In  my  view  it  is
    clear from reading the decision why the Appellant was not believed.   I
    note that there was no challenge to the  adverse  credibility  findings
    made by the FTT in relation to the Appellant's failure to claim  asylum
    in Austria, Germany or France.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity made to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
FTT made no anonymity  direction.   I  do  not  see  the  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th September 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th September 2017
