
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/13790/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 June 2019                               |On 28 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   J A O A
                         (ANONIMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shoye, Solicitor; CW Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with leave against a  decision  of  FTTJ
    Saunders dated 16 April 2019. For convenience we  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were designated before the FTT.

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian aged 45. His immigration history is set out
    in paragraph 1 of the FTT decision. On 24 April 2015 he  was  convicted
    at Snaresbrook Crown Court of making false representations for gain and
    supplying articles for use in fraud. He  was  sentenced  to  30  months
    imprisonment on each count to be served  concurrently.  On  18  October
    2016 the respondent made  a  deportation  order.  He  was  subsequently
    served with removal directions but he made a verbal claim  for  asylum.
    Following a judicial review being lodged and refusal of his  claim  for
    protection a fresh decision was served on 12 December 2018.

 3. The appellant appealed the decision on both protection and human rights
    grounds. The protection claim was not pursued before  the  FTT  and  he
    relied on article 8.

 4. The appellant is in a relationship with Mrs A. She has two children, D,
    who is 7 and J who is 6.  They  are  British  citizens.  They  have  no
    contact with their biological father.  The  appellant  has  a  parental
    relationship with them. The appellant and Mrs A also have another child
    born in July 2018. Mrs A  has  health  difficulties  resulting  from  a
    medical accident during the birth of her latest child when her  bladder
    was accidentally cut during a caesarean section. D is on  the  autistic
    spectrum and receives 1:1 support at primary school.

 5. The grounds of appeal can be summarised as follows; the FTTJ failed  to
    give adequate reasons as to why it would be unduly harsh for D  if  the
    appellant was deported and D remained in the UK; that the FTTJ gave  no
    consideration as to the possibility of accessing assistance from social
    services; and that the expected harsh consequences that the appellant's
    partner and D will suffer from the appellant's deportation do not  meet
    the threshold of unduly harsh consequences.

 6. Mr Lindsay adopted the grounds of  appeal.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    decision was a careful and balanced one but that nevertheless the facts
    did not support a conclusion that the  threshold  of  unduly  harsh  as
    described in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC)  and  approved  by
    the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 had been met. Nor  had
    the FTTJ considered the availability of social services  to  assist  if
    required.

 7. We did not need to hear from Mr Shoye. We are satisfied that  there  is
    no error of law in the  FTTJ  Saunders  determination.  As  Mr  Lindsay
    conceded this was a careful decision. D is a child with  special  needs
    who has full time 1:1  adult  support  in  class.  While  he  has  good
    expressive skills he has difficulty with listening,  understanding  and
    following  instructions.  He  also   has   difficulties   with   social
    interaction and behaviour. His teacher is concerned that his  behaviour
    may become more challenging if  not  managed  appropriately.  He  needs
    stability, routine and familiar people and places.  The  evidence  from
    the school was that the appellant played  a  significant  role  in  D's
    parenting. Mrs A, who impressed the FTTJ,  described  a  close,  loving
    relationship between the appellant and  D;  he  is  supportive  of  his
    special needs and plays an active role both at home and  at  school  in
    both physical and emotional terms.

 8.  Mrs  A's  physical  problems  include  significant  pain  and  ongoing
    difficulties with everyday functions such  as  such  as  housework  and
    lifting, and holding her newborn baby. Although she was about to  begin
    a new full time job, with reasonable adjustments  being  made  for  her
    medical condition she did not know how well she would cope.

 9. While the appellant was in prison Mrs A had been placed in a  situation
    of very considerable difficulty, both practically and  emotionally  She
    had struggled to cope with D's complex needs and his distress  at  what
    was obviously a significant change in his routine. Her initial  attempt
    to have overnight sleep-in-care while she was at  work  failed  because
    the childminder was unable to cope with D. The FTTJ found that this was
    not a sustainable long  term  solution.  Both  children  had  displayed
    emotional distress when their step-father  was  not  there  with  D  in
    particular misbehaving at school. Childminders,  who  would  inevitably
    change over time were not appropriate for a significant caring role ion
    D's life.

10. FTTJ Saunders concluded (at paragraph 37)  that  the  impact  on  D  of
    losing the appellant  would  be  greater  than  purely  emotional.  The
    appellant plays an important role in keeping the family functioning. He
    is the primary carer enabling  his  wife  to  go  to  work.  He  is  an
    important source of discipline. At both  home  and  school  he  can  be
    effectively invoked to  calm  D.  Mrs  A  only  just  coped  while  the
    appellant was in prison but there was an adverse  impact  on  D  during
    this time. The system of child care that Mrs A put in place  would  not
    be viable in the long  term,  especially  given  her  reduced  physical
    health and stamina. FTTJ Saunders found that for all these reasons  the
    multiple effects on D of losing his father would be so severe as to  be
    unduly harsh.

11. In KO (Nigeria) Lord Carnwath, giving the opinion of the court said, in
    respect of the test of unduly harsh in section 117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  "One  is  looking  for  a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with the deportation of a parent." It is clear that  the  effects
    on D go well beyond the harshness that would be ordinarily expected. As
    Mr Lindsay acknowledged FTTJ Saunders decision  is  careful  and  well-
    reasoned. He was unable to point to any factor not taken  into  account
    or any material omissions. The decision was rational. We see  no  error
    of law.

12. As for the contention, based  on  BL  (Jamaica)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  357
    (paragraph 53), that the FTTJ had failed to consider  the  availability
    of social services for assistance with D there  was  no  evidence  that
    social  services  had  ever  been  involved  with  the   family.   More
    importantly however the clear evidence was that  D  required  stability
    and familiar figures in his life. That was clear from the impact  on  D
    during the appellant's imprisonment. Childminders had been used in  the
    past but that was not a long term solution. There is no  evidence  that
    social services could replicate the long term familiarly and  stability
    that D requires and which the appellant provides. Again we see no error
    of law on this point

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 26 June 2019

Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

