
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/13278/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18th January 2018                       | On 5th February 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    a o i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Tobin of Counsel instructed by Atlas Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Andonian of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 18th July 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a Russian citizen born in 1984.  His asylum and  human
    rights claim was refused on 15th November 2016.

 3. The Appellant feared being returned to Russia because the head  of  the
    FSB complaints department made a false allegation against him for which
    he had been sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.   Although  the
    Appellant was sentenced on 19th January 2016, he was  not  detained  at
    that time, and he was able to leave Russia on 23rd January 2016.

 4. The FTT heard the Appellant's appeal against refusal of his asylum  and
    human rights claim on 22nd June 2017.  The FTT did not  find  that  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum engaged a Convention reason in that he did
    not  fear  persecution  by  reason  of  race,  religion,   nationality,
    membership of a particular social group or political opinion.  The  FTT
    found that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof and did
    not accept that he would be at risk if returned to Russia.  The FTT did
    not accept that the Appellant  was  of  any  adverse  interest  to  the
    Russian authorities, noting that he had been able to  leave  Russia  on
    his own passport without  any  difficulty.   The  FTT  also  found,  at
    paragraph 27, that harsh prison conditions in Russia have been held  by
    the British courts not to be a sufficient reason to give protection  in
    the UK.  The FTT found that this  was  not  an  extradition  case.   In
    addition the FTT found that the Appellant had legal  representation  in
    Russia, and could rely upon  the  Russian  courts  to  have  the  false
    allegation against him set aside.  The FTT indicated  at  paragraph  24
    that;

         "I must be satisfied that the Appellant's life would be at risk and
         he would not have recourse to the law.  I cannot be satisfied about
         these matters on the lower standard of proof."

 5. Following dismissal of his appeal on all grounds, the Appellant applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying upon six grounds
    which are summarised below.

 6. Ground 1 contends that the FTT erred in considering Dzgoev [2017]  EWHC
    735 (Admin).  At paragraph 27 the FTT  had  stated  that  harsh  prison
    conditions in Russia were not a sufficient reason to give protection in
    the UK.  The FTT also found that in an extradition case, the fact  that
    prison conditions in Russia are harsh, and there is "torture in prisons
    and unsafe for an Appellant to be returned to" the High Court in Dzgoev
    held that extradition could still take place.  It  was  submitted  that
    the FTT had erred in considering the case law, as  in  Dzgoev  and  all
    cases involving Russia, extradition is  only  effective  when  specific
    assurances have been provided by the Russian authorities that returnees
    will not be subjected to treatment which would breach Article 3 of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights.   No  such  assurance  is  in
    place in this case, and therefore the FTT erred in law in finding  that
    return to face prison in Russia  would  be  acceptable.   The  FTT  had
    therefore misapplied Dzgoev.

 7. The second ground contends that the FTT erred by failing to  take  into
    account a material consideration and erred in finding that the  Russian
    authorities would have no interest in the Appellant.  The FTT noted  at
    paragraphs 21 - 22 that there was no dispute about the  genuineness  of
    documents submitted by the Appellant, and the Respondent  had  accepted
    that court documents were genuine.  The documents prove that there  was
    an outstanding warrant for the Appellant's arrest which  had  not  been
    considered by the FTT in finding that the Appellant  would  not  be  of
    interest to the authorities and would not be at risk.

 8. It  was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's explanation that  he  had  pre-booked  his  departure  from
    Russia, and flew after sentence was confirmed, and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival  in  the  UK.   The  FTT  had  not  taken  into  account   that
    explanation, and the Appellant's claim that the Appellant  feared  what
    extrajudicial treatment he would be  subjected  to  by  the  FSB,  once
    detained when he returned to Russia.

 9. The third ground contends that the FTT erred by placing reliance on  an
    immaterial matter.  The FTT had placed reliance upon the fact that  the
    Appellant was not subject to extradition proceedings and made reference
    to this at paragraphs 26 and 27.  It was submitted that the absence  of
    extradition proceedings is irrelevant, there is no  evidence  that  the
    Russian authorities are aware that the Appellant is  currently  in  the
    UK.  The fact that extradition proceedings have not yet been instigated
    cannot be regarded as confirmation that such proceedings  will  not  be
    initiated in the future.

10. Ground 4 contends the FTT erred by failing to give adequate reasons for
    findings at paragraphs  21  and  24.   The  FTT  does  not  accept  the
    Appellant's evidence regarding the false  allegations  and  manipulated
    proceedings which the Appellant maintains had been lodged by  the  head
    of the FSB office in Volgograd, but gives no reasons for rejecting that
    aspect of the Appellant's claim, even though it  is  acknowledged  that
    there is no overall aspersion cast on the Appellant's credibility.  The
    FTT fails to set out clear reasons for findings on this core issue.

11. It is also contended that the FTT applies the incorrect legal  test  at
    paragraph 24 in that the Appellant does not need  to  demonstrate  that
    "his life would be at risk and he would have no recourse to the law" in
    order to succeed in his appeal.

12. Ground 5 contends that the FTT  erred  by  failing  to  set  out  clear
    reasons for finding that the  Appellant  could  seek  adequate  redress
    though the  court  system  in  Russia  at  paragraphs  22  -  25.   The
    Appellant's case is that  his  insistence  on  pursuing  earlier  cases
    through the courts caused public humiliation and angered the  FSB,  and
    the false conviction which led to  the  sentence  of  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment, resulted from the  FSB  taking  revenge  upon  him.   The
    Appellant therefore  fears  being  imprisoned  as  a  result  of  being
    convicted on false charges, and fears that a much worse fate awaits him
    in custody.  Given the evidence before the FTT,  and  as  a  matter  of
    public record regarding the influence and power that the FSB exerts  in
    Russia, it is unclear why the FTT finds that recourse to  the  judicial
    system would provide an  adequate  remedy  to  the  Appellant  in  such
    circumstances.

13. Ground 6  contends  the  FTT  erred  by  making  an  erroneous  finding
    regarding engagement of the Refugee Convention.  It is  contended  that
    the Refugee Convention is engaged on the basis of political or  imputed
    political opinion, as the false case pursued against the  Appellant  by
    senior members of the local FSB is politically motivated because of the
    public humiliation it caused to their department and the inefficiencies
    which he exposed.  It is submitted that the FTT  erred  by  failing  to
    recognise this.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pickup  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge misdirected himself and  wrongly
             applied the law.  More significantly, it appears that some key
             findings were inadequately reasoned, including those at  [21].
             The judge may also have applied the incorrect legal test.  All
             grounds may be argued."

15. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Directions were issued that  there  should  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the  FTT  erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mr Walker conceded that the FTT had materially erred  in  law  for  the
    reasons given in the  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was invited by Miss Tobin  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the FTT and remit the appeal back to the FTT  to  be  heard
    again with no findings preserved.  Mr Walker agreed with that  proposed
    course of action.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I find that the FTT erred in law.  The decision is set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved.  I accept, as conceded by the Respondent, that the
    grounds contained within  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    demonstrate a material error of law.

18. The decision needs to be re-made.  I have considered paragraph  7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice statements, which is reproduced  below;



         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I am satisfied that the extent of judicial fact finding is such that it
    is more appropriate for the appeal to be re-made  by  the  FTT,  rather
    than the Upper Tribunal.

20. The appeal will therefore be reheard by the FTT.  The parties  will  be
    advised of the date in due course.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to  the  FTT  to  be
heard afresh with no findings preserved.  The appeal is to be  heard  by  an
FTT Judge other than Judge Andonian.

Anonymity

Because this is claim for  international  protection  I  make  an  anonymity
direction.  No report or other publication of these proceedings  shall  name
or directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction may lead to  a  contempt  of  court.   This  direction  shall
continue in force until the Upper  Tribunal,  the  FTT,  or  an  appropriate
court shall lift or vary it.  The direction is made pursuant to rule  14  of
The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date 18th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  This must be decided by the FTT.



Signed                              Date 18th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
