
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/14243/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st August 2017                      | On 11th September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  alieu bah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen
For the Respondent:    Mr Y Darbor of Queen's Park Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Jones made following a hearing at Bradford on 31st January 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the Gambia born on 21st February 1968.  He
    married in the Gambia in 1990 and had five  children  but,  from  2008,
    when he arrived in the UK, had no contact with them. He then lived with
    two other women in the UK, one of whom was European, in order, he said,
    to be able to stay here.

 3. His wife came to the UK in 2012 but he was not  aware  of  her  arrival
    until he was informed of it by his  sister.   The  couple  subsequently
    reconciled.

 4. In June 2016 he claimed asylum and was refused.  He appealed  to  Judge
    Jones who found that he would not be at risk  on  return.   Indeed,  he
    concluded that the claimant left the  Gambia  purely  in  the  hope  of
    achieving some sort of immigration status in the UK.

 5. The claimant's wife was  granted  status  for  five  years,  her  leave
    expiring in May 2018.  The judge accepted that although the couple were
    formerly estranged, they are now in a genuine relationship  and  indeed
    they now have another daughter born on 2nd May 2014.

 6. The couple have had five children, but one died in a drowning accident.
     Two remain in the Gambia with other relatives, and three  are  in  the
    UK, including the youngest one.

 7. The judge considered the Immigration Rules.  So far  as  his  wife  was
    concerned he said that he did not accept that there were insurmountable
    obstacles to her returning to the Gambia  in  respect  of  her  medical
    conditions.  She  had  leave  until  May  2018  but  this  was  at  the
    discretion of the Secretary of State.

 8. He then wrote as follows:

         "Moreover having said that, I do find that there are  some  factors
         here in favour of the appellant's cause in terms of the  children's
         best interests (Section 55).  They are undoubtedly to be with  both
         parents and not see the family separated at this time,  though  the
         respondent may yet  have  cause  to  review  the  family's  overall
         circumstances and will in any event do so before May 2018.

         It is only against such limited circumstances that I already  cause
         to consider the position as to  whether  exceptions  to  the  Rules
         apply  (EX.1)  and  whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
         outside the Rules that apply here.  If in error therein  I  proceed
         further with the appeal as pleaded before me.  Whilst the  children
         are not UK nationals and have not been in the UK for such a  length
         of time.  I note also the references made to the  aspects  of  care
         and support that are  provided  by  the  NHS,  educational  support
         services, and Social Services, presumably still being available  if
         the appellant were removed.

         However, notwithstanding all of Mr McBurnie's misgivings as to  the
         appellant's capacity to tell the truth  and  not  advance  his  own
         interest at all costs.  I do accept, against the required standard,
         that the appellant is providing care and assistance to the children
         and he has a meaningful relationship  with  them.   It  is  in  the
         children's best interest to have their father's support  especially
         as given their mother's current health problems.  I find  it  would
         be in those circumstances disproportionate and  contrary  to  their
         best interests if he  were  to  be  removed  alone  at  this  time,
         separating him from his children  and  his  wife.   As  stated  the
         overall position as regards  the  family  unit  will  doubtless  be
         revisited by the respondent in due course".

 9. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in law.  The claimant could not take the benefit of
    paragraph EX.1 in respect of his children because they do not  qualify.
    The judge appears not to have materially relied upon the detail of  his
    wife's grant of refugee status and it was noted that  no  copy  of  the
    determination in her case was produced; there  was  no  evidence  about
    why her appeal was allowed.  The Secretary of State contended that  the
    burden was upon the claimant to evidence his claim that there  will  be
    insurmountable obstacles or compelling reasons outside of the Rules  in
    respect of his wife's return with him to Gambia.  The grant of  refugee
    leave was not determinative of her inability to return.

11. In purportedly dealing with the appeal  outside  the  Rules  the  judge
    appears  to  have  considered  that  EX.1  applied  as  a  freestanding
    exception.  He had acted irrationally in appearing to place weight upon
    medical evidence having previously said that it was  insufficient.   He
    did not refer  to  the  mandatory  elements  of  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and  did  not  consider
    whether the children could  relocate  to  Gambia  with  their  parents,
    effectively treating their best interests as determinative, contrary to
    numerous binding authorities.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro on 25th  May  2017  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

13. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and  submitted  that  the  claimant
    could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  appears  to  have
    regarded the children's best interests as a trump card even though they
    were not qualifying children.  In any event, they were not subject of a
    removal  decision  and  could  remain  in  the  UK.    There   was   no
    identification of exceptional circumstances such that Article 8  should
    be considered outside the Rules.

14. Mr Darbor submitted that the grounds amounted to  a  disagreement  with
    the decision.  He relied on the case of AB v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ  1422
    and submitted that there was no burden upon the claimant to  in  effect
    re-litigate his wife's case.

Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

15. The claimant is correct to argue that there is no burden  upon  him  to
    establish that his wife is no longer at risk in the Gambia.  In  AB  at
    paragraph 21 the Court of Appeal said:

         "It is for an appellant to establish a claim under  Article  8.   A
         third party's refugee status may  be  relevant  to  such  a  claim.
         Where an appellant asserts that there would  be  an  insurmountable
         burden to that person returning to his or her  country  of  origin,
         and relies on his or her established refugee status to support that
         proposition, in my judgment the starting  point  for  the  Tribunal
         should be to take it that the person concerned could not reasonably
         be expected to return to his or her country of origin unless it has
         some basis to suppose otherwise"

16. The problem here is that the judge did not in fact rely upon the  grant
    in order to conclude that there were insurmountable obstacles to family
    life continuing outside the UK.  Indeed, so far as she  was  concerned,
    he appeared to find that there were no such obstacles.

17. None of the children are qualifying children since they are not British
    citizens nor have they lived here for a period of seven years.

18. In dealing with Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, the judge does
    appear to have treated the children's best interests  as  determinative
    without taking into account other factors, including those set  out  at
    paragraph 117B of the 2002 Act.  Moreover, he has taken into account an
    irrelevant consideration, namely the fact that the Secretary  of  State
    will review  the  family's  circumstances  before  May  2018  when  the
    claimant's partner's status expires.

19. Accordingly the decision is set aside.

Further Submissions

20. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge had found that the claimant  was
    not credible in relation to his asylum claim and none of  his  findings
    have been subsequently challenged.  He could  not  succeed  within  the
    Immigration Rules, having arrived in the UK as a visitor. She  did  not
    suggest that the children leave the UK but the couple could  reasonably
    separate and live apart as they had done in the past and he could  make
    the necessary application to join them from the Gambia.

21. Mr Darbor submitted that, whilst he accepted that  the  claimant  could
    not succeed under paragraphs EX.1 and 2, he  could  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules with respect to family reunion, paragraph  352A.   At
    the relevant time, when the sponsor was  granted  refugee  status,  the
    couple were married.  They had never divorced.

22. It was plainly in the children's best interests to  have  their  father
    live with them.  He referred me to the letter from  the  older  child's
    primary school which gives details of the claimant's wife's  low  mood,
    depression, anxiety and isolation.  She does not sleep or eat well  and
    is diabetic.  She also has pains in her hands and  knees.   The  family
    outreach worker stated that she had been told that the wife wanted  the
    claimant's support and he in turn wanted the right to  a  family  life.
    There were also a  large  number  of  photographs  showing  the  family
    together.

Findings and Conclusions

23. Paragraph 352A sets out the requirements to be met by a person  seeking
    leave to enter or remain in the UK as the partner of a  person  granted
    refugee status.  Inter alia, the paragraph requires that  each  of  the
    parties intends to live permanently with the other as their  spouse  or
    civil partner and the marriage is subsisting.  It is quite  clear  that
    when  the  claimant's  partner  arrived  in  the  UK  the  couple  were
    estranged.  Indeed, the claimant admits in his witness  statement  that
    he never called his wife following the tragic death of their son  in  a
    drowning accident.  He said that he kept avoiding her after she came to
    the UK in 2012 and it was only after his relationship with the European
    woman broke down that he informed his wife  about  it  and  sought  her
    forgiveness.

24. I conclude that the claimant did not  satisfy  paragraph  352A  of  the
    Immigration Rules at the time of his wife's arrival in the UK  and  her
    subsequent claim for asylum.

25. The claimant cannot successfully navigate through to paragraph EX.1 and
    EX.2 and has made no application for leave to  remain  under  paragraph
    352A,  although  if  he  were  to  be  removed,   given   the   present
    reconciliation, he could apply under paragraph 352A for leave to  enter
    from the Gambia.

26. The claimant is not eligible for limited leave to remain as  a  partner
    under Section E-LTRP because his only leave was as a visitor and, since
    that leave expired, he has been in the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration
    laws.

27. The question therefore remains  as  to  whether  there  are  compelling
    circumstances such as to require a grant of leave.

28. The claimant's strongest argument is that his wife has  refugee  status
    and therefore cannot enjoy family life with him  in  the  Gambia.   The
    Immigration Judge accepted that the couple were now in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship; this was both his evidence  and  that  of  his
    wife.  His children will remain in the UK until at least May  2018  and
    he enjoys family life with them as well as his wife.

29. There is no evidence about the basis upon which the claimant's wife was
    granted asylum. The determination allowing  her  appeal  has  not  been
    produced. She has leave to remain for a further eight months.  There is
    no basis to go behind that grant and to assume that she could return to
    the Gambia with him at this stage.

30. On the other hand, the original skeleton argument concedes  that  there
    has been a change of government in the Gambia on 21st January 2017.  No
    attempt appears to have been made to bring the older  children  to  the
    UK.  In these circumstances the  grant  of  refugee  leave  per  se  is
    insufficient to establish that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.

31. His removal would be a clear interference with his right to family life
    but lawful since he does not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

32. So far  as  the  public  interest  considerations  are  concerned,  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest
    and this claimant has shown complete disregard for those controls.   He
    has an appalling immigration history. He overstayed his  initial  visa,
    appears to have made a series of attempts to form  other  relationships
    which could have led to a grant of leave, and then made a  late  asylum
    claim which had no basis. He has made no application to remain with his
    wife as the partner of a person with refugee status despite having  had
    ample opportunity to do so.

33. I have no information about the claimant's command of  English  or  his
    economic activity.  His private life  has,  since  2008,  been  enjoyed
    whilst he has been in the UK unlawfully.  He cannot take  advantage  of
    paragraph 117B(6).

34. The best interests of the children are clearly a  prime  consideration.
    Whilst it is clearly in the children's best interest to  be  with  both
    their parents, and it is accepted that the couple are  living  together
    at present, it would appear that as late as May 2014, when his daughter
    was born his address was different from his wife's address.   The  only
    documentary evidence dated from September 2016.  He was  clearly  alive
    to all possible routes to remaining in the UK and yet did not make  any
    application on the basis of his wife's status.   Moreover,  the  letter
    from  [         School],  which  sets   out   the   claimant's   wife's
    difficulties, makes no reference to him being supportive.  Indeed,  the
    letter only refers to the  limited  support  from  a  couple  of  local
    friends who drop off and pick the children up.

35. Importantly the claimant has two children who are not in  the  UK.   He
    said that they had fled to Senegal due to harassment  by  the  security
    services but his claim has  been  disbelieved.   I  conclude  that  his
    children are still in the Gambia.

36. Taking account of all of the above circumstances, whilst it  is  always
    in a child's best interests to be with both parents, in this particular
    case those best interests should not  determine  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal.

     Notice of Decision

37. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is re-made as follows.  The claimant's appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
Date 11 September 2017



