
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14167/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 22 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brennan, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Gillespie  promulgated  on  27  March   2018,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made on 28 November 2016  to
    refuse his asylum and protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who says he was  raised  as  a  Shia
    Muslim but in 2015 began to get involved with a house  church  in  Iran
    beginning around 25 December 2015.

 3. On 25 March 2016 the police raided the house church but he was able  to
    escape but unfortunately left behind his jacket containing  his  wallet
    and ID documents.  He decided  not  to  return  home  and,  as  he  had
    suspected, the Authorities attended the family home making it clear  to
    the family he had converted to Christianity.   The  family  was  warned
    that he was an apostate and would be killed if apprehended.

 4. The family then arranged for him to be taken out of Iran, leaving on  1
    April 2016 and travelling via Turkey over land and then to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. Since arriving in  Belfast  and  claiming  asylum,  the  appellant  has
    attended Windsor Presbyterian Church from July 2016.   In  addition  to
    attending church services he attends Bible study  and  prayer  meetings
    and has been baptised.  He takes part in Outreach Skype Church.

 6. The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of
    membership of a house  church  or  that  it  was  raided  or  that  the
    Authorities were looking for him.

 7. The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant,  as  well  as  [DC],  an
    assistant minister at Windsor Presbyterian Church, [DM] who works  with
    the Irish Church Mission in Dublin and [ND] who is Clerk of Session  at
    Windsor Presbyterian Church.  The judge found:-

      i) that the appellant's account of realising the house church had been
         raided and escaping onto  the  roof  and  across  other  roofs  but
         leaving behind his jacket with wallet and  ID,  was  a  fabrication
         given his failure to mention it in interview [37] and to provide  a
         proper explanation for this [39] to [40];

     ii) that he had been inconsistent about what had happened to his family
         and contact with them [42];

    iii) that his credibility was damaged by his implausible account of  how
         he had arrived in Northern Ireland but yet been told to  travel  to
         Scotland [43];

     iv) the church witnesses were honourable sincere  people  but  none  of
         them had real knowledge of the circumstances in which he  had  been
         forced to leave Iran [48]; and,

      v) having weighed the approach of the witnesses with the greater  body
         of evidence including what the appelalnt had said in interview,  he
         was not satisfied that the account given by  the  church  witnesses
         overcame the doubts about the appellant's account;

     vi) having had regard to the report from Dr Bell, he was not  satisfied
         that the appellant's mental condition was such that a propensity to
         be forgetful could establish that his ability to give evidence  was
         compromised;

    vii) the appellant's  claim  that  so  far  as  events  of  violence  is
         concerned is not experience based and he  had  not  shown  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason  if  returned
         there.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) In failing to assess whether the appellant was a genuine  Christian
         irrespective  of  what  caused  him   to   leave   Iran   and   had
         overemphasised the issue of credibility;

     ii) In failing proper to consider whether on the basis  of  the  church
         witnesses whom  he  found  to  be  honourable  and  sincere  people
         whether, irrespective of what had happened in Iran,  the  appellant
         was now a committed Christian;

    iii) In that at [48] he apparently expected witnesses to  have  inquired
         under the circumstances in which he left Iran;

     iv) in failing to note that there  was  overwhelming  evidence  to  the
         genuineness of his conversion to Christianity.

 9. On 19 April 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray granted permission.



10. Mr Brennan submitted the judge had erred in noting that credibility was
    not in itself  an  end.   The  judge  had  heard  evidence  from  three
    different  witnesses  who  believed  him  to  be  a  genuine  committed
    Christian.  The witnesses had explained that there  were  Protocols  in
    place to prevent the abuse  of  people  seeking  asylum  and  that  the
    appellant had needed to satisfy the judge that he was ready for baptism
    and was genuine, before becoming a full member of the church.

11. Mr Brennan submitted that although they were not expert witnesses  they
    went as to character and their observations of him were for a period of
    eighteen months.  There is strong evidence of  his  proper  conversion.
    He submitted that the judge should have considered that  the  appellant
    had converted sur place.

12. Mr Duffy submitted that there must be doubt that this was a  sur  place
    claim, given that the issue here was the  appellant  had  converted  in
    Iran and what he was seeking to do in the United Kingdom was  simply  a
    continuation of that.  He submitted that it was evident that the  judge
    had clearly listened to the church witnesses who believed him but  that
    the judge thought that this was simply an  extension  of  the  original
    claim.

13. Mr Duffy submitted that there was no challenge to the findings  at  the
    back of credibility and the judge not being satisfied as to the account
    of what happened in Iran and  that  in  the  circumstances  these  were
    relevant to the issue of baptism.

14. In  reply,  Mr  Brennan  submitted  that  the  judge  had  at  [48]  an
    overemphasis of what had occurred in Iran  and  that  the  evidence  of
    character was compelling.

15. The factual matrix of this asylum claim is different from  that  in  TF
    and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH  58  where  people  had  claimed  a  fear  of
    persecution in Iran and had converted to Christianity whilst  here.  In
    this case, the appellant's case is that he  had  begun  to  convert  to
    Christianity in Iran and had attended a house church.

16. I bear in mind what the Court of Session said in TF &  MA  at  [48]  to
    [50]:

         [48] The first point is that already mentioned  in  paragraph  [38]
         above. Any court or tribunal must be very careful not to dismiss an
         appeal just because an appellant has told lies. For reasons we have
         already set out, the judge should  not  jump  too  readily  to  the
         conclusion that because the appellant  has  told  lies  about  some
         matters then his credibility on all matters is fatally undermined.


         [49] The second point is that even if the FTT judge concludes  that
         the witness's evidence on the critical matters is undermined  by  a
         finding that he is generally incredible and not to  be  relied  on,
         that has the limited  effect  that  the  appellant's  (disbelieved)
         evidence is disregarded or put to one side:  it  does  not  somehow
         become evidence to the opposite effect,  to  be  used  against  the
         appellant in contradiction of other independent evidence  on  which
         he relies. That again reflects the standard direction  in  criminal
         cases in Scotland and applies in civil cases too,  including  cases
         before tribunals. The judge should not allow  his  adverse  finding
         about the credibility of the appellant to sway  his  assessment  of
         the credibility and relevance of other independent evidence bearing
         upon the issue before him. So  here,  where  the  FTT  judges  have
         disbelieved the appellants' evidence that they are genuine converts
         to Christianity, their evidence to that effect will be put  to  one
         side, given no weight. But the rejection of their evidence on  this
         point does  not  become  evidence  that  their  conversion  is  not
         genuine, to be set against other, independent, evidence from  which
         the genuineness of their conversion can  be  inferred.  That  other
         evidence requires to be assessed  on  its  merits,  without  any  a
         priori assumption derived from the complainer's own false  evidence
         that it is in some way suspect or of little value.


         [50] The third point is very familiar in this type of case.  It  is
         wrong in principle  to  form  a  concluded  view  of  the  probable
         veracity of particular items of evidence and then, from that  fixed
         point, to allow  that  view  to  govern  the  assessment  of  other
         evidence in the case. The proper  approach  is  to  adopt  what  is
         sometimes  called  an  "holistic"  approach,  considering  all  the
         evidence "in the round" before arriving at any  concluded  view  on
         the facts. The authority usually cited for this proposition is  the
         judgment of Sedley LJ in Karanakaran v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2000] 3  All  ER  449  at  477  (para  16  of  his
         judgment):


             "... a civil judge will not make a discrete assessment of  the
             probable veracity of each item of the evidence; he or she will
             reach a conclusion on the probable factuality  of  an  alleged
             event by evaluating all the evidence about it for what  it  is
             worth. Some will be so unreliable as  to  be  worthless;  some
             will amount to no more than straws in the wind; some  will  be
             indicative  but  not,  by  itself,  probative;  some  may   be
             compelling but contra-indicated by other evidence. It is  only
             at the end-point that, for  want  of  a  better  yardstick,  a
             probabilistic test is applied. ..."


17. Here, it cannot be said that the judge erred in concluding that because
    the appellant had told lies about some matters his credibility  on  all
    matters was fatally undermined. He did take into account  the  evidence
    of the church witnesses, and weighed that. Essentially, the grounds are
    an argument about the weight he attached to that.  The  judge  was  not
    bound by what those witnesses said.

18. I do not consider that it the judge  put  aside  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses.  On the contrary it is clear from what is  written  at  [49]
    that he gave it due weight.  It was,  I  consider,  on  the  particular
    facts of this case appropriate to consider how the church witnesses had
    considered the appellant's account of what had happened in Iran as this
    went to the core of his case to be a convert.  This was not a sur place
    case; rather it is an intensification, on the appellant's  account,  of
    what  had  begun  to  occur  in  Iran,  that  is  his   conversion   to
    Christianity.  I am not satisfied, however, that the judge did, as  the
    grounds aver, improperly expect the church witnesses to  have  enquired
    into what had occurred in Iran. On the facts of  this  case,  it  would
    not, for example, have been inappropriate to ask if the church  members
    had discussed with the appellant if he had begun to attend services and
    to pray.  The judge simply at [48] records what the witnesses said, and
    directed himself that he had to look at the totality of the evidence.

19. Essentially, this comes down to a matter of weight.  The judge did  not
    rule out the evidence of the church but rather considered it as part of
    the whole and concluded, as  it  was  open  to  him  to  do,  that  the
    appellant was not a genuine convert despite the evidence of the  church
    witnesses.  His reasons for setting that evidence aside are  sufficient
    and sustainable.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of  law  and  I
    uphold it.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and I uphold it.

      2. I am satisfied that, given the issues raised in this and as it is a
         protection case  that  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
         direction.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10 December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
