
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14163/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      ER
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Albania, born on 23 July 1999  as  the
    appellant herein.  The appellant at the age of 16 left  Albania  on  10
    August 2015 accompanied by his cousin and travelled via Belgium  before
    making his way to Calais and arriving in the UK in a lorry on 23 August
    2015.  He applied for asylum on 28 September 2015 but this  application
    was refused on 29 November 2016.  The appellant was given limited leave
    to remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking  child.   He  was  granted
    leave until 23 January 2017.  The appellant was advised that  he  would
    not be returned to Albania until he reached the age of 18.

2.   The appellant's claim was based on a blood feud between his family  and
    the T family which had been ongoing since  1993  when  a  relative  had
    killed a member of the T family.  A blood feud was declared against the
    appellant's family following which it was claimed that all male members
    of the appellant's family had stayed  in  confinement  and  efforts  at
    reconciliation had failed.  On turning 16 the appellant became a target
    in the blood feud and it was decided that he should leave  Albania  and
    seek refuge elsewhere.

3.   The appellant has three sisters but they are not  targets  in  a  blood
    feud which only affects male members of the family.

4.   There was no dispute in this  case  that  there  was  a  blood  feud  -
    however the respondent took the view that  the  feud  was  not  active.
    While the appellant  had  claimed  that  his  father  had  remained  in
    confinement since the declaration of the feud the appellant had said at
    interview that his father had worked  for  the  local  water  authority
    which was inconsistent with him not leaving the family home.

5.   The appellant's case was supported by a statement from his aunt to  the
    Albanian police complaining about an incident in 2011  and  another  in
    2013 whereby the T family were alleged to have made threats on the life
    of the appellant's uncle.  The appellant's case was that his father and
    other male members of the family have either fled Albania or as in  the
    case of his father had been back in  confinement  since  2011.   The  T
    family were a large  and  financially  well-off  clan  and  had  people
    working for the authorities and wherever he  travelled  within  Albania
    the T's would find him and the police would not act to protect him.

6.   The judge records the evidence before him as follows:

         "14  The appellant relied on the  statements  he  made  during  his
             screening interview on 21 October  2015  and  his  substantive
             interview  on  the  6  January  2016;  he  also  provided  two
             narrative  written  statements.   The  appellant  provided   a
             further written statement post-decision dated 8 June 2017.  In
             addition, he gave oral evidence and was cross-examined.


         15   I have taken account of Presidential Guidance; and allowed  in
             my analysis for the appellant's vulnerability as a 16-year-old
             boy in a strange country providing  information  and  evidence
             other than in his first language.


         16   The appellant asserts that the facts set out in  Paragraphs  5
             to 13 above are correct.  Of course, the appellant cannot give
             direct evidence as to the events of 1993 -  he  was  not  then
             born.  But the respondent's  own  enquiries  have  established
             that what he has stated regarding those  events  is  accurate;
             the appellant's account has been found to be credible.   There
             is an inconsistency regarding the appellant's  account  as  to
             the length of  his  father's  self-confinement:  initially  he
             claimed that his father had remained in self-confinement since
             1993  -  but  this  is  clearly  incorrect  because   of   the
             appellant's later statements to the  effect  that  his  father
             worked for the water authority.  The appellant can,  and  did,
             give  direct  evidence  as  to  his  father's  renewed   self-
             confinement after the events of 2011: he  confirmed,  both  in
             his witness statement and in oral evidence, that this was  the
             position from 2011 until the appellant left Albania  in  2015.
             Other male members of the family, by then, had  fled  Albania;
             but the appellant's father did not wish to leave his mother.


         17   The appellant's evidence  is  that  the  T  family  have  far-
             reaching influence with connections in the police  and  public
             authorities."

7.   The  judge  was  also  provided  with  a  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant's older sister confirming that  by  the  time  she  had  left
    Albania in 2012 her father was again living in  self-confinement.   She
    had been told by family members that, before fleeing Albania, her uncle
    had attempted to come out of self-confinement but had immediately  gone
    back in.  The judge also refers to the appellant's aunt's statement.

8.   The judge directed himself on the law  appropriately  and  referred  to
    the relevant country guidance - EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT
    00348 (IAC) - setting out the headnote in full.  He  also  referred  to
    the relevant authorities  on  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  and
    sufficiency of protection as well  as  relevant  statutory  provisions.
    The determination concludes as follows:

         "40   The  respondent  accepts   the   appellant's   identity   and
             nationality; and accepts the  existence  of  the  blood  feud.
             Applying  the  principles  set  out  in  EH,  the   respondent
             concludes that the blood feud is not active; there has been no
             killing since 1989, and the respondent states in  the  refusal
             letter, that no-one has been self-confined since 2000.


         41   Furthermore, the respondent notes that the Albanian Penal Code
             gives sentences of up to 25 years' imprisonment for blood feud
             killing; and concludes  that  the  appellant  has  adduced  no
             evidence that the police and the  relevant  authorities  would
             not act to provide  protection.   No  detail  has  been  given
             regarding the alleged report to the police  in  January  2016.
             And save for a single  telephone  call  the  matter  does  not
             appear to have been pursued in a determined or formal  way  by
             the appellant or his family.


         42   Finally, the respondent concludes that internal relocation  is
             available to this appellant out of reach of the T family.


         Discussion & Conclusions


         Credibility


         43   I found the appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness:  what  he
             related from outside his own knowledge, but based on what  his
             family had told  him,  corresponded  entirely  with  what  the
             respondent established in her own independent  investigations.
             When challenged about the apparent inconsistency  between  his
             father having remained in  self-confinement  since  1993,  and
             working  outside  the  home  for  the  water  authority,   the
             appellant acknowledged that he had made  an  error;  and  that
             there were some intervening years when  his  father  had  come
             out.  I found the appellant's direct evidence about his father
             going back into self-confinement to be compelling and I accept
             it.  It was corroborated by his  sister's  witness  statement;
             and by contemporaneous documents within the appellants bundle.




         44   I make no adverse finding as to his credibility  by  reference
             to his failure to claim asylum in Belgium or France.   He  had
             an older sister living in the UK.


         Findings of Fact


         45   In my judgment, the account upon which this appeal is based is
             credible: it is accepted by the respondent that the blood feud
             exists; the issue is whether it is still active.  I accept the
             appellant's evidence regarding the events  of  2011  and  2013
             and, based on that, and applying the principles set out in EH,
             my judgement is that the blood feud remains active;  and  that
             the appellant is at risk if he returns to Albania.


         Internal Relocation


         46   There is a difficulty with internal relocation in Albania: the
             difficulty arises from the need to  register  with  the  civil
             service in order to access any of the public  services.   Once
             registered, details of an individual are available: and, in  a
             country rife with corruption, those  with  connections  within
             the  public  services  could  easily  obtain  details  of   an
             individual's whereabouts.


         47   In any event, this appellant was just 16 years of age when  he
             left Albania; he had never lived independently of his parents;
             he came to the UK where he was placed with foster parents; and
             now lives with his older sister.  He is  now  18,  but  he  is
             still a very young and inexperienced man:  to  expect  him  to
             relocate within Albania to a place where he has no family  and
             no support; whilst at the same time having to take care not to
             reveal his whereabouts to the T family would, in my judgement,
             be unduly harsh.


         Sufficiency of Protection


         50    Absent  the  possibility  of  safe  internal  relocation,  EH
             confirms that there is not sufficient protection available  in
             Albania to the targets of blood feuds.


         Conclusion on Asylum, Humanitarian Protection and Articles  2  &  3
             ECHR


         51   For the reasons set out above, I find that the appellant is  a
             refugee he is entitled to a grant of asylum  and  humanitarian
             protection; his enforced return to Albania would be  a  breach
             of his rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.


         Article 8 ECHR


         52   The appellant clearly has no family life in the UK (his family
             are in Albania).  Such private life as he has established here
             is  with  his  sister  and  her  husband.   But,  my  findings
             regarding his asylum and humanitarian  protection  claims  are
             such that there are clearly very significant obstacles to  his
             reintegration into  Albania.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  he
             brings himself within the provisions of  Paragraph  276ADE(vi)
             of the Rules.  He is entitled to leave to remain in the UK  on
             the basis of his private life under Article 8 ECHR.


         53   In my judgement, the respondent has discharged her duty  under
             Section 55 by her undertaking not to return the  appellant  to
             Albania before he attained his majority."

9.   Accordingly the appeal was allowed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.

10.  The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.  It  was  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider relevant evidence, failed to give
    adequate reasons, and failed to properly resolve a  conflict  of  fact.
    It was said there were only two paragraphs containing the  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's claim - reference was made to paragraphs 43
    and 45 which I have set out above.  It was  submitted  that  given  the
    brevity of the issues it was incumbent upon the  judge  to  demonstrate
    however briefly why the respondent's  evidence  had  been  rejected  in
    preference  to  the  appellant's.   Checks  had  been  made  with   the
    authorities in Albania based on all the  information  provided  by  the
    appellant as to the nature of the blood feud and the judge  had  failed
    to give any analysis of this in the light  of  the  clear  conflict  of
    evidence between the appellant and the respondent.  The  evidence  from
    the respondent accepted that the blood  feud  existed.   However  since
    2000 that feud was no longer active given the appellant's  family  were
    not in self-confinement.  Reference was made to AM (Afghanistan) [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123  at  paragraphs  21  and  22.   The  evidence  should  be
    considered holistically.  The appellant's knowledge had been  in  large
    parts based on what he had been told by his family.  It  appeared  that
    the judge had accepted his account solely on  the  basis  that  it  was
    internally consistent without addressing the conflict in the  evidence.
    The losing party was  entitled  to  know  why  the  evidence  had  been
    rejected - MK (Duty to give reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641  at
    paragraphs 8, 12 and 14.  A response was filed  on  21  February  2018.
    The grounds of appeal it was submitted were wholly without merit.   The
    Secretary of State had acknowledged the brevity of the  issues  in  her
    grounds of appeal.   The  appellant's  father  had  returned  to  self-
    confinement after 2010.  The judge  had  allowed  for  the  appellant's
    vulnerability as a 16-year-old.  The evidence as to  the  far  reaching
    influence of the opposing family had been  accepted.   There  had  been
    corroborating evidence from the appellant's sister about the return  to
    confinement of the father by 2012.  There had been  evidence  from  the
    aunt about the threats in 2011 and 2013.  When read as a whole  it  was
    clear that the judge had been aware of the conflict in the evidence and
    had  given  it  adequate  consideration.   The  Secretary  of   State's
    investigations had supported the general credibility of the appellant's
    account.

11.  The judge had been guided by the relevant  country  guidance.   He  had
    not accepted the account simply because it was internally consistent as
    alleged.  Much of the account had been accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It was apparent that  all  the  evidence  had  been  considered
    holistically and the  grounds  were  no  more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement.  The reasons for granting permission were  disputed.   In
    any event none of the grounds were  material  to  the  outcome  as  the
    Secretary of State had not challenged the alternative  basis  on  which
    the Secretary of State had made the decision in paragraph  39  in  that
    case the Secretary of State had given consideration to the  appellant's
    claim on the basis that it had been accepted that  there  might  be  an
    active blood feud.  The judge had addressed the issue of sufficiency of
    protection and internal relocation and had made sustainable findings on
    those issues which had not been challenged in the grounds.

12.  At the hearing before me Mr Mills relied on the grounds that  had  been
    submitted that the judge's  reasoning  for  accepting  the  appellant's
    account had  been  inadequate.   Mr  Mills  focused  his  attention  on
    paragraph 10 of the determination:

         "Following investigations which the respondent has made through the
         British Embassy in Tirana, it is agreed in this case that  a  blood
         feud exists; and that male members of  the  family,  including  the
         appellant's  father,  were  in   confinement   until   2000.    The
         respondent's investigations  indicate  that  no  one  has  been  in
         confinement since then.  Unfortunately, it is clear on the face  of
         the RALON report that the Embassy have not  made  enquiries  as  to
         events occurring more recently than 2010."

13.  This letter had not been  in  the  original  bundle  but  it  had  been
    submitted under cover of a letter from the Home Office  dated  27  June
    2017.  I pointed out that this did not appear to be a point  explicitly
    raised in the grounds and Mr Mills accepted that it  arose  earlier  in
    the determination.

14.  Mr Mills submitted however that it  was  clear  on  the  face  of  that
    document that there had been no issues since 2010  and  that  it  dealt
    with matters on an up-to-date footing.  For example the second page  of
    the letter dealt with material emanating from the Albanian  Border  and
    Migration Department  dealing  with  events  such  as  the  appellant's
    travels in 2015.  It was accepted that what was said  about  checks  on
    the third page of the  document  was  not  ideal  because  it  was  not
    identified who the relevant Albanian authorities were.  It was  however
    said on that page that the family had not been confined from  the  year
    2000.

15.  The judge's reasoning had been brief.  He had found  the  appellant  to
    be credible.   He  had  disregarded  the  evidence  from  the  Albanian
    authorities.  While he had accepted the evidence from  the  appellant's
    sister  she  was  an  interested  party.   While  he  had  referred  to
    contemporaneous documents in paragraph 43 he had not set out what  they
    were.  They must have been a reference to the aunt's letter.  There had
    been material from Mr Marko, chairman of the  Commission  for  National
    Reconciliation.  The Tribunal in  EH  had  found  his  evidence  to  be
    unimpressive.  The judge had ignored relevant evidence  for  irrelevant
    reasons.  The alternative point raised in the appellant's reply did not
    bear on the materiality of the Secretary of State's decision.

16.  Mr Spurling submitted that the judge had referred to the RALON  letter.
     He had taken into account the appellant's evidence.   The  father  had
    come out of confinement but had returned to confinement.  The  evidence
    in the RALON letter was very poor it was submitted.  The third page did
    not make matters clear at all.  There was a period when the family  had
    come out of confinement and then  had  returned  to  confinement.   The
    judge's assessment was not perverse.  He had heard  live  evidence  and
    found it to be compelling.  He had taken into account the  age  of  the
    appellant.  He had found this explained the apparent  conflict.   In  a
    blood feud it would be necessary to have regard to  evidence  from  the
    family - it was in the nature of a blood feud that the family would  be
    targeted.  The criticism made by Mr Mills was cynical.  In relation  to
    Mr Marko the country guidance did not say that  letters  from  Albanian
    non-governmental organisations should  be  excluded  rather  that  they
    should not in general be regarded as reliable evidence.   Counsel  also
    relied upon the alternative point referred to  in  the  response.   The
    judge had reached a sustainable  decision  and  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

17.  Mr Mills in reply submitted that the judge had not given  consideration
    to the RALON letter and it was clear on its face that  it  was  dealing
    with events more recently than  2010.   Page  2  was  all  about  2015.
    Matters had been considered in 2016.  There was no rational  basis  for
    the judge to find as he had done.   The  determination  should  be  set
    aside and remitted for a fresh hearing.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's decision  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.  It is  said  that  the  judge's  credibility
    findings were limited to what was said in paragraphs 43 and 45 and that
    the judge had dealt with the matter too briefly.  As  Counsel  observes
    in the response the respondent had  referred  to  the  brevity  of  the
    issues in the case and so it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  the
    reasoning  of  the  judge  set  out  within  a  small   compass.    The
    determination needs to be read as a whole.  A large part of  Mr  Mills'
    argument centred on paragraph 10 of the determination and in particular
    the last sentence of that paragraph.  The only paragraphs focused on in
    the grounds were paragraphs 43 and 45.  It is important to note that  a
    perversity challenge was not advanced in the respondent's grounds.

19.  It is clear that the judge had regard to  the  RALON  report.   It  was
    accepted by Mr Mills that the third page of that letter was  not  ideal
    in that the dates of the checks had not been  given  nor  had  it  been
    specified what the relevant authorities  were  that  had  provided  the
    result.  The second page of the letter does give dates  and  identifies
    the relevant authority but the judge was concerned  with  the  evidence
    regarding confinement since 2000 and  it  was  open  to  him  to  place
    limited weight on what was said on the third page of  the  letter.   He
    had to balance that material with the material before him from  members
    of the appellant's family and the appellant himself.  Perversity  as  I
    have said was not raised in this case.  It is an important matter  that
    the judge was dealing with the evidence of a young  person  and  as  Mr
    Mills points out in a blood feud case it would  be  inevitable  that  a
    young person would rely on evidence from  family  members  particularly
    when a blood feud had gone back in time before they were born.

20.   I  see  no  evidence  that  the  judge  did   not   approach   matters
    holistically.  The determination has to be read as a whole.  The  judge
    had  regard  to  the  objective  evidence  and  directed   himself   in
    appropriate terms on legal matters.  He sets out in full  the  headnote
    of the relevant country guidance.  It was open to the judge to find  as
    he did and to rule as he did on the issues of internal  relocation  and
    sufficiency of protection.

21.  I do not find the  judge's  decision  to  be  flawed  for  the  reasons
    advanced in the grounds.  I do not  need  to  make  a  finding  on  the
    alternative basis put forward in the response in relation to  paragraph
    39 of the decision letter. In a nutshell the judge  was  not  satisfied
    with  the  respondent's  evidence  and  did  accept   the   appellant's
    explanation.

22.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge shall stand.

23.  The First-tier Judge made an anonymity direction and it is  appropriate
    in my view that that should continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 27 March 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
