
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14026/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 19 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Rashid, Counsel, instructed by Mamoon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Groves, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Pakistan, has permission to challenge  the
decision of Judge Durance of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  12
February 2019 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
respondent on 12 October 2018 refusing his protection claim.  The  basis  of
the appellant's asylum claim was that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Pakistan because he was a gay man. The judge did not find that he had  given
a credible account of his gay identity.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal, lack clarity but  contend  that  the
judge had erred in:-

    1)   his treatment of the issue of the appellant's age;


    2)   his treatment of  the  evidence  of  Mr  [W],  which  he  said  he
         accepted.

So far as concerns Mr [W], the judge had a witness statement  from  him  and
also heard oral testimony from him. He summarised Mr [W]'s evidence at  para
47 as follows:

    "Mr [W] gave evidence and confirmed that he  had  known  the  appellant
    since spring 2018. He stated that he had seen the appellant a couple of
    time at Icebreakers and knew the appellant somewhat better than  [K  S]
    as his English was better. In cross examination he  indicated  that  he
    had seen him once outside Icebreakers when the  appellant  had  invited
    him to a basement sauna. I asked Mr [W] about this. He  indicated  that
    he had seen the appellant in  the  sauna  and  that  he  had  seen  the
    appellant going into a cabin and that his presumption was that  he  was
    going into the cabin to have sex. He stated that [K S}  was  not  there
    but that he made  no  judgement  about  that  as  he  himself  had  had
    relationships which were semi-open and that he took the view that  that
    was a matter for the appellant and [K S]."

When later evaluating the evidence, having attached  little  weight  to  the
evidence of the appellant and other witnesses, the judge's treatment of  the
evidence of Mr [W] included the following passages:-

    "84. That leaves the  evidence  of  Mr  [W].  Essentially,  I  have  an
    appellant who I have determined has lied about events in  Pakistan  and
    has fabricated a relationship in the United Kingdom in order to  remain
    in the United Kingdom. The appellant is arguing that he  is  now  in  a
    relationship with another asylum seeker who has been  found  as  having
    lied about his sexuality at all costs in order to stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Set against that I have the evidence of an independent witness
    who says that he has seen the appellant in a gay  sauna  going  into  a
    cabin where he presumed that the appellant went on to have sex.


    ...


    88.  Notwithstanding these reservations [which concerned the fact  that
    Mr [W] had said he had given evidence in a number of asylum appeals]  I
    accept his evidence. I accept that Mr [W] has seen the appellant  in  a
    gay sauna. I accept his evidence that he saw the appellant  go  into  a
    cabin. I accept that he has seen the appellant and [KS] attend a number
    of meetings at Icebreakers and I accept his evidence that  he  believes
    the appellant to be a gay man.


    89.  However, I do not find that this proves to the lower  standard  of
    proof that the appellant is a gay man. The appellant and  [KS]  have  a
    chequered immigration history. Mr [W]  is  entirely  unaware  of  their
    history and whilst his  evidence  may  be  in  good  faith  it  is  one
    dimensional and superficial. Both men have  been  found  to  have  been
    dishonest on core issues. I have determined that the appellant will say
    anything if he believes that it will secure immigration status  in  the
    United Kingdom.


    90.  Given these findings, I  do  not  accept  that  the  mere  act  of
    visiting a gay bar or sauna is sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
    proof. In addition, the mere fact that the appellant went into a  cabin
    does not mean that he had sex. That is a presumption that  Mr  [W]  was
    entitled to reach but he makes that presumption without  being  in  the
    full possession of the facts or immigration history of  the  appellant.
    In my judgement, something more qualitative is  required.  I  find  the
    evidence of a loving and lasting relationship is  the  most  persuasive
    evidence and that such evidence is absent. I do not  consider  that  Mr
    [W]'s  evidence  of  seeing  the  appellant  in  a  sauna  alters  that
    conclusion given the determination displayed by the appellant to secure
    status at any cost."

I turn to the grounds.

3.   I find ground 1 devoid of merit, since the  issue  of  the  appellant's
age was peripheral to the reasons given by  the  judge  for  dismissing  the
appeal.

4.   It is only the second  ground  (ground  2)  that  was  advanced  by  Mr
Rashid.  He submitted that the judge's error in this connection  arose  from
a misunderstanding of the evidence actually given  by  Mr  [W].   The  judge
thought Mr [W]'s evidence was that he saw the appellant enter a cabin  in  a
gay sauna, whereas, submitted Mr Rashid, Mr [W] had actually  said  that  he
had had  sex  with  the  appellant  in  this  cabin.   In  support  of  this
submission he submitted a supplementary statement from Mr [W] prepared post-
hearing and submitted with the written grounds of permission.

5.   It is a general rule that  evidence  adduced  after  a  hearing  cannot
demonstrate an error of law on the part of a judge  who  can  only  consider
the evidence that is before him.

6.   However, a well-established exception to that rule arises if the  judge
is considered to have mistakenly understood/recorded material evidence.   In
order to assess whether that is in fact what happened here, it is  important
to set out the relevant documents:-

7.   Mr [W]'s Statement of 30 November 2018


This statement was as follows:


    1, [Mr] [W] of [...] state as follows:


    Declaration


    I make this statement in connection with the asylum claim of [B A]. Its
    contents are true to the best of my knowledge and belief.


    1)   I am a British citizen [aged 61] .... I worked for 29  years  for
         the Environment Agency and predecessor organisations, taking  early
         retirement April 2015. Since then, I work around six days per month
         as a volunteer for George House  Trust,  a  HIV  charity  based  in
         Manchester. Since Sept 2016  I've  volunteered  weekly  at  English
         language courses at St Johns Centre in Old Trafford,  working  with
         asylum seekers, refugees and others needing better English to  make
         social contacts in Greater Manchester.


    2)   I first met [B A] in  April  2017  at  'Icebreakers'  which  meets
         weekly at the LGBT Foundation in the Manchester gay  village,  with
         typically 15 to 30 guys there. It is "a mutual support  group  that
         caters for gay and bisexual men - 18  years  or  older  -  who  are
         'coming out', as well as men who  are  already  'out'  but  new  to
         Greater Manchester or having feelings of loneliness  or  isolation.
         New prospective members of Icebreakers  are  interviewed  at  their
         first visit to the group, to explore the reasons for  them  coming,
         and find out how they can benefit and fit into the group.  In  this
         way, new members are in effect 'screened' to see they fit into  its
         target of helping gay or bisexual men.


    3)   I go to Icebreakers around 2-3 times per  month,  and  see  [B  A]
         quite  often  there.  I  have  also  met  his  partner  [K  S]   at
         Icebreakers, and met them both once at 'First Wednesday'. This is a
         monthly information and support group for LGBT people who have come
         to UK or seek sanctuary here on account of their sexuality and  the
         risks they'd run at home if discovered or  living  openly  as  gay.
         Wednesday is my volunteering day at George House Trust, so I'm  not
         often at First Wednesday, but I know a  few  of  the  guys  who  do
         attend. [B A] also goes to PLUS group (People Like Us, Stockport) a
         monthly meet up for LGBT people which I've been to once this  year.




    4)   [B A] and [K S] have volunteered  with  the  LGBT  Foundation,  at
         Manchester  Pride  2017  and  [B  A]  bucket-collected   money   at
         Manchester Pride 2018. I've talked with [B A]  about  his  time  in
         Manchester since coming in December 2011 on a study visa.  I  asked
         him about his gay history since then, as he's more able to be  open
         here, and about when [B A] started venturing into the gay world. He
         said that his limited English before 2014 had restricted this,  and
         that he met [K S] about 3yrs ago and of course they don't  have  to
         rely only on English. His English level is now reasonable but I can
         understand this reasoning, as 'chatting up' and  building  trusting
         relationships needs some level of  fluency.  [B  A]  however  seems
         fully at ease with me and the guys at  Icebreakers.  They've  lived
         together in [W] since 6 July 2018.


    5)   [B A] says he lived with his uncle since 2014, who now knows [K S]
         and about their gay relationship. In July 2018  [B  A]  and  [K  S]
         moved in together with [K S's] uncle. Both families  are  OK  about
         them living together. I believe that [B A] is a gay  man  and  that
         he'd be at risk in Pakistan, under either the  former  or  the  new
         Imran Khan government. I am happy  to  speak  further  on  this  if
         required.


                                        [Mr] [W] 30 November 2018

8.   The Judge's Record of Mr [W]'s Evidence at the hearing


I could not locate this during the hearing but have now consulted it. It  is
necessary in the circumstances to set out the  relevant  passages  recording
Mr [W]'s evidence in full. It will be  apparent  that  it  is  not  easy  to
follow the judge's shorthand.


    "Mr [W]


    P.30.


    Happy to use it - para 5 - not a blood uncle -


    Language ? . - English.


    How long known [B A]?  since spring 2018  -  April  -  started  gay  to
    Icebreakers -


    What relationship?  See each other couple of times pcm at Icebreakers -
    nearly always together - know [B A] better as his English is  better  -
    meeting sometimes go across - The Molly House - over the road.


    Why so sure [B A] is homosexual?  Very clearly touchy feely - a lot  of
    body contact as is [B A] himself.  Meet - ? - v. close - [B A] is  more
    outgoing of the two - body language - happy that gay ? .


    Ms Newton


    What pos - hold?  Ordinary member.


    How often see o/ ? Icebreakers?  Once invited -  to  basement  sauna  -
    both been to last year - met @ meals - basically Icebreakers and  Molly
    House.


    Been to ? address?  No.


    RXN?  No.


    Say invited to basement sauna - did see them?  It was [B A] -  DNK  how
    many would be - not surprised just [B A] - went into sauna not together
    - I was late - I caught up with him - went into the sauna - but  spent
    much time in sauna - went into T.V. room - then  went  into  area  with
    cabins - clear where he was and that he was having sex  -  I  have  had
    relationships which were semi-open - it is up to [K S]  and [B A] - how
    they live their relationship - don't want to do anything  that  damaged
    that.


    Anything missing? X (x 2).


    FINISH."


9.   The Presenting Officer's Record


At the hearing before me, Miss Groves said she  was  happy  to  produce  the
Presenting Officer's Note of Proceedings.  It was  very  detailed  and  gave
every indication of being  a  verbatim  record,  although  I  am  not  in  a
position to be sure about that.  In relation to Mr [W],  the  relevant  part
of the record reads:


    "IJ invited to basement sauna did you see them there? Just [BA]  I  saw
    it was probably both of them were coming but just [BA] turned up. I was
    running late so we arranged I would catch up  with  him.  I  went  into
    sauna chatted for a bit went to TV room and drifted out  it  was  clear
    from the way he was  that  he  was  up  for  having  sex.  I  have  had
    relationships that have been semi open its up to them how  they  manage
    their relationship they appear happy together."

10.  The Supplementary Statement from Mr [W]


Submitted  with  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  the  judge's
decision, was a further statement from Mr [W].   In  its  relevant  part  it
states:-


         "I refer to Paragraphs 84-90 of Judges Decision, which I feel  have
         omissions which are central to, and material facts of the issue  of
         whether the Appellant is a gay man or not.


         The Decision Notice describes my response to a question as  that  I
         merely witnessed the Appellant going into a cabin at a  gay  sauna,
         and that I then presumed the Appellant to be having sex [with  some
         other unknown person] in the cabin.


         On the contrary: in my answer to  the  Judge's  questioning  of  (I
         think it was phrased as) Where, apart from LGBT Foundation I'd  met
         the Appellant:


         -    I described the circumstances how the Appellant had  suggested
             we meet up at the gay sauna;


         -    that in the premises the Appellant and myself met in the sauna
             itself, and then soon went into a private cabin.


         -    I stated that the Appellant and myself had sex with each other
             in this cabin. Within the boundaries of what can be said in  a
             Tribunal about sexual activity, my description of events as an
             independent witness were clear and unambiguous: that is,  that
             the Appellant and I actively had sex. This  is  in  paragraphs
             84, 88 and 90.


         I stated that the visit to Basement sauna  was  in  December  2018.
         I've now found the SMS thread that confirms  the  correct  date  of
         visit was on Wednesday 21 November 2018. I  was  unsure  from  the
         Appellant's level of English whether he wanted me to refer to  this
         sauna visit in my Statement of 30/11/18,  or  how  his  partner  or
         other Witnesses would feel about this. We subsequently talked  more
         on this in January with a friend who helped with good  English  and
         Urdu translation.


         I have now provided Screenshots of the Appellant's and my  messages
         around 21 November.

         In more detail:


         Paragraph 84


         The Decision Notice describes me seeing the  Appellant  go  into  a
         cabin and presumed him to  have  sex  there.  However,  I  and  the
         Appellant ourselves went together into the cabin and  we  did  have
         sex.


         I described in the Tribunal how the Appellant had suggested we meet
         up at Basement gay sauna in Manchester, and that I'd wondered if he
         meant to meet with him alone or  with  his  partner.  I  stated  it
         turned out the Appellant was alone, but I'd myself  had  couple  of
         longish term relationships which had been a little bit  'open'  and
         it didn't seem  odd  as  I  knew  the  Appellant  and  partner  had
         apparently been to this sauna together.


         I stated that I had been running late so the Appellant was  already
         in the sauna itself, so we didn't chat long in the heat  but  moved
         to TV lounge and then to private cabins.  It was at  this  point  I
         recall using the phrase "He seemed up for sex" or "He  was  clearly
         up for sex", and being aware of boundaries to use in a Tribunal had
         hoped to myself that such description was appropriate and  not  too
         lewd. I stated we had sex in the cabin together. I did  not  detail
         what exactly we did, and our use of condoms etc, as was aware  such
         detail would not be appropriate. I strongly believe however that  I
         said at this point something like "He seemed  motivated  and  fully
         taking part in our sexual activity."

         Paragraph 88


         My  response  to  questioning  was  specifically  that  I  and  the
         Appellant ourselves went into  a  cabin  and  that  we  had  sexual
         activity together.


         Paragraph 89


         My  evidence  is  described  from  practical  experience   of   the
         Appellant's sexuality shown to me in action at the sauna,  as  well
         as from observations of him and his partner elsewhere.


         I request that notes to this case be re-examined.


         [Mr] [W], 15 February 2019"

11.  The appellant's representatives produced no record of  the  proceedings
or even a summary.

12.  I am grateful to both representatives for  their  careful  submissions.
Since their submissions were made without sight of  the  judge's  record  of
proceedings, I have considered whether I should send it to the  parties  and
give them an opportunity to comment on it before I  reach  my  decision.  In
the end I have decided this is unnecessary  since  on  any  fair  reading  I
consider several things are evident.  First,  in  the  Presenting  Officer's
note (and Miss Groves did  not  suggest  that  it  should  be  taken  to  be
anything other than accurate), there is no mention of anyone except  Mr  [W]
and the appellant being present in the sauna area where he said he  saw  the
appellant. Second, this Note is much more similar to  Mr  [W]'s  account  in
his supplementary witness statement  of  what  he  said  than  that  of  the
judge's record. Third, the Presenting Officer's Note  is  capable  of  being
read as Mr [W] saying that the appellant was "up for  sex"  with  him  (i.e.
with Mr [W]), and that this is what happened and that this why he  expressed
his hope that this would not upset the  appellant's  relationship  with  KS.
Third, although the judge's record of proceedings makes no reference  to  Mr
[W] himself having sex with the appellant, it does describe Mr [W] as  going
into the area with cabins and stating that it was "clear where  he  was  and
that he was having sex". It is difficult to construe those words as  meaning
only (as the judge opined) that Mr [W] "presumed" the appellant  was  having
sex. Read together with Mr  [W]'s  supplementary  statement,  it  cannot  be
excluded that the judge misunderstood Mr [W]'s  evidence.  According  to  Mr
[W], he had not been clear and straightforward in his  description  of  what
happened because of "being aware of boundaries to use  in  a  Tribunal"  and
there is an element of ambiguity in both the judge's record  of  proceedings
and the Presenting Officer's Note.


In reaching this assessment, I have taken into account as a factor  pointing
the other way, that the judge did not record either of  the  representatives
as proceeding on the basis that Mr [W] had said he  had  had  sex  with  the
appellant and that if they had understood his  evidence  as  being  to  that
effect it should have made a significant difference  to  their  submissions.
However, I have decided that it would be unsafe to place too much weight  on
this point. For one thing, it would appear from the judge's record that  the
submissions were taken up with other matters, in  particular  the  issue  of
how the judge should approach the fact that the appellant's  representatives
had not produced a copy of the negative appeal determination in the case  of
KS. For another, as already mentioned, there is a distinct possibility  that
Mr [W] was not as clear as he said he thought he was because of concern  not
to overstep boundaries of  decency.   Given  (i)  that  the  judge  said  he
accepted Mr [W] as a credible witness (despite reservations), (ii)  that  Mr
[W] was clearly, on all accounts of his evidence, in the same gay  sauna  as
the appellant and in close proximity to him;  (iii) that KS was  not  there;
(iv) that there was no questioning (as one might  expect  if  the  appellant
was not alone and not with Mr [W]) as to who the other person in  the  sauna
was or  could  have  been,  there  is  too  great  a  risk  that  the  judge
misunderstood the purport of Mr [W]'s  evidence.  Since  he  only  found  Mr
[W]'s evidence to have limited weight because he had not seen the  appellant
having sex, it may have made a material difference if he had  understood  Mr
[W] to be saying he had had sex with the appellant.

Two other factors that has influenced  my  decision  are  firstly  that  the
judge's observation that "the evidence of a loving and lasting  relationship
is the most persuasive evidence" appears too judgemental; and secondly  that
t even on the evidence accepted by  the  judge  it  would  appear  that  the
appellant has spent over a year attending at places known  to  be  locations
where there are gay men. That meant that either he had spent a  considerable
amount of time and effort constructing a false gay profile or  that  he  was
gay. If, as seems  to  be  the  case,  that  the  judge  believed  that  the
appellant had been constructing a false  gay  profile,  then  I  would  have
expected some inquiry of Mr [W] and  other  witnesses  as  to  whether  they
considered that if the appellant was feigning a gay  sexual  identity,  they
could detect that.

For the above reasons, I have concluded that the judge's decision is  unsafe
and that the case needs to be remitted for a fresh hearing.

Direction as to preparation for next hearing

Given that the evidence of Mr [W] will very likely play a  significant  part
at the next hearing, the appellant's representatives are directed to  obtain
a further supplementary statement  from  Mr  [W]  to  be  submitted  to  the
Tribunal at least 21 days in advance  of  the  hearing  (with  copy  to  the
respondent), giving particulars of all  the  times  he  has  attended  as  a
witness in asylum appeals with details of the names of  the  appellants  and
the dates of the hearings, the names of the representatives and  judges  (if
recalled) and the outcomes if known.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 10 July 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

