
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/14259/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2021                   |On 25 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     X X
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms E Gunn, instructed by Duncan Lewis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of Dr H H Storey, sitting as
    a FtT Judge, promulgated on 18 September 2020.

 2. The technology  enabled  an  effective  remote  hearing,  despite  some
    difficulties in referring to underlying materials.  No separate bundles
    had been provided to the UT, and the versions of  previous  bundles  in
    the hands of the parties had inconsistent page numbering and incomplete
    referencing.  However, with the assistance of both representatives, all
    materials referred to were identified in course of the hearing.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the UT are headed (i) error in  assessment  of
    section 117B(6) [of the 2002 Act]; (ii) speculating on evidence;  (iii)
    no reasons for rejecting material evidence; and (iv) error in  approach
    to medical evidence.

 4. The grant of permission, although on all  grounds,  observes  that  (i)
    appears strongest.

 5. The SSHD responded to the grant  of  permission  on  30  October  2020,
    conceding ground (i) only.  Mr Bates acknowledged  that  on  the  FtT's
    findings, the appeal should have been allowed under article 8.

 6. It was accepted that the appellant could not be expected to go back  to
    Nangahar.  Ground (ii) is directed against the finding  that  he  might
    relocate to Kabul.  Ms Gunn said that  the  FtT  speculated  on  family
    support and on the possibility  of  employment.  She  referred  to  the
    appellant's statements about having little information about or contact
    with family members; an expert report on the likelihood of their  being
    abducted or killed; the flimsy basis for identifying the appellant as a
    mechanic; and the unlikelihood, as specified in  country  guidance,  of
    finding any employment, in absence of family connections, other than as
    a day labourer.

 7. On this ground, I prefer the submissions of  Mr  Bates.   The  FtT  was
    aware of the appellant's claims about his  family,  but  he  failed  to
    establish those.  His general credibility was rejected for various good
    reasons, not challenged in  the  grounds.   The  assessment  of  family
    contact was made in that context.  It was not incredible  that  someone
    might be described in Afghanistan as a mechanic even if apparently aged
    14 at the time; and that came from a document which he produced.

 8. Ground (ii) shows selective disagreement, rather than speculation.

 9. Ground (iii) says that the FtT failed to deal adequately with materials
    about the Covid pandemic specified in the skeleton argument.

10. The judge noted the submissions about the pandemic at  several  points,
    but concluded at [77] that although this  would  increase  difficulties
    for returnees, those were not likely to be significantly  greater  than
    those  evaluated  in  the  latest  country  guidance.   That  was   the
    assessment which the judge had to make.  It is not said to  lie  beyond
    reason.

11. The evidence provided by the appellant was not "rejected".   The  judge
    simply declined to draw from it  the  conclusion  which  the  appellant
    wished.  The appellant recites the evidence again, but  does  not  show
    the absence of further elaboration to amount to an error of law.

12. Ground (iv) says that the FtT,  having  accepted  the  diagnosis  in  a
    report by Dr Singh, made its finding of no significant risk of  suicide
    "in vacuum with no medical basis" which  "again  amounts  to  ...  mere
    speculation".

13. It is the ground,  not  the  decision,  which  is  in  a  vacuum.   The
    assertion does not withstand reference to [51] of the decision.  Having
    accepted the diagnosis as based on clinical observations, the FtT gives
    the report "limited weight" due  to  (i)  absence  of  engagement  with
    previous adverse findings; (ii) acceptance of the appellant's narrative
    about his experiences and lack of family, which he has otherwise failed
    to establish; and (iii) absence, contrary to the Istanbul protocol,  of
    consideration of other possible causes.  The appellant shows  no  error
    in any of those reasons.  The finding on the report is far above  "mere
    speculation".

14. The decision, read fairly  and  as  a  whole,  is  a  thorough,  indeed
    painstaking,  analysis  of  the  appellant's  case  by   one   of   the
    jurisdiction's most experienced judges.  Grounds (ii), (iii)  and  (iv)
    probe for disagreement, but they do not show error on any point of law,
    such that the decision should be set aside, other than as follows.

15. The decision of the FtT is set aside to the extent explained above.  On
    remaking, the appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is  allowed  on
    article 8 grounds, based  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    child.  On other grounds, the appeal stands as dismissed.

16. An anonymity direction is in place.  It is  doubtful  whether  that  is
    justified, but as the matter was not addressed in the UT, anonymity  is
    maintained herein.




    Hugh Macleman


    10 February 2021
    UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
