
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/14112/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 July 2017                        |     On 04 August 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     CG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, Counsel, instructed by Alex Bell
                    Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Cockrill (the judge),  promulgated  on  2  February  2017,
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
        taken on 8 December 2016 to refuse his protection claim.



Relevant background

     2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  24
        December 1987. He entered the UK on 12 March 2008 as a student  and
        has remained in the  UK  ever  since.  The  Appellant  was  granted
        further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student, but this was
        curtailed by a decision dated 16 November 2013 such that it expired
        on 17 January 2014.  An  application  made  by  the  Appellant  for
        further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  was  refused
        on 27 March 2014. On 28 April 2016 the Appellant  was  served  with
        notice of his liability to removal as somebody who  required  leave
        to remain UK but did not have it. On 9 June 2016 he claimed asylum.


     3. The following is a summary of the Appellant's asylum claim.  He  is
        Hindu. The Hindu community in his home area (Chittagong)  began  to
        experience  problems  in  October  2015  because  a  local   Muslim
        councillor was set on transforming the local Hindu temple, which is
        on land owned by the Appellant's family and is also the site of his
        grandparents mausoleum (the Appellant's  grandfather's  ashes  were
        contained in the temple), into a mosque.  The  Hindu  temple  is  a
        place of special value to the Appellant, his immediate  family  and
        those who attended from nearby villages. The Muslim  councillor  is
        influential and is a member of the Awami league, the  ruling  party
        in Bangladesh. In a telephone to the Appellant's father in  October
        2015 a threat was made to kill the  Appellant  if  he  returned  to
        Bangladesh unless money was paid. In December 2015 the  Appellant's
        father was attacked requiring him to spend some days  in  hospital.
        Despite the attack on both the Appellant's father  and  the  family
        home the police were not prepared to investigate and follow  up  on
        the matter. The Appellant  claimed  that  the  councillor  and  his
        brother have the power to take the temple but have not yet done so.
        The Appellant is not sure why they have not  already  done  so  but
        believes that if his father dies  or  leaves  Bangladesh  then  the
        councillor will try and take  the  temple  grounds.  The  Appellant
        believes he is at particular risk  because  he  would  be  the  one
        standing in the way of the councillor's plans.


     4. The Respondent accepted the Appellant was Hindu but did not  accept
        the Appellant's claim relating to the attack  on  his  father.  The
        Appellant was said to have given inconsistent answers in respect of
        the ability of the councillor to take the land and  in  respect  of
        the targeting of his father. The Respondent also  drew  an  adverse
        inference from the delay by the Appellant in claiming  asylum.  The
        Respondent  considered  that  there  would,  in  any  event,  be  a
        sufficiency of protection available to the  Appellant  or,  in  the
        alternative, that he would be able to avail himself of the internal
        relocation alternative.

 The First-tier Tribunal decision

     5. The judge set out a  summary  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and  the
        reasons advanced by the Respondent  for  refusing  the  claim.  The
        judge heard evidence from the Appellant and considered a number  of
        background  documents,  including  the  country   information   and
        guidance (CIG) document on Bangladesh relating to minority  groups,
        published in March 2016.


     6. Although the judge did not engage with the  reasons  given  by  the
        Respondent for finding the Appellant's  claim  incredible  (and  to
        this extent did not make  clear  credibility  findings)  the  judge
        indicates, at [59] that he is prepared to accept  as  a  matter  of
        fact that the Appellant's father was attacked with a view to trying
        to pressurise him to force over the land. At [65] the judge appears
        to find that the Appellant could not  go  back  to  his  home  area
        because, as a  member  of  a  religious  minority,  he  would  face
        "serious  difficulties"  in  stopping  the  actions  of  the  local
        officials. At [67] the judge concludes that there  had  been  "some
        exaggeration" of the potential  risk  faced  by  the  Appellant  on
        return  because  the  Appellant's  evidence   suggests   that   the
        councillor  and  his  associates  are  prepared  to  wait  for  the
        Appellant's father to die of natural  causes,  which  may  be  some
        years off. At [68] the judge says that the Appellant "might find it
        tricky to return to his home area" for the reasons already given by
        him. It is not immediately clear from the assessment at  [68]  that
        the judge is satisfied that the Appellant  would  face  a  risk  of
        persecution in his home area and  that  the  authorities  would  be
        unwilling or unable to provide a sufficiency of protection.


     7. From [68] to  [72]  the  judge  concentrates  on  the  question  of
        internal relocation. At [69] the judge states that, "... it  should
        be open to [the Appellant] to be able to preserve his  family  land
        from unlawful interference when he is back  in  Bangladesh  and  in
        many ways he is better placed to  do  that  than  from  the  United
        Kingdom." The judge concludes that the Appellant  could  internally
        relocate and thereby secure his safety. At [70] the judge does  not
        consider that the local councillor would track down  the  Appellant
        or that this is "particularly likely" to take place.  At  [71]  the
        judge states that if the local authorities  had  really  wanted  to
        take over the piece of land in the temple than they could have done
        so. The councillor was not however prepared to go  "that  one  step
        further" and take unlawful action by simply grabbing the  land  but
        had attempted to apply pressure to the Appellant and his father. At
        [72] the  judge  considers  that  the  Appellant  could  return  to
        Bangladesh and "... take all the appropriate steps to preserve  the
        family land and the lawful ownership of  his  father,  and  in  due
        course the Appellant  himself  would  inherit  the  land  perfectly
        lawfully and properly, including the temple." Having concluded that
        the Appellant was not  entitled  to  international  protection  the
        judge dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     8. The grounds contend that the judge gave inadequate consideration to
        the issues of internal relocation and  sufficiency  of  protection.
        The grounds relied on documents contained in the Appellant's bundle
        including an excerpt from Hansard  quoting  an  MP  who,  in  turn,
        relied on a report from a  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on  freedom  of
        religion and beliefs report from 2015. It was  submitted  that  the
        judge's conclusions that the Appellant would be  able  to  preserve
        his family land if returned to Bangladesh  was  irrational  as  the
        father's attackers could attack again.


     9. In granting permission to appeal judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Page found it arguable that the judge failed  to  engage  with  the
        issue of internal relocation by failing to adequately consider  the
        objective evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant.

Submissions at the error of law hearing

  10. Ms Warren expanded upon the grounds by submitting that the decision
      contains no satisfactorily clear credibility findings and that it is
      unclear what the judge's findings are in respect of the issue of the
      sufficiency of protection available to the Appellant. No consideration
      was given by the judge to the background evidence relating to ill-
      treatment of Hindus in other parts of Bangladesh I was invited to
      consider the CIG March 2016 report at section 6 and the executive
      summary. If, as the judge found, the Appellant would be able to assert
      ownership of the land from another part of Bangladesh, this was likely
      to expose him to the risk of ill-treatment as he would be easily
      traced. This was very likely to occur given the political connections
      of the councillor. Mr Kotas indicated that credibility had not perhaps
      been properly examined by the judge but that it was clear the judge
      took the claim at its highest and was entitled to conclude that the
      Appellant could move to another part of the country.

Discussion

    11. There are several aspects of this decision that are concerning. The
        Respondent has argued that the judge approached the  appeal  having
        taken the claim at its highest and that he was entitled to conclude
        that the Appellant could internally relocate.  As  I  have  already
        indicated there are no clear credibility findings in respect of all
        the credibility issues raised by  the  Respondent  in  her  refusal
        letter.  Although  the  judge  indicated  (at  [59])  that  he  was
        prepared to accept as a matter of fact that the Appellant's  father
        was attacked, the judge has not engaged with the reasons relied  on
        by the Respondent in her refusal letter for finding the Appellant's
        account incredible. This included the  timing  of  the  Appellant's
        asylum claim (after being served with a decision notifying  him  of
        his liability to removal  and  after  the  Appellant  had  remained
        unlawfully in the UK for approximately 2 years) and what  was  said
        to be an internal  contradiction  in  the  Appellant's  account.  I
        appreciate that credibility is not in itself a  valid  end  to  the
        function of a  judge's  assessment,  but  a  judge  is  obliged  to
        determine whether an individual has given a credible  account  such
        as to entitle them to international protection.


    12. At [67] the judge states that the "... truth in  the  situation  is
        that there has been some exaggeration of the potential  risk  faced
        by this Appellant on return."  It  is  not  altogether  clear  what
        aspect of the risk facing the Appellant the  judge  found  to  have
        been exaggerated. At [71] the judge appears  to  suggest  that  the
        councillor was not willing to "... go that one  step  further"  and
        take unlawful  action  by  simply  grabbing  the  land.  The  judge
        considers that if the councillor really wants to take over the land
        then he would have done so by now. This suggests that  the  threats
        to the Appellant and the temple are not as great as  that  advanced
        by the Appellant and that the threat was  therefore  'exaggerated'.
        Nor is it clear that the judge has made  material  findings  as  to
        whether the authorities  would  actually  be  willing  or  able  to
        provide a sufficiency of protection in Chittagong  given  that  the
        Appellant fears a local councillor and member of the Awami  league,
        the ruling party in Bangladesh.

    13. The evidence before the judge indicated that the Hindu temple owned
        by the Appellant was a place of "special  value"  to  him  and  his
        family. The Appellant's grandfather's ashes were contained  in  the
        temple and it was, accordingly, a family  mausoleum.  In  his  oral
        evidence, as recorded by the judge  at  [35],  the  Appellant  said
        there was no way that he or his father would be  prepared  to  sell
        the land with the temple on it. It was a matter extremely close  to
        them because of their religious beliefs as practising  Hindus.  The
        judge  emphasised  the  evidence  relating  to  the  religious  and
        personal significance of the temple on family  land.  At  [58]  the
        judge noted that the Appellant himself was "in no way shape or form
        willing to part with the  land  and  to  sell  it".  This  evidence
        suggests that the Appellant may have a strong link  with  the  land
        and the temple and was not willing to see it transformed in the way
        sought by the Muslim councillor,  and  that  this  may  compel  the
        Appellant to maintain and assert  his  rights  in  respect  of  the
        family land even if there is a risk of serious ill-treatment in  so
        doing. There was however no clear finding in  this  regard  by  the
        judge. Moreover, at paragraph 10 of his statement dated 10  January
        2017 the Appellant indicates that his father decided to stay with a
        view to protecting the temple and the  family  land  despite  being
        advised by the Appellant not to  do  so.  This  suggests  that  the
        Appellant was not willing for his father to stay in the village  if
        there was a high risk to him, and that  he  therefore  may  not  be
        willing to  face  such  a  risk  himself  by  asserting  rights  of
        ownership. I also  note  that,  according  to  his  interview,  the
        Appellant lived for 20 years in  Sylhet,  a  considerable  distance
        from Chittagong, potentially indicating again that his link to  the
        family land is not as strong as advanced by him. There has been  no
        resolution by the judge in respect of these issues.


    14. The judge indicates  (at  [69])  that  it  would  be  open  to  the
        Appellant  to  preserve  his  family  land  when  he  returned   to
        Bangladesh, and at [72] the judge stated that the  Appellant  would
        be able to "take all the appropriate steps to preserve  the  family
        land and the lawful ownership of his father, and in due course  the
        Appellant himself would inherit the  land  perfectly  lawfully  and
        properly, including the temple." The judge does  not  explain  what
        "appropriate steps" the Appellant would be able to take if  returns
        to Bangladesh and lives in another area. Presumably the  judge  was
        referring to legal steps that the Appellant could undertake  in  an
        attempt to ensure the family land was not taken  by  force  and  to
        resist any attempt to do so. If however the Appellant did undertake
        legal or other formal steps to protect the family  land  the  judge
        has not  considered  the  possibility  that  his  contact  details,
        including his address,  may  then  become  known  as  they  may  be
        required in formal or official documents.  If  this  was  the  case
        then, despite the councillor only  being  local,  and  despite  the
        Appellant's fear being localised to Chittagong, it is possible that
        those intent on obtaining  the  land  may  attempt  to  target  the
        Appellant wherever he is in Bangladesh. This is not a  matter  that
        was considered by the judge.  Nor  has  the  judge  considered  the
        background evidence contained in the Applicant's bundle  relied  on
        by the Applicant to support his claim that  he  would  be  targeted
        wherever he relocated in Bangladesh as a result of his religion.


    15. Having cumulative regard to all these factors I am  satisfied  that
        their impact is such as to render the determination  unsafe.  Given
        the absence  of  clear  credibility  findings  and  the  unresolved
        factual issues identified above it is appropriate for the matter to
        be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  decided  afresh,
        all issues open, by a judge other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Cockrill.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material legal error.
The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing
before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cockrill


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               3 August 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


