
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14149/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th February 2019                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    m s r
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cuhna (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dean, promulgated on 19th  July  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 10th  July  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  10th
    December 1980.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 8th  December  2016,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is gay, and as a result  of  this,  he
    fears persecution  and  serious  harm  in  Bangladesh  because  of  his
    sexuality.  As the judge pointed out, his case is that he first  became
    aware of his sexuality in 1995, but was also aware  that  homosexuality
    was considered a sin in Islam and he therefore kept these  feelings  to
    himself.  The Appellant  came  to  the  UK  in  2009  and  subsequently
    observed public displays of affection between men.  He started going to
    gay clubs in 2010.  In February 2013 he met a man called "Anthony" with
    whom he had a seven to eight month relationship.  The Appellant  states
    that he lives openly in this country as a  homosexual  and  as  a  non-
    practising Muslim (see paragraph 9 of the determination).

The Judges Findings

 4. The judge  observed  how  the  Respondent  had  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK since 2009, and  had  only  mentioned  his
    sexuality in 2016.  In fact, he did so only when he was in  immigration
    detention after claiming asylum.  His initial  claim  had  always  been
    that he was an atheist, and in a  subsequent  statement  to  a  doctor,
    whilst in detention in 2016, he had stated that he  was  a  homosexual.
    Moreover, his account was inconsistent because he had claimed  to  have
    been beaten by his father in 1995, or alternatively in 2009,  but  this
    was on the basis that he was an atheist,  and  not  because  he  was  a
    homosexual.   Furthermore,  with  the  exception  of  the  evidence  of
    "Masudur Rahman" all the letters of support were from people  who  were
    recent associates, and were post-decision letters.

 5. The judge concluded that,

         "Looking at this  evidence  I  find  that  although  the  Appellant
         clearly had contact with the Respondent  by  way  of  a  number  of
         applications for leave, as  well  as  regularly  reporting  to  the
         authorities, at no time did he mention his sexuality or  even  that
         he was in fear of returning to Bangladesh.  Accordingly, while  not
         determinative, I find that the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  gay  is
         undermined because of his failure to mention this fact when he made
         applications for further leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom"
         (paragraph 12).

 6. The judge also went on to say that, even after the Appellant  had  made
    his asylum claim on 13th June 2016, he failed to mention the fact  that
    he was gay, and this matter only arose after the completion of the Rule
    24 report in Harmondsworth on 19th July 2016, when he told  the  doctor
    that he was a  non-practising  Muslim  "and  also  a  homosexual"  (see
    paragraph 14).  It was now his  case  that  he  claims  "to  have  been
    leading a homosexual lifestyle in this country since  2010"  (paragraph
    14).

 7. The judge went on to conclude that "looking  at  the  evidence  in  the
    round" the Appellant could not be considered credible in his claim that
    he was gay.

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application are that the judge failed to engage with the
    evidence of an important witness, namely, a Mr Peter Bernard Blackburn,
    who gave corroborative and unchallenged  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    homosexuality.  Yet, the judge had already  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    credibility before going on to  consider  this  unchallenged  evidence.
    Second, the judge did not record the fact that the Respondent chose not
    to pursue allegations of deception which had only  be  raised,  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had cheated in his ETS English  language  test
    results, and so this can in no way be seen as strengthening the case of
    the Respondent.  Third, that the judge did not record and  give  proper
    weight to the oral as well as the written evidence of Mr Blackburn.

10. On 11th October 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the  Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge (at paragraphs 25  and
    26) had dismissed the  Appellant's  credibility  first  and  only  then
    considered the evidence of Mr Blackburn, and no consideration was given
    to the fact that this was unchallenged evidence.

11. On 4th January 2018, the Upper Tribunal stated that this case  was  not
    suitable for a panel hearing and was not one which should not go before
    the single judge in the normal manner.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 11th February 2019, Mr  Chelvan,  appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, handed up his skeleton argument.
     He then made the following points.  First, that, although it  was  the
    case that there had been a "Cart  JR"  which  was  determined  by  Lord
    Justice Irwin, in an order dated 23rd November  2018,  the  observation
    there by the Learned Judge could not be binding on this Tribunal.  What
    the Right Honourable Lord Justice Irwin had stated was  that  the  term
    "homosexual" is a perfectly proper and correct term, for which the term
    "gay" is normal as a  synonym.   The  preference  of  the  "applicant's
    representatives" for the word "gay" of the word "homosexual"  is  quite
    irrelevant, and should not have been expressed.  This was  in  relation
    to what had been said  in  the  grounds  of  application  (by  Counsel,
    Jennifer Blair on 25th April 2018, at paragraphs 14 to 15),  that  "the
    judge has made stereotypical assumptions" in "assessing credibility  in
    sexual  orientation  based   claims   for   international   protection"
    (paragraph 14).  Mr Chelvan  submitted  that  the  use  of  the  phrase
    "homosexual" was outdated and prone to be disparaging.  Indeed, he drew
    strength from the submission from the fact that  the  "Equal  Treatment
    Bench Book" (February 2018), makes it quite clear,  under  the  heading
    "acceptable terminology" that, "In general the following terminology is
    considered acceptable: a gay man.  The  word  'homosexual'  sounds  old
    fashioned  and  it  carries  echoes  of  discriminatory  attitudes  and
    practices in the past" (see paragraph 47).  Mr Chelvan  submitted  that
    the Equal Treatment Bench Book does not appear to have  been  drawn  to
    the attention of the Court  of  Appeal  when  the  argument  was  made.
    However, the fact that in the instant case, Judge Dean refers to how it
    is that the Appellant had told his doctor in Harmondsworth on 19th July
    2016 that he was a non-practising Muslim "and also a  homosexual"  (see
    paragraph  14)  suggested  that  there  were   echoes   of   the   past
    discriminatory attitudes in the judge's treatment of this appeal.  This
    was compounded by the fact that  the  judge  refers  to  the  Appellant
    claiming "to have been leading a homosexual lifestyle in  this  country
    since 2010" (paragraph 14).  Mr Chelvan submitted  that  there  was  no
    such claim ever made by the  Appellant.   He  had  always  referred  to
    himself as a "gay" man.  In any  event,  on  the  day  of  the  hearing
    itself, he had attended presenting himself as a "gay" person and not as
    a homosexual.

13. Second, it was plainly an error of  law  for  the  judge  not  to  have
    referred to the evidence of  Peter  Bernard  Blackburn  (whose  witness
    statement appears at pages 91 to  92),  particularly  given  that  this
    evidence was unchallenged, and that he was not even  cross-examined  by
    Counsel on the day.  What this witness does is to make it  clear  that,
    "I testify that as a gay man with more than 40 years on the gay  scene,
    I believe that the Appellant's asylum application was genuine ...."  He
    had gone on to say, "I also testify that he has  been  totally  relaxed
    while we cuddled each other at the Eagle Club,  a  club  that  gay  men
    attend" (paragraph 5).  This witness goes on to say that,

         "The Immigration Judge questioned my evidence that it was not  safe
         in Bangladesh from the evidence I  had  seen,  e.g.  news  reports.
         This was part of my evidence that  was  questioned  by  the  judge,
         simply  to  establish  that  I  had  no  first-hand  knowledge   of
         Bangladesh, or any academic expertise  on  the  subject.   However,
         when it came  to  the  barrister's  submissions,  the  Home  Office
         barrister dropped this part of the  case,  accepting  that  if  the
         Appellant is gay, he would be entitled  to  protection"  (paragraph
         6).

14. No  reference  whatsoever,  submitted  Mr  Chelvan,  is  made  to  this
    evidence.  In particular, if it is indeed the case  that  this  witness
    claims that he  met  the  Appellant  at  the  "Eagle  Club"  which  was
    frequented by gay men, and that  he  and  the  Appellant  cuddled  each
    other, this evidence could not have been left out of consideration.




15. Third, Mr Chelvan submitted that what the judge  had  on  the  contrary
    done, however, was to repeatedly refer to having looked at the evidence
    "in the round" before even considering the evidence of  the  witnesses,
    and then concluding that the Appellant was not credible in the  account
    that he gave.  This was putting the cart before the horse.   The  judge
    had already made his decision before he came to the evidence.  This was
    indeed the precise basis upon which Judge Ford had  granted  permission
    to appeal.

16. For her part, Ms Cuhna submitted that she would place reliance upon the
    Rule 24 response which  makes  it  quite  clear  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence is not credible.   Furthermore, it is not true that the  judge
    had neglected the evidence.  He makes it quite clear that he  considers
    the evidence of Mr Rahman (at paragraph  18)  and  then  observes  that
    there are "material inconsistencies" in the evidence.   The  judge  had
    already reached his conclusions before turning to the  evidence  of  Mr
    Masudur Rahman, whom the judge refers to  "in  his  written  evidence",
    before concluding that it was implausible that the Appellant  would  be
    open about his sexual orientation within a few days of meeting  someone
    in a food shop, and who had identified  himself  as  a  Bengali  Muslim
    because of his homosexuality, given  that  this  was  contrary  to  the
    teachings of Islam.

17. But most importantly, it was the judge's failure (at paragraph  26)  to
    consider the evidence of Mr Blackburn on its own terms.  This  was  the
    evidence on the day.  It must not be forgotten that the current  sexual
    identity on the day has to be looked at, as emphasised by the Court  of
    Appeal in NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 856, and this was  the  position
    that was presenting itself on the day before the judge.  The judge  was
    wrong to avoid considering this.  What the judge did do  (at  paragraph
    26) was to reject  this  evidence  on  the  basis  that  this  evidence
    postdated the Appellant's release from immigration detention and  could
    therefore not be of significance.  The only issue before  the  Tribunal
    was whether the Appellant was gay.  However, Mr Blackburn was not cross-
    examined.  He was not even challenged.  There was no issue of  the  ETS
    deception that had previously been raised a year ago.  That  being  so,
    if this matter were to be remitted,  it  should  not  be  remitted  "de
    novo", because the only issue is that of the Appellant being a gay  man
    and all other issues have fallen by the wayside.

18. For her part, Ms Cuhna submitted that the  Rule  24  response  did  not
    concede the fact that the ETS deception  was  not  any  longer  a  live
    issue.  Mr Chelvan returned to say that if one looks at the CIPU report
    of November 2017, under the heading of "assessment of risk" this  makes
    it clear at paragraph 3.1.1 (at pages 9 to 10) that if a person is gay,
    then there is a risk on return because this would lead to  Section  377
    prosecutions in Bangladesh.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are twofold.  First, this is  a  case  where  the
    judge has, as the grant of permission makes clear by Judge  Ford,  made
    his findings of  fact  before  looking  at  the  evidence.   The  judge
    repeatedly refers to looking at the situation in the round, before  his
    consideration of the evidence.  For example, he states that "When taken
    in the round I find that the veracity of the Appellant's  claim  to  be
    gay is undermined" (paragraph 13) because he had earlier  claimed  only
    to be an atheist from a Muslim country and not a gay person.   I  agree
    with Mr Chelvan, that if this  were  to  be  the  case  then  the  vast
    majority of gay claims would fail.  One has to look at the situation as
    it presents itself on the day.  The judge also states that "Looking  at
    the evidence in the round, I find that the Appellant has failed to give
    a consistent account of the facts" (paragraph 18).  It  is  only  after
    this that the first reference is made to the  evidence  of  Mr  Masudur
    Rahman (at paragraph 24), who states that the Appellant had got to know
    him and then told him about his sexual  orientation.   The  judge  once
    again states that "When taken in  the  round  it  does  not  materially
    advance the Appellant's case".

20. Second, and even more importantly, the evidence of Mr Blackburn is  not
    rejected on the basis of intelligible reasons given.   In  SIO  (sexual
    identification of a lesbian from Nigeria) [2017],  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stated that,

         "The other witnesses gave a range of  reasons  to  corroborate  the
         Appellant's account of being a lesbian and  it  was  necessary  for
         that evidence to be evaluated and addressed.  The  judge  may  well
         have a good reason to not accept the sentence.  He may, for example
         have thought that the  evidence  was  largely  based  on  what  the
         witness had been told  by  the  Appellant.   ...  However  no  such
         reasoning was given in the decision  and  the  absence  of  reasons
         being given as to  why  each  of  the  witnesses  (other  than  the
         Appellant and S) were not believed, I agree that there has been  an
         error of law.  The error is material because the  evidence  of  the
         numerous witnesses whose evidence was  not  addressed  is  relevant
         too,  and  potentially  determinative  of,  the  question  of   the
         Appellant's sexuality" (at paragraph 20).

21. In this case there was no evidence of numerous witnesses.   There  were
    two principle witnesses.  Of these the evidence  of  Mr  Blackburn  was
    most significant.  The judge rejects that evidence but gives no reasons
    for doing so.  The conclusion reached thereafter that "the Appellant is
    a stranger to the truth" (paragraph 27) may well have  been  the  right
    conclusion, but it could only have been reached after the  evidence  in
    its entirely had been taken into  account,  before  it  being  rejected
    simply on the basis of there having been a delayed application by  this
    Appellant whilst he was in detention.




22. Although Mr Chelvan has invited me to make a finding of an error of law
    and to remake the decision in this Tribunal, and if necessary to do  so
    on the basis of hearing the evidence of Mr Blackburn, who  was  present
    in court, together with Mr Rahman, who was also  present  in  court,  I
    consider it much more expeditious that this matter should  return  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Dean, so that the evidence can be taken in a fulsome manner  and,
    if necessary, cross-examined by the Respondent Secretary of State.  For
    the avoidance of doubt, I make it plain that this is a case where there
    is no ETS exception issue to  consider.   That  was  not  the  position
    before the judge.  This history of this case  makes  this  clear.   The
    decision appealed against was dated 8th December 2016.   It  was  based
    upon an alleged deception in the TOEIC deception dated 6th August 2014.
     That led to an adjournment of the hearing on 26th January 2017 so that
    the Respondent Secretary of State  could  make  that  allegation  good.
    When evidence was submitted by  the  Respondent  at  the  January  2017
    hearing, this was then not even relied upon by  the  Tribunal  on  10th
    July 2017.  In short, the Respondent did not run the deception point at
    all.  It has fallen by the wayside.  The issue before  Judge  Dean  was
    simply that of the Appellant being a gay  person.   That  is  the  only
    issue to be determined.  It has to be determined on the  basis  of  the
    evidence of the two witnesses who attended the hearing to  support  the
    Appellant before any decision of finality can be made  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's sexual orientation.

23. An anonymity direction is made.

24. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019

