
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA141892016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th July 2017                              |On 6th July 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel instructed on behalf of appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on 6th February
    2017 dismissed his claim for protection.  The  Appellant's  immigration
    history and the basis of his claim is set out within the  determination
    at paragraph [1], [10-17]] and in the decision  letter  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It can be summarised briefly as follows.

 5. The Appellant is from xxx and is a Kurdish-Sunni Muslim.  His  problems
    in Iraq began when his  father,  who  was  a  retired  officer  in  the
    Peshmerga had been approached by insurgents to cooperate with them  but
    had rejected that request. In 2015 whilst on the telephone to  him,  he
    was killed and the person who had done so spoke to him on the phone and
    had threatened that he would be the next target. He reported the matter
    to the police but did not wait the outcome having left  Iraq  in  2016.
    His house was later set on fire believed by those responsible  for  the
    death of his father.

 6. The appellant arrived in the UK after having travelled through a number
    of European countries including a stay of seven months  in  France  and
    arrived between 11th to 15 June 2016.

 7. The appellant underwent a screening interview on 15  June  2016  and  a
    substantive interview took place on 29 November. In a detailed  reasons
    for refusal letter dated 9th December 2016 the respondent refused  that
    application for asylum. In that decision, the respondent  accepted  the
    evidence of his nationality and identity but rejected  his  account  of
    having had problems in Iraq due to threats. The decision letter applied
    the country guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c) [2015] UKUT 544(IAC) in
    relation to humanitarian protection and accepted that in his home  area
    there was a present  situation  of  internal  armed  conflict.  Further
    consideration was given to return  and  in  particular  that  he  could
    return to the IKR. The decision letter also considered Articles 2 and 3
    and Article 8 (family and private life).

 8. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 30th January 2017.

 9. The judge set out  his  findings  at  paragraphs  [20]  to  [38].  When
    considering the  circumstances  in  Iraq  before  he  left,  the  judge
    rejected his account and gave a summary of those reasons  at  paragraph
    [23]. He also placed weight and reliance on section 8 of  the  2004  at
    and his failure  to  claim  asylum  in  the  first  safe  country  (see
    paragraphs 20, 21 and 24). Having rejected his core account, the  judge
    considered internal relocation in the context of the  Country  Guidance
    decision  of  AA  (as  cited).  Whilst  the  decision  letter  had  not
    considered the prospect of internal relocation to any other  area  than
    the IKR the judge identified relocation to  Baghdad  (set  out  in  the
    decision of AA). Having applied the country guidance case,  he  reached
    the conclusion that he could relocate to either  Baghdad  or  the  IKR.
    Thus the claim for protection was dismissed on all grounds.

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers  dated  17th  February  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by FTT Judge Foudy  on  the  18th  May  2017.  Those
    grounds make reference to the judge's findings on  credibility  (ground
    1).  Ground  2  made  reference  to  the  Tribunal  erring  in  law  by
    determining the appeal on the basis that the appellant  could  relocate
    Baghdad when the Secretary of State had not suggested return to Baghdad
    or dealt with that in the decision letter. Ground three made  reference
    to errors relating to relocation to Baghdad and grounds for dealt  with
    the issue of relocation to the IKR.

11. At the hearing before this Tribunal Mr Gayle, relied upon  the  grounds
    that were before the  Tribunal.   It  was  not  necessary  for  him  to
    articulate in any oral submissions the grounds that had been  submitted
    in written form because Mr Jarvis on behalf of the  Respondent  at  the
    outset submitted that  having  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the
    grounds in the light of the determination he considered that there  was
    a material error of law in the credibility findings (which were set out
    in relation to  Ground  1).  In  those  circumstances  he  invited  the
    Tribunal to set aside the decision and for the appeal to be reheard  so
    that all issues relating to credibility could be considered and in  the
    context of the decision of AA (Iraq) which had recently been  heard  by
    the Court of Appeal but for which there was  no  transcript  and  would
    also provide time necessary for a supplementary refusal letter  dealing
    with the issue of internal relocation and to Baghdad and/or the IKR.

12. In the light of that concession made by  Mr  Jarvis  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that both parties agree that  the  determination  cannot
    stand and must be set aside.  I am satisfied that the  submission  made
    on behalf of the Appellant to which I  have  made  reference  to  which
    concerns the issue relating to the credibility findings ( ground 1) are
    made out. The credibility findings related to threats from  insurgents.
    As to the identity of those who  killed  the  appellant's  father,  the
    judge found that the persons responsible and their "self advertisement"
    was implausible. However as the grounds assert, given the practices  of
    those identified by the appellant and the issue of open intimidation it
    could not be so readily disregarded as implausible  and  in  any  event
    there was no evidence to justify such a finding. Furthermore, as to the
    aftermath of the event, the judge found that there  were  no  witnesses
    however that failed to take into account the appellant's evidence given
    in his interview. Whilst the judge also  rejected  as  implausible  any
    interest in the appellant's father that failed to take into account the
    appellant's father's prior history as a Peshmerga  which  was  relevant
    background history relevant to  the  overall  findings.  Therefore  for
    those reasons and in the light of the concession made by Mr Jarvis, the
    decision cannot stand and will be set aside.

13. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of  this  nature  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the  Appellant's  evidence  and  also  the
    issues relating to return to Iraq and internal relocation;  this  is  a
    case in which the adverse credibility findings are therefore unsafe and
    cannot be preserved. There is also the  additional  requirement  for  a
    supplementary decision letter dealing with the aspects  of  relocation.
    The decision in AA (as cited) has now been heard by the Court of Appeal
    but to date there is no transcript. That will be available to the First-
    tier Tribunal who will consider the matter  afresh.  In  the  light  of
    those submissions and the concession made by the Secretary of State , I
    am satisfied that this is the correct course to take  and  therefore  I
    set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of an  error
    point of law. It is set aside and it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   The  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 5/7/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
