
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/14153/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 1 December 2017                            |On 8 December 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                            muhammad Ziaul Haque
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms L Busch, Queen's Counsel instructed by Londonium
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant seeks to challenge the  determination  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Meah dismissing his appeal by way of a determination
         promulgated on 6 February 2017 following a hearing at Taylor  House
         on 26 January 2017.  He  is  a  Bangladeshi  national  born  on  17
         November 1987 who appeals the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  9
         December 2016 refusing his application for protection.

      2. There are two limbs to the appellant's claim. The first is that  he
         would be at risk on return because of his stance on atheism and the
         books, articles and blogs he has written to share  his  views.  The
         second is that he fears an individual who lent him money to come to
         the UK and who wants to be repaid.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
         on 25 September 2017 on the basis that  the  consideration  of  the
         supporting evidence by the judge was arguably inadequate.

      4. The matter then came before me on 1 December 2017.

      5. The Hearing

      6. The appellant attended the hearing and I heard submissions from the
         parties. In summary, Ms Busch criticized the  credibility  findings
         of the judge and submitted that these should have been made in  the
         context of the country evidence whereas it appeared that the  judge
         had not even considered that material. She pointed  me  to  various
         documents in the bundle which confirmed  there  were  frequent  and
         brutal attacks upon atheists and bloggers.   She  referred  to  the
         judge's findings at paragraphs 41-43 and submitted that even  where
         the claim had been considered at its highest, the judge still erred
         in stating that there was no evidence that  atheists  and  bloggers
         faced any risk. She submitted that the  negative  findings  by  the
         judge had failed to take account of the appellant's  evidence.  The
         originals of two documents (a warming notice in a newspaper  and  a
         letter from Barrister Khan) were produced.  Having  seen  these,  I
         returned them to the appellant.

      7. In response, Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds were no more than
         a disagreement with the decision. The judge  was  not  required  to
         rehearse all the evidence in the determination. He had given  valid
         reasons for finding the appellant would not  be  at  risk.  He  had
         considered relocation. He was entitled  to  approach  the  evidence
         with caution. The determination should be upheld.

      8. Ms Busch  replied.  She  submitted  that  the  judge's  credibility
         findings were skewed by his failure to  take  account  of  all  the
         evidence. The determination was unsafe.

      9. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give.

     10. Conclusions

     11. I  have  given  careful  consideration  to  the  evidence  and  the
         submissions. I agree with Ms  Busch's  submission  that  there  are
         serious difficulties with the judge's approach to the evidence  and
         the way in which his findings were made.

     12. At paragraph 32 of the  determination  the  judge  states  that  he
         approaches the evidence submitted by  the  appellant  with  caution
         "given my serious doubts about the credibility of the claim".  This
         would suggest that the  judge  fell  into  error  in  reaching  his
         adverse conclusion about  the  claim  before  considering  all  the
         evidence.

     13. At paragraphs 41-2 he  purported  to  consider  the  claim  at  its
         highest but found that even if the appellant was an atheist, "there
         is no country background material or anything objective  before  me
         to show that being an atheist in Bangladesh will put the  appellant
         at risk..." This assertion is plainly unsustainable in the light of
         the documents that Ms Busch referred me to. It may have  been  open
         to the judge to find that the evidence did not support a  claim  of
         real risk but that was  not  his  finding.  To  say  there  was  no
         evidence at all irrationally disregards the many articles and  news
         reports contained in the large bundle before the Tribunal.

     14. The judge found that the appellant could  relocate  to  escape  his
         problems and he pointed to the appellant having moved to Chittagong
         in 2006 to avoid his difficulties. This takes no account,  however,
         of the explanation given by the appellant in his witness  statement
         regarding how the situation changed drastically in  2013  with  the
         actions of the Shahbag Movement.  That  same  change  prompted  the
         appellant to consider making an asylum  claim,  an  action  he  had
         tried to avoid previously in the  hope  that  he  would  return  to
         Bangladesh.

     15. The supporting evidence relating specifically to  the  appellant  -
         statements from those who know of his work,  print  outs  from  his
         blogs and social media accounts, receive no mention at all  in  the
         determination. Whilst it is right that a judge is not  expected  to
         set out every item of the evidence, as the  judge  self-directs  in
         paragraph 8, there is a significant difference between not  setting
         out each item of evidence and not demonstrating that core  evidence
         on material matters has been considered.  An  appellant  must  feel
         assured that his evidence has been taken into account. Regrettably,
         the judge's omission to refer to key evidence and to make  findings
         which  plainly  demonstrate  that  such  evidence  was   not   even
         considered (for example with regard to the issue of relocation) can
         only have left  the  appellant  feeling  that  his  claim  has  not
         received the anxious scrutiny that asylum applications deserve.

     16. It follows that the problems with the consideration of the evidence
         mean that the judge's findings cannot stand. Ms Busch is  right  to
         argue that they are "skewed" by the judge's failure to have  regard
         to all the evidence, including the country  material,  before  they
         were reached.

     17. Decision

     18. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         must be set aside. It shall be re-made  by  another  judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

     19. Anonymity

     20. No request for an anonymity order was made.


    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 1 December 2017


