
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14317/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th September 2019                |On 8th October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     EL
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams of Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury promulgated on 12 June 2019, in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 19 November 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 21 December  1991,  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 30 August
    2015, having travelled from Albania, through Italy  and  Belgium.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum on 10 February 2016, following which her  case
    was referred  through  the  National  Referral  Mechanism  to  consider
    whether there were reasonable grounds to believe that she was a  victim
    of trafficking/modern slavery.  A reasonable grounds decision was  made
    on 17 February 2016, but on 28 November 2016, the  Competent  Authority
    made a negative conclusive grounds decision that the Appellant was  not
    a victim of trafficking.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had been trafficked, nor was there any risk
    of trafficking or objective fear  of  persecution  by  the  Appellant's
    father.  In any event, the  Respondent  considered  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection available  in  accordance  with  the  country
    guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked  Women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00092
    (IAC) and an option of internal relocation.  For essentially  the  same
    reasons the Respondent did not consider the Appellant to be in need  of
    humanitarian protection, nor that her removal would  be  in  breach  of
    Articles 2 or 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. In relation to family and private life, the Appellant did  not  have  a
    partner in the United Kingdom and neither of her children, born in 2016
    and 2018, were qualifying children.  The Appellant  did  not  meet  any
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  primarily
    because there were no very significant obstacles to  her  reintegration
    in Albania.  The Respondent considered that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain, having  considered
    in particular the Appellant's two young children for whom education and
    healthcare would be available in  Albania  where  there  were  extended
    family members.

 5. Judge Hanbury dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 12 June
    2019 on all grounds.  In particular, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal identified a number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    account which was found overall to lack coherence and the plausibility,
    such that less weight was attached to the medical evidence relied  upon
    and overall the claim was not considered to be credible.  In any  event
    the First-tier Tribunal found that there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection available to  the  Appellant  and  the  option  of  internal
    relocation.    There   was   consideration   of   the   potential   for
    discrimination and stigma in Albania for the Appellant returning  there
    with two illegitimate children, but  it  was  found  that  she  was  an
    educated and employable woman who would  be  able  to  reintegrate  and
    support   herself   and   her   children.    Overall   there   was   no
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to respect for
    private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on five grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made errors of fact, primarily on the  plausibility
    of the Appellant's account because her travel plans changed  after  her
    planned wedding in Albania was  brought  forward  which  increased  the
    pressure for her to leave and the sequence of events she describes  was
    consistent even if there  were  errors  in  the  year  referred  to  in
    interview.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  consider
    the best interests of the  Appellant's  children,  in  particular,  the
    older child had speech problems and was suspected  of  being  autistic.
    The First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons as  to  whether
    there were obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Albania  for  the  family.
    Thirdly, the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  criticising  the  medical
    report due to the passage of time since the events referred to therein,
    without recognising that there had been earlier  intervention  for  the
    Appellant's mental health.  Fourthly, the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    finding that the Appellant  could  internally  relocate,  ignoring  the
    expert evidence before it about the  unaffordability  of  accommodation
    and childcare in urban areas even for those in employment  and  further
    ignored the risk of the Appellant being tracked by traffickers  through
    the registration system in Albania.  Finally, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in fact by misunderstanding  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's passports, in that there was  one  issued  in  Albania  for
    travel to the United Kingdom and a second passport issued in the United
    Kingdom.

 7. At the oral hearing Mr Lams relied on the written grounds of appeal and
    pursued these orally in further  detail.   In  relation  to  the  first
    ground of appeal, he submitted that there was clear  confusion  on  the
    part of the Appellant as to the years given when asked about dates  for
    specific events, with almost all dates being exactly one year  out  and
    the dates were corrected in correspondence shortly after the interview.
     The sequence of events was however said to be consistent.  In relation
    to planned travel dates, it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    ignored the evidence that the original plan was to travel to Belgium in
    August 2015, with the intended departure being brought forward to April
    of that year because the Appellant's arranged marriage had been brought
    forward to July.  Mr Lams relied on the answers given by the  Appellant
    in interview to questions 58, 110  and  111,  the  Appellant's  written
    statement and the Respondent's understanding of her claim as set out in
    the decision letter to support the claim that  the  travel  plans  were
    brought forward because the marriage had been brought forward.

 8. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it was submitted that there
    had simply been no best interests assessment in relation to  either  of
    the Appellant's two children at all.  Such an assessment  was  required
    but of  particular  importance  because  of  the  likely  reception  of
    illegitimate  children  in  Albania,  a  matter  relevant  to  internal
    relocation, Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  and
    whether there would be obstacles to reintegration for the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  There was  evidence  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  stigma  attaching  to  illegitimate
    children both in the country guidance case of  TD  and  in  the  expert
    report before it.  As to the position of the children, it was  accepted
    that medical  issues  were  raised  only  in  the  Appellant's  written
    statement and there was no supporting medical or other  evidence  about
    them.

 9. In relation to the third ground  of  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    attached little weight to the psychiatric report because of the passage
    of time between the alleged incidents and the date  of  assessment  and
    report, the same being unfair given that  the  Appellant  had  received
    prior treatment for mental health problems  and  this  was  not  a  new
    issue.

10. In relation to the  fourth  ground  of  appeal,  Mr  Lams  referred  to
    detailed evidence in the expert  report  which  was  not  addressed  or
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal, particularly in relation to  the
    likely circumstances of the Appellant and her  children  on  return  to
    Albania.

11. Finally, Mr Lams submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  in
    paragraph 17(v) of  the  decision  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation  to  her  passport   was   inconsistent   was   based   on   a
    misunderstanding of fact, in that the Appellant had two passports,  one
    issued in Albania for  travel  and  one  later  issued  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  evidence  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal   clearly
    identified two separate passports, one of which had been cancelled.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas relied on an overarching  problem
    of confusion by the Appellant throughout her interview, relied upon  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in  paragraph  17(ii)  of  the  decision.   The
    Appellant did start off referring to what she says is the correct  year
    in interview, the dates were then one year out until this  was  pointed
    out to her by the interviewer, following which one date was  corrected.
    Following the interview, the Appellant clarified multiple  dates  given
    in the asylum interview, but it  left  the  story  skewed  and  it  was
    submitted that this supported the view that it was a concocted account.

13. As to the claim that the  Appellant's  arranged  marriage  was  brought
    forward, it was submitted that in her interview, the Appellant had made
    no suggestion that her arranged marriage would be in September, instead
    she clearly stated at the date was set in March for July  of  the  same
    year.  There is nothing in the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that the date of marriage had changed.  At best  there  was  a  general
    plan to leave Albania in August, which was brought  forward  after  the
    marriage date was set.

14. In relation to the passport and findings  in  paragraph  17(v)  of  the
    decision, Mr Kotas submitted that if the Appellant did have  more  than
    one passport, that should have been abundantly clear.  In any event the
    Judge was simply saying that the wrong year had been given in interview
    and that the Appellant's evidence of what  had  happened  passport  was
    inconsistent.  In any event, this would not be a material error of law.

15. The Appellant has not made any challenge to the findings  in  paragraph
    17(i), (iii) or (vi) of the decision and although it is  accepted  that
    not too much weight should be placed  on  a  screening  interview,  the
    weight attached by the First-tier Tribunal was not  inappropriate  this
    particular case.  As found  by  the  Judge,  there  were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account and even  those  which  were
    corrected, such as dates, were not reasoned or explained.  Further, the
    findings in paragraph 18 as to  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account have not been challenged by her and they were  rationally  open
    to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence before it.  There  was  also
    no challenge to the finding in paragraph 20 of the decision  about  the
    delay in making the asylum claim.

16. Overall, it was submitted by Mr Kotas that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    the benefit of hearing all evidence and even if there may have  been  a
    mistake of fact in relation to the passport, this  could  have  had  no
    material impact on the credibility of the claim in the  scheme  of  the
    other findings made.

17. As to the second ground of challenge, on the  basis  that  the  adverse
    credibility  findings  are  upheld,  then  the  position  is  that  the
    Appellant continues to have family in Albania and  Mr  Kotas  submitted
    that there was nothing to suggest that a best interests assessment  for
    her two very young children would change anything and it was noted that
    there was very little evidence specifically in relation to them and  no
    supporting documents.

18. In relation to the psychiatric report, it was noted that this was based
    solely on the Appellant self-reporting to the  doctor,  no  GP  records
    were  provided  and  neither  was  the  negative   conclusive   grounds
    trafficking decision which is highly pertinent as to  the  reasons  why
    the Appellant's claim had not been accepted.  In these circumstances it
    was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal placed appropriate weight on
    the report.

19. Mr Kotas submitted in relation to the  fourth  ground  of  appeal  that
    issues of internal relocation only arise in the context of  the  asylum
    claim and if it is accepted that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk
    from acclaimed trafficker and/or family on return to Albania.   In  the
    absence of such a risk being accepted, it is not strictly necessary  to
    consider internal relocation and in the event that there is no risk  on
    return, then the Appellant has  a  support  network  from  her  family.
    Further and in any event, the Appellant could live a relatively  normal
    life in her home country, she has qualifications and has  worked  as  a
    nurse in Albania.

20. In reply, Mr Lams  submitted  that  the  position  of  the  Appellant's
    children as illegitimate children was a freestanding  point  regardless
    of whether her trafficking or asylum claim was accepted.  Overall, even
    in the absence of some findings not being directly challenged  in  this
    appeal, when taken together in the round, it is  not  possible  to  say
    that if the Appellant is successful in any all of her grounds of appeal
    that that would not have had a material bearing on the outcome  of  the
    appeal or  specifically  the  first  ability  findings.   It  was  also
    submitted that some of the credibility points could  have  easily  gone
    either way.

Findings and reasons

 1. To determine the grounds of appeal, it is necessary to set out in  more
    detail the findings and reasons of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    evidence before it.

 2. At the start of the section on findings in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, reference is made to the  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Witnesses Guidance and that this has been taken into  account
    and applied given the Appellant's claim to be a victim  of  trafficking
    who  suffers  from  mental  illness  and  as  potentially  therefore  a
    vulnerable person.   However,  there  is  no  further  mention  of  the
    guidance or of its application when  considering,  in  particular,  the
    Appellant's credibility.

 3. The key credibility findings appear in paragraphs 17 and 18, which  are
    necessary to set out in full.

         "17. However, there are a number of additional  inconsistencies  in
         the appellant's account which it is impossible to ignore.  I do not
         intend to list all of these.  The appellant is an  adult  and  does
         not apparently have any mental health problems other than suffering
         from PTSD.  The appellant is clearly a reasonably intelligent  lady
         who has been educated to degree or diploma  standard  it  would  be
         expected to remember key  dates  [sic].   Yet  there  are  numerous
         inconsistencies, for example, there  were  inconsistencies  between
         the screening interview conducted on 10 February 2016 shortly after
         her claim to asylum in the UK and a substantive interview conducted
         on 14 June  2016.   Among  the  inconsistencies  I  identified,  in
         addition to those already referred to in passing above, I felt  the
         more important ones included the following:

          i)  The  appellant  stated  at  question  3.4  of  the  screening
             interview that she had "no" family in "any  European  country"
             yet her substantive interview revealed that she had parents, a
             brother,  sister  and  grandmother  in  Albania.    Only   her
             grandmother had passed on (see question 8).

         ii) There is confusion throughout the interview as to the  correct
             year of the events.  In the  first  interview  (the  screening
             interview) the appellant thought she travelled  to  Italy  and
             then to Belgium in the middle of April 2015 but  in  a  second
             interview  (see  for  example  question  111  at  B12  of  the
             substantive interview) she claimed to have  travelled  Belgium
             stopping in Italy on 13 April 2016.

        iii) In  the  screening  interview  she  claimed  that  she  became
             involved with [B[1]] and travelled Belgium by Italy  in  April
             2015.  She claimed she work as a prostitute from mid-April  to
             August 2015.  However, in her substantive  interview  and  her
             oral evidence before the tribunal the  appellant  claims  that
             she worked the cleaner first and later was required to  become
             involved in the world of prostitution.

         iv) Whichever year events she describes place (be it  in  2015  or
             2016 depending on whether one reads the appellant's  screening
             interview or her substantive interview)  she  claims  to  have
             travelled that year to avoid marriage which was  due  to  take
             place in July (2016) (see question  58  at  the  nine  of  the
             substantive interview).  It therefore made no  sense  for  the
             appellant to plan with [B] to "(go) in August (2015/2016) ..."
             with the intention that they would "... attempt to go together
             to  Belgium"  in  August  of  that  year.   Given   that   the
             appellant's wedding to [BK] was said to have been set in March
             of that year (be it 2015 or 2016) (according to  Q110  of  the
             substantive interview), the date of the wedding  was  set  for
             July of that year (thought by the appellant to be 2016 in  her
             substantive interview).  It therefore made no sense arrange to
             go to Belgium in August, as it would not enable her  to  avoid
             an unwanted marriage the previous month.

          v) The appellant appears to have travelled on  her  own  passport
             and   she   must   have    had    identification    documents.
             Alternatively, she claims to have had these removed by  people
             traffickers.  Alternatively, she claims to  have  lost  these.
             It is interesting to note that questions 114 and  115  in  her
             substantive asylum interview she  says  that  she  obtained  a
             passport in late March or early April 2016.  However,  in  her
             screening interview she referred to obtaining a  passport  "in
             October 2015" (question 3.2).

         vi) Numerous other inconsistencies were pointed out to me by  Miss
             Ahmed in her helpful submissions and I adopt  the  summary  of
             those  inconsistencies  in  the  above  detailed  account  the
             evidence and submissions made.

         18.  The whole account lacked coherence and had the character of an
         account which had been invented and was significantly  embellished.
         For example:

         (i)  I was unable to accept that approximately 12 "girls" with  the
             appellant were taken by "two men" (see  question  2.5  in  her
             screening interview) but were allowed to  simply  escape  from
             their control.  The appellant's account of the details of that
             escape are hazy and it does not seem plausible that they would
             be able to so in such circumstances.

         (ii)     It does not seem credible that [...]  would  know  nothing
             about [B's] history or  intentions  towards  her  friend.   In
             fairness the appellant does say that [...] "did not know him".
              Nevertheless, a cousin of hers did and had been "friends with
             him since childhood" (see Q 73 in the substantive interview at
             B 10).  It seems unlikely that  [B]  suddenly  turned  into  a
             people trafficker and pimp without anyone knowing of it."

 4. The Appellant's first ground of challenge is in two parts,  first  that
    the First-tier Tribunal attached to much weight to the error  in  dates
    in her  substantive  asylum  interview  and  secondly  that  the  Judge
    misunderstood the evidence in relation to the timing of  her  departure
    from Albania.  On the first issue, this is not simply a case where  the
    Appellant had identified all dates incorrectly by one  year,  but  that
    the years were muddled at some points in interview but not others.   At
    questions 5, 16, 27, and 32, the  Appellant  appears  to  identify  the
    correct dates and years, with no subsequent correction to  these  after
    the interview.  These  are  questions  about  how  long  she  lived  in
    Albania, her last contact with family members,  study  and  work.   The
    dates and years get muddled from question 38 onwards (dealing with  the
    substance of the Appellant's claim) until it was  pointed  out  to  the
    Appellant by the interviewer at question 157 that the date referred  to
    had not yet happened, at which point the year  was  corrected  for  the
    answer to the previous question  only.   There  then  followed  further
    confusion in the dates towards the end of the interview.

 5. The Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Respondent to correct  some  of
    the answers given on 25 July 2016 and 5 August 2016, in  which  it  was
    explained that the Appellant was interviewed with her  young  baby,  it
    was difficult for her to concentrate and a number of dates and  answers
    were corrected, primarily in relation to the years given  but  also  in
    relation to dates and months for some answers.

 6. The decision under challenge refers on a number  of  occasions  to  the
    inconsistency in dates given by the Appellant, but only  really  relies
    upon  this  in  paragraph  17(ii)  of  the  decision  as   a   specific
    inconsistency.  It is certainly not the only one  relied  upon  in  the
    decision and it is not clear that any particular or significant  weight
    is given to this other than it being  just  one  of  many  examples  of
    inconsistencies in the evidence; not all of which have been  challenged
    in the course of the further appeal.  Although there  was  no  detailed
    explanation of the  inconsistencies  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there was reference to the circumstances of her interview and the dates
    were corrected relatively promptly after the interview and  before  the
    decision under challenge.  There is nothing on the face of the decision
    to indicate whether the First-tier Tribunal considered the  explanation
    that had been  given,  of  the  impact  of  any  vulnerability  of  the
    Appellant on the inconsistencies;  nor  whether  overall,  they  had  a
    material adverse effect on her credibility.

 7. On the second issue, there is no basis at all in the evidence  for  the
    proposition made in the grounds of appeal and  repeated  orally  by  Mr
    Lams that the First-tier Tribunal misunderstood or ignored the evidence
    that the travel plans were brought forward because the arranged wedding
    had been brought forward.

 8. The Appellant's evidence about her planning to leave Albania with B  is
    contained in her written statement and her asylum interview.  The three
    relevant questions in interview on this point were as follows:

         Q. 58 - when were you due to get married? July 2016

         Q. 110 - When did your problems begin? In March 2016 the family  of
         fianc� called around to set the marriage date.   Then  I  told  [B]
         that the marriage was fixed for July.  We  made  a  plan  that  [B]
         would come in August and that we will attempt  to  go  together  to
         Belgium.

         Q. 111 - Why was he going to come in August  if  you  were  getting
         married in July? I did not want to get married.  Initially  we  did
         not know the marriage date would be in  July  therefore  the  plans
         changed and on the 13th April 2016 I set off to Belgium.  Initially
         I stopped in Italy.

 9. In the letter  from  the  Appellant's  solicitor  dated  25  July  2016
    correcting some the answers given in her asylum interview, in  relation
    to question 58, the answer was corrected to the Appellant being due  to
    get married in September 2015, not July 2016.  There was no  suggestion
    that the date of the wedding was changed  or  brought  forward,  simply
    that the wrong date had been given interview.  The September 2015  date
    was not however maintained in the Appellant's later  evidence  for  her
    appeal.

10. In her written statement, the Appellant stated that in February 2015, B
    returned to Albania from Belgium for two or three days and they  agreed
    that when he came back to Albania in August, they would return together
    to Belgium.  The date for the Appellant's arranged marriage was set  in
    March 2015 for July 2015, following which, the Appellant and  B  agreed
    that she should leave Albania and travel to Belgium where he would wait
    for her.  The Appellant left Albania on 13 April 2015.

11. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  was  therefore  relatively
    consistent that the date of the wedding  was  fixed  for  July  in  the
    preceding March and that at most there was some suggestion that it  was
    only the travel plans brought forward from August to April to avoid the
    arranged marriage in July, once the  date  had  been  set.   I  do  not
    therefore find any error of law as claimed by  the  Appellant  on  this
    matter and find that given the answer to question 110 in  interview  in
    particular as well as some inconsistency as to the sequence of  events,
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that it  made  no  sense
    for the Appellant to arrange to travel in  August,  after  the  wedding
    and, as in the Appellant's own  words,  after  the  date  the  arranged
    wedding had been fixed for.

12. There is a clear error of law on the  second  ground  of  appeal.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was under a duty to consider the best interests  of
    the children which the Judge failed to do.  There was no attempt at all
    to consider the position of the two children  and  although  there  was
    very little evidence from the Appellant about them  and  no  supporting
    evidence, for example as to the elder child's  health/education  needs,
    it was squarely before the First-tier Tribunal that the  Appellant  and
    her children  would  face  discrimination  because  the  children  were
    illegitimate.  The best interests of the children and likely  situation
    of the family on return to Albania was at least potentially relevant to
    the question of whether internal relocation would be unduly  harsh;  to
    the application of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    proportionality of removal  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights more widely.

13. The third  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  weight  attached  to  the
    psychiatric report by the First-tier Tribunal.  Although the weight  to
    be attached to evidence is largely a matter for the Judge,  I  find  an
    error of law in paragraph 19 of the decision as to the weight  attached
    to this report for the reasons given.  The Judge was not satisfied that
    the medical evidence was sufficient to show that the  Appellant's  PTSD
    was caused in the manner described, i.e. as a  result  of  abuse  as  a
    victim  of  trafficking  and  it  was   not   therefore   accepted   as
    corroborative of the claim.  The reasons for this were first, that  the
    diagnosis of PTSD was inconsistent with the Appellant's answers in  her
    screening interview that  she  had  no  medical  disabilities  and  had
    nothing to say about her mental health; and secondly,  because  of  the
    length of time between  the  events  complained  of  and  the  date  of
    assessment/report more than two years later.

14. The First-tier Tribunal has erred in attaching too much weight  to  the
    screening interview to undermine a detailed medical report, on a matter
    which the Appellant may or may not have had any particular insight into
    at the point when she  claimed  asylum.   It  is  not  clear  from  the
    evidence when the Applicant was diagnosed with PTSD, but it is  evident
    from the medical report itself and some  further  supporting  documents
    that the Appellant had sought and obtained help for her  mental  health
    since her arrival in the United Kingdom and prior to her asylum  claim.
    In any event, there is no reasoned basis as to why the passage of  time
    would affect a continuing (not historic) diagnosis  and  treatment  for
    PTSD and no rational basis for reducing the weight to  be  attached  to
    the report for this reason.  Although there are concerns  that  can  be
    raised about the report, which appears to proceed on the basis that the
    Appellant's  account  is  true  and  in   the   absence   of   relevant
    documentation such as the negative conclusive grounds  decision;  these
    are not reasons relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In relation to internal relocation, the First-tier Tribunal  considered
    this in paragraph 26, albeit in the alternative following  the  finding
    that the Appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution  on
    return to Albania, or her home area within Albania, from B or  her  own
    family.

         "26. ... although Albania has a relatively small  population  (...)
         there are many  rural  parts  as  well  as  urban  areas.   If  the
         appellant would find it difficult to avail herself of the  numerous
         shelters for victims of trafficking that  exist  in  larger  cities
         such as Tirana and Vlore, she would be to go  to  another  part  of
         Albania.  She is part of the majority Muslim  population.   Albania
         now permits religious freedom.  As I have indicated, the  appellant
         is educated to a high standard and has  a  reasonable  prospect  of
         obtaining employment.  If, as she claims, she could no  longer  see
         her family, she is unlikely to see her trafficker, if he is  indeed
         trafficker and if indeed he  returned  to  Albania.   Additionally,
         there is little risk from non-state agents in my view.   [B]  would
         not be able naughty seek to relocate to a rural area, if  she  went
         go to such an area, for example.  It is not ideal for the appellant
         have to relocate with young children but is reasonably available to
         her as an option.  Her family all live in the Koplik area and  they
         would not have the motivational desire to find her out in any  part
         of that country.  It seems that the future  may  be  to  settle  in
         different part of Albania, therefore.  In any event, the  appellant
         seems to give you that his family did not represent a threat (see a
         screening interview question 4.1 and asylum  interview  substantive
         interview at questions 35, 40, 55, 60 and 63).  In addition,  there
         are a large number of hostels in Tirana were  peopled  and  settled
         another part of Albania.  I fully accept the appellant find it more
         difficult to set him on the rule areas but there may be  exceptions
         it is certainly an option to  settle  in  one  of  the  big  cities
         mentioned."

16. This paragraph is confused  and  difficult  to  understand  because  it
    appears to cast doubt on whether the Appellant was  trafficked  or  not
    and whether she would be at risk from, or at least not supported by her
    family or not.  The Judge appears to set out a  range  of  options  and
    conclude that none would be unduly harsh because the  Appellant  has  a
    reasonable prospect of obtaining  employment  and  although  difficult,
    could settle in a rural or urban area.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not consider in any  detail  a  specific  or  identified  location  for
    internal relocation, nor consider in any detail the Appellant's  likely
    position on return with two  young  children,  in  circumstances  where
    there was specific evidence on this in the expert report.

17. Further, the First-tier Tribunal fails to engage with  the  Appellant's
    claim, at least arguably supported by expert evidence, that  she  could
    easily be traced in Albania through the  registration  system  and  the
    possibility that her family may be motivated to do so  because  of  the
    shame of the Appellant's actions (which could include at a minimum  her
    return with two illegitimate children even  if  the  remainder  of  her
    claim about the circumstances  in  which  she  left  Albania  were  not
    accepted), which would be consistent with the strong concept of  family
    honour in northern Albania.

18. Whilst there is no requirement on a Tribunal to engage  with  each  and
    every piece of evidence before it, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal
    has erred in law in its consideration of internal  relocation  in  this
    case by not expressly identifying a place of  internal  relocation  nor
    considering in any detail whether it would be safe and not unduly harsh
    for the Appellant to relocate there.  These factual issues and  failure
    to make findings on the same are even more pertinent to the  Article  8
    issues in this appeal which I consider below.

19. In relation to private and family life, this is dealt within  paragraph
    27 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is accepted that the
    Appellant has established family life in the United Kingdom but respect
    for the same would not outweigh other considerations and in  particular
    the need to enforce proper immigration controls.  It was  not  accepted
    that there was  any  basis  for  the  Appellant  to  remain  under  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant is a single  mother
    with two illegitimate children but it was not accepted that there would
    be very significant obstacles to her safe return to Albania in  all  of
    the circumstances.

20. This conclusion appears to follow from a  suggestion  in  paragraph  21
    that the Appellant had a substantially family in Albania  to  whom  she
    could potentially turn (albeit with no express findings as  to  whether
    she could do so or whether her family have  disowned  her  as  claimed,
    even if she is not at risk of persecution from  them  and  in  apparent
    contradiction to the findings in paragraph 26 set out  above)  and  the
    findings in paragraph 24, which are as follows:

         "24. ... Nevertheless, I acknowledge the violence against women  is
         prevalent in Albania and that an Albanian female  will  undoubtedly
         face difficulties on return.   Albania  is  a  patriarchal  society
         where family support is  expected,  whether  this  comes  from  the
         nuclear family or the extended family.  Generally speaking,  whilst
         I  found  Ms  Kosumi's  report  helpful  for  providing  background
         material, it was very general in character.  Obviously, it is based
         on the appellant's own account being correct, but I  rejected  this
         and my findings above.  I take on board that the appellant has  two
         illegitimate children and there may be a degree of social stigma to
         her status.  I have fully considered the  appellant's  expert  when
         she draws attention to the difficulties faced by single female with
         illegitimate children to support returning to Albania.   This  will
         exacerbate her difficulties on return.  Nevertheless, the appellant
         is educated to degree level, having obtained  a  degree/diploma  in
         2014 (question 26 of the substantive interview) and therefore  does
         have the potential to obtain gainful employment on her own."

21. As above, the First-tier Tribunal  focuses  in  general  terms  on  the
    Appellant's potential to  obtain  employment  in  Albania  without  any
    further or more detailed consideration of integration or  the  position
    of the family on return.  The complete failure  to  consider  the  best
    interests  of  the  children  is  again  highly  relevant  here.    The
    conclusions contain no structed assessment of Article 8 at all.

22. I also find an error of law on the final ground in paragraph  17(v)  of
    the decision, in which there is a failure to appreciate that  there  is
    no inconsistency about the date  on  which  the  Appellant  obtained  a
    passport because there was sufficient evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to show that she obtained two on two different dates,  one  in
    Albania  and  one  in   the   United   Kingdom.    Whilst   the   other
    inconsistencies identified in this paragraph are  not  challenged,  the
    latter is based on a mistake of fact.

23. For the reasons  identified  above,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  contains  numerous  errors  of  fact   and   law.    Although
    individually the errors identified above may not have  been  sufficient
    to establish a material error of law capable of affecting the  outcome,
    taken together it can not be said that the errors would not be material
    to the outcome of the appeal, even when the  unchallenged  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  taken  into  account.   As  such,  it  is
    necessary to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Due to
    the nature of the errors identified, which at their  heart  go  to  the
    credibility  findings  and/or  identify  a  failure  to  make  relevant
    findings at all; it is not possible to preserve any findings  from  the
    decision.  I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal because of the
    extensive findings required to determine this appeal afresh.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) before any Judge except Judge Hanbury.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         7th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
-----------------------
[1] The identity of the Appellant's claimed trafficker has been anonymised
throughout this decision to 'B' to preserve the Appellant's anonymity.

