
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/14050/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Thursday 25 February 2021               |On 18 March 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    K U M
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  an  appeal
on protection grounds.  It is therefore appropriate to continue that  order.
 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  her  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel instructed by  Duncan  Lewis  &
                    Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  P-J  S  White  promulgated  on  23  April  2020  ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 7 August 2018  refusing
      her protection and human rights claims.

2.          The Appellant is a national  of  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
      ("DRC").  According to the Respondent, she is the person named in this
      appeal.  According to the Appellant, her  real  name  is  [CMM].   The
      Appellant came to the UK on 3 December 2017 as a visitor.  She claimed
      asylum on 6 February 2018.

3.          The Appellant claims to be at risk as a  result  of  involvement
      in 2011 with an independent political party, the Rassemblement pour la
      Defense Du Peuple Congolaise ("RDPC").  She says that she was detained
      and mistreated by the DRC authorities as a result of that involvement.
       In 2014, the  Appellant  says  that  she  became  involved  with  the
      Mouvement de Liberation du Congo ("MDC").  Following a MDC rally,  she
      claims  to  have  been  abducted  by  persons  associated   with   the
      authorities, beaten, sexually  assaulted  and  raped.   In  2017,  the
      Appellant claims that she became involved with a church known  as  the
      Bundu dia Kongo ("BDK").  Whilst there, the church was cut off by  the
      authorities due to the views of the  leader  of  the  church  and  the
      Appellant and her partner were  trapped  for  two  weeks.   When  they
      surrendered, the Appellant says that she was  recognised  due  to  her
      past political involvement,  was  again  detained  and  imprisoned  at
      Makala prison where the conditions were very harsh.  She says that she
      managed to escape when a raid was carried  out  by  followers  of  the
      leader of the BDK.  She was assisted thereafter by  an  old  lady  and
      then her paternal uncle to leave the country.  She says that an arrest
      warrant has been issued against her.

4.          The Appellant suffers with psychiatric problems  for  which  she
      has received treatment in the UK.   She  produced  a  report  from  Dr
      Krishna Balasubramaniam in support of her problems.  He has  diagnosed
      her with PTSD.  As a  result  of  her  psychiatric  difficulties,  the
      Appellant's barrister submitted to Judge  White  that  she  should  be
      treated as a vulnerable witness.

5.          The Judge found the Appellant's claim not to  be  credible.   He
      accepted that the Appellant suffers from PTSD.   He  did  not  however
      accept that this was caused by what she said had happened  to  her  in
      DRC.  At the heart of the Judge's reasoning is his  finding  that  the
      Appellant is KUM and not CMM.  That identity issue is central  to  the
      documents submitted in support of the Appellant's  case,  particularly
      the arrest warrant.  The Judge explained at [21] of the Decision  that
      the Appellant entered the UK on a genuine passport in the identify  of
      KUM, which had been subject to checks  when  she  sought  entry  as  a
      visitor and  when  she  left  DRC.   The  Judge  also  rejected  other
      documents as not being shown to be genuine.  He was not satisfied that
      the Appellant's expert who authenticated the documents was  expert  in
      this field.  He also made findings based on the documents  themselves.



6.          The Appellant appeals on three grounds as follows:
            (1)  The Judge has erred in his treatment of the  report  of  Dr
      Balasubramaniam. It is said that the doctor's opinion as to  causation
      should have been treated as providing corroboration for the claim.
            (2)  The Judge has acted unfairly, improperly  and  unreasonably
      when making remarks about the giving of the  Appellant's  evidence  in
      relation to the sexual assault and rape in 2014.  The  Judge  observed
      at [19] that the volunteering of information  during  the  Appellant's
      evidence was in contrast with the behaviour which  Dr  Balasubramaniam
      had observed.  It is pointed out  that  the  Judge  is  not  medically
      qualified to offer an assessment of this nature.  In any event, it  is
      said that the Judge was wrong in his observation since  the  Appellant
      did in fact become distressed when giving evidence.
            (3)  The Judge has failed to assess the Appellant's evidence  in
      the context of her vulnerability.

7.          Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  G
      Wilson on 10 June 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

            "... 3.    In an otherwise careful decision, it  is  nonetheless
           arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately  consider  the
           Appellant's credibility in the context of the  medical  evidence
           in particular the diagnosis of PTSD which was  accepted  by  the
           judge.
             4.    This  arguably  material  error  of   law   having   been
           identified, all the issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

8.          By a Note and Directions sent on 4 August 2020,  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Rimington formed the provisional view  that  the  error  of  law
      hearing could  be  dealt  with  on  the  papers.   However,  following
      submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic, on
      16 October 2020 directed that there be a remote hearing to  deal  with
      the error of law.

9.          The hearing was conducted via Skype for  Business.   There  were
      no technical issues affecting the hearing  generally.    In  terms  of
      documentation, in addition to the Decision itself, I was taken  to  Dr
      Balasubramanian's report  which  appears  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
      before the First-tier Tribunal at [AB/61-78].

10.         The matter comes before me to decide whether there is  an  error
      of law in the Decision and, if I conclude that there  is,  whether  to
      set aside the Decision for re-making.  If the Decision is set aside, I
      may either retain the appeal in this Tribunal for  redetermination  or
      remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

11.          Having  heard  from  both  representatives,  and  following   a
      concession made by Mr Walker on behalf of the Respondent, I  found  an
      error of law in the Decision. I indicated that I would  therefore  set
      aside the Decision and  it  was  agreed  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted.  I indicated that  I  would  set  out  the  reasons  for  my
      conclusions in writing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

12.         I begin by setting out the salient paragraphs  of  the  Decision
      relied upon by the Appellant as follows:

             "18.  I   have   a   psychiatric   report   from   Dr   Krishna
           Balasubramaniam.  He saw the appellant in October 2019, with the
           assistance of a French interpreter.  At the time that he saw her
           she  had  already  been  diagnosed  with  Post-Traumatic  Stress
           Disorder ("PTSD")  and  was  receiving  treatment  for  it.   He
           clearly saw no reason to doubt that diagnosis,  and  I  was  not
           invited to consider that she does not  have  PTSD.   He  took  a
           history of events which was broadly in line with her evidence to
           me; insofar as there are slight differences in  her  account  of
           the start and end of the  2014  episode  I  do  not  attach  any
           significance  to  that,  bearing  in  mind  the  very  different
           circumstances  and  that  everything  was,  on  both  occasions,
           relayed through  an  interpreter.   He  noted  that  she  became
           tearful  when  discussing  her   traumatic   experiences.    She
           described having flashbacks and nightmares about the episodes in
           2014 and 2017, and avoiding cues that remind her of the original
           trauma.  This was evidence of her PTSD. He  commented  that  the
           recommended treatments are Cognitive Behavioural Therapy ("CBT")
           or Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing ("EMDR"),  that
           she needed to continue the treatment she was receiving and  that
           for therapy to be fully effective victims of trauma need to feel
           safe,  indicating  that  a  positive  outcome  to   her   asylum
           application would result in the treatment being  effective.   He
           further expressed the view that the precipitating trauma for her
           PTSD was the torture  and  rape  in  2014,  exacerbated  by  the
           further, similar trauma in 2017.  I am bound to note that  since
           these are the traumas she described it is hardly surprising that
           they should be identified as the precipitants, but that begs the
           question I have to decide, whether  her  account  of  events  is
           shown, to the lower standard, to be reliable.  I accept that the
           appellant is suffering from PTSD and  that  it  must  have  been
           precipitated by a  traumatic  event,  but  Dr  Balasubramaniam's
           report does not directly help me to decide what the trauma was.
            19.  I also note in this context  that  cross-examination  about
           the 2014 incident was very limited.   The  appellant  was  asked
           about whether she left the party HQ with  one  other  person  or
           two, it being suggested that there was some inconsistency.   She
           was then asked  a  question  about  being,  at  a  later  stage,
           unconscious.  In reply she began volunteering details about  the
           rape and assault, without apparent hesitation or distress.   The
           contrast  with  the  avoidance  and  distress  described  by  Dr
           Balasubramaniam was surprising.
            20.  Apart from Dr Balasubramaniam's report  I  have  a  limited
           amount of other medical evidence.  The appellant was referred to
           talking therapies at one point, but referred on by them  to  the
           Helen Bamber Foundation because  of  her  complex  presentation.
           The  Foundation  has  supported   her   with   trauma   informed
           stabilization sessions, to which there has been a good response,
           and plans to provide trauma-focussed therapy  when  practicable.
           I have a letter dated 10th  March  2020  which  notes  that  she
           reports symptoms of PTSD, and  frequent  dizziness,  nausea  and
           headaches.  She had experienced temporary loss of  consciousness
           and these episodes are being investigated, but no known  medical
           explanation has thus far been found.  She is also said  to  have
           an intense fear of surgery for reasons related to her  traumatic
           past  which  has  prevented  treatment  for  a  current  medical
           condition.  This is a matter identified  in  a  letter  of  10th
           September 2019 from Dr Mirnezami at the colorectal clinic at  St
           Thomas'  Hospital.   That  notes  the  appellant's  account   of
           assault,  including  anal  rape  and  subsequent  bleeding.   On
           examination she was found to have skin  tags  and  suspected  of
           having internal haemorrhoids, although  examination  was  poorly
           tolerated.  These would require surgery.  Again I have no reason
           to doubt Dr Mirnezami's findings, but I have no evidence to show
           whether there is, or may be, any connection between her physical
           condition and what  she  says  happened  to  her  and  I  cannot
           speculate on the point.
            ...
            40.  ...In oral evidence,  in  both  cross-examination  and  re-
           examination, she said that the police forced their  way  in  and
           arrested her.  I attempted to clarify this point  and  she  said
           there were two separate incidents.  The police came in intending
           to arrest them, they encircled the church, she and  her  partner
           went and surrendered, but she then added that the police came in
           to arrest them and  there  was  a  confrontation.   It  was  not
           possible to get a clear and consistent answer  whether  she  and
           her partner went to the police and  surrendered  or  the  police
           forced their way in and arrested  them,  despite  this  being  a
           crucial part of her account.
            ...
            44.  I have considered all of the evidence with care and in  the
           round.   I  have  borne  in  mind  the  low  standard  of  proof
           appropriate.   I  have   also   noted   the   evidence   of   Dr
           Balasubramaniam, which I accept, that sufferers  from  PTSD  may
           often have  difficulties  in  recalling  events  and  recounting
           details in chronological order, but the appellant does not  seem
           to have difficulties of that kind.  In the light of the  matters
           discussed above I am not persuaded that her account  is  in  any
           way reliable.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  documents  produced,
           particularly the two warrants and the  letter  purportedly  from
           [N],  are  wholly  unreliable,  and  their  production  detracts
           further from the appellant's credibility.  I  am  not  persuaded
           that the  passport,  the  one  document  which  will  have  been
           subjected to meaningful checks, is the one that  is  unreliable.
           I am accordingly satisfied that the appellant is  [KUM]  as  her
           passport shows, and that her claim to be [CMM],  who  may  be  a
           real person for all I know, is false.   It  necessarily  follows
           that her account of what happened to her, as [CMM], is  also  in
           my judgment false.  She may well have  suffered  some  traumatic
           experience, to give rise to the PTSD diagnosed,  but  I  am  not
           satisfied that it is the experience described or that,  whatever
           it may have been, it  gives  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
           persecution on return."

13.         Dr Balasubramaniam is a forensic psychiatrist.  He is  a  Fellow
      of the Royal College of  Psychiatrists  and  holds  qualifications  in
      general  adult  and  forensic  psychiatry.   He  has  practised  as  a
      psychiatrist for 27 years.  The Judge did not doubt his competence  or
      expertise.   Dr  Balasubramaniam  interviewed  the  Appellant  on  one
      occasion on 1 October 2019 for the purposes of completing the  report.
      He had access to her medical records and documentation relating to her
      asylum claim.  The Judge did not find any  inconsistency  between  the
      Appellant's account as given to the doctor and that given to the  Home
      Office and to him.

14.         In terms of her presentation,  Dr  Balasubramaniam  recorded  at
      [5.1] of his report that "[the Appellant] became tearful when we  were
      discussing her traumatic experiences, and she was also anxious and had
      negative thoughts about her future when we were discussing her  asylum
      status".   When describing the Appellant's symptoms of PTSD  at  [6.1]
      of the report, Dr Balasubramaniam said the following:

            "[KUM] is suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder  (ICD-10
           Code 43.1).  This is evidenced by flashback experiences  of  the
           traumatic events, such as intrusive memories and  nightmares  of
           her traumatic experiences of the  rape  and  imprisonment.   She
           also avoids cues that remind her of  the  original  trauma,  she
           avoids activities and situations that may bring back memories of
           the trauma.  [KUM] told me that she has  a  sense  of  numbness,
           such as emotional blunting, and she also has physical  reactions
           such as sweating  and  rapid  heartbeat  when  reminded  of  the
           trauma."

15.         At [6.3] of his report,  Dr  Balasubramaniam  had  this  to  say
      about the Appellant's account:

            "On consideration of the  causation  of  [KUM]'s  PTSD,  I  have
           concluded that the main cause of her symptoms is from the trauma
           that she suffered in 2014, when  she  was  kidnapped  and  raped
           several times that resulted in her losing her unborn baby.  Then
           in 2017,  [KUM]'s  symptoms  worsened  after  she  was  kept  as
           prisoner in the church and Makala prison."

GROUND ONE

16.         This ground of challenge  is  best  summarised  at  [8]  of  the
      grounds as follows (by reference to what is  said  in  the  concluding
      sentences of [18] of the Decision):

            "The Judge therefore considers that Dr Balasubramaniam's opinion
           as to causation has no bearing on his findings of fact,  as  the
           Appellant's trauma could  just  as  well  have  been  caused  by
           experiences other than the ones she describes.  However, this is
           incorrect as a matter of law because the opinion of  a  properly
           qualified expert as to  the  causation  of  psychiatric  illness
           constitutes independent evidence.  There is no  suggestion  that
           Dr Balasubramaniam is not such an expert.  Whilst  the  question
           of credibility is, ultimately, for the Tribunal, it is an  error
           not to treat such an expert's opinion on causation as  providing
           corroboration."

17.         I am  unpersuaded  by  the  reliance  placed  on  the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgment in R (oao AM) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521.  That was  concerned  with  a  medical
      report as to scarring.  Since that is evidence of physical  injury,  a
      medical expert can provide  more  definitive  evidence  as  to  likely
      causes which in turn is likely to provide stronger  corroboration  (or
      not) of an account.  It stands to reason  that  determination  of  the
      cause of mental trauma depends to a  greater  extent  on  the  account
      given and, for that reason, on the credibility of  the  person  giving
      the account.   As  was  said  by  Forbes  J  in  Virjon  B  v  Special
      Adjudicator [2002] EWHC 1469 (Admin) (on which judgment the  Appellant
      also relies), a doctor can give an opinion that the symptoms exhibited
      are "consistent" with the  trauma  described  and  many  doctors  with
      experience of taking accounts from trauma victims "must be taken to be
      well used to assessing the truth or otherwise of  assertions  made  by
      patients".  However, and with respect to the Judge in that  case,  the
      credibility or otherwise of the account of the trauma is likely to  be
      a secondary  consideration  for  a  psychiatrist  whose  focus  is  on
      diagnosis of the mental illness caused by the trauma and how to  treat
      it.   It also goes without saying that  Immigration  Judges  are  also
      well used to assessing credibility or otherwise of the evidence  given
      by appellants.

18.         Ms Sanders also drew my attention to the helpful  summary  given
      by the Court of Appeal on the issue of evidence from  medical  experts
      in the recent case of MN and others v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1746 ("MN and others") as follows:

           "21.  In our view the law as appears from those authorities (so
           far as relevant to the issues in these appeals) can be
           summarised as follows:
           (1) The decision whether the account given by an applicant is in
           the essential respects truthful has to be taken by the tribunal
           or CA caseworker (for short, the decision-maker) on the totality
           of the evidence, viewed holistically - Mibanga.
           (2) Where a doctor's opinion, properly understood, goes no
           further than a finding of "mere consistency" with the
           applicant's account it is, necessarily, neutral on the question
           whether that account is truthful - see HE (DRC), but the point
           is in truth obvious.
           (3) However, it is open to a doctor to express an opinion to the
           effect that his or her findings are positively supportive of the
           truthfulness of an applicant's account (i.e. an opinion going
           beyond "mere consistency"); and where they do so that opinion
           should in principle be taken into account - HK; MO (Algeria);
           and indeed, though less explicitly, Mibanga. In so far as Keene
           LJ said in HH (Ethiopia) that the doctor in that case should not
           have expressed such an opinion (see para. 117 (1) above), that
           cannot be read as expressing a general rule to that effect.
           (4) Such an opinion may be based on physical findings (such as
           specially characteristic scarring). But it may also be based on
           an assessment of the applicant's reported symptoms, including
           symptoms of mental ill-health, and/or of their overall
           presentation and history. Such evidence is equally in principle
           admissible: there is no rule that doctors are disabled by their
           professional role from considering critically the truthfulness
           of what they are told - Minani; HK; MO (Algeria); SS (Sri
           Lanka). We would add that in the context of a decision taken by
           the CA on a wholly paper basis, a doctor's assessment of the
           truthfulness of the applicant may (subject to point (5) below)
           be of particular value.
           (5) The weight to be given to any such expression of opinion
           will depend on the circumstances of the particular case. It can
           never be determinative, and the decision-maker will have to
           decide in each case to what extent its value has to be
           discounted for reasons of the kind given by Ouseley J at para.
           18 of his judgment in HE (DRC).
           (6) One factor bearing on the weight to be given to an
           expression of opinion by a doctor that the applicant's reported
           symptoms support their case that they were persecuted or
           trafficked (as the case may be) is whether there are other
           possible causes of those symptoms. For the reasons explained by
           Ouseley J (loc. cit.), there may very well be obvious other
           potential causes in cases of this kind. If the expert has not
           considered that question that does not justify excluding it
           altogether: SS (Sri Lanka). It may diminish the value that can
           be put on their opinion, but the extent to which that is so will
           depend on the likelihood of such other causes operating in the
           particular case and producing the symptoms in question."

19.         In this case, it might be said that, at [6.3] of his report,  Dr
      Balasubramaniam is expressing a view that the Appellant's  account  of
      the cause of her trauma is, as  she  has  reported,  the  events  that
      befell her in DRC.  It might be said that he is there saying  that  he
      is persuaded of the credibility of the account and not simply that  it
      is consistent  with  her  symptoms.   However,  I  do  not  read  that
      paragraph in the way suggested.  In my view, what  Dr  Balasubramaniam
      is doing in that paragraph is distinguishing  between  the  events  in
      2014 which he considered to be the main  cause  of  the  symptoms  and
      those in 2017 which exacerbated those symptoms.  He is not  expressing
      a view of the credibility of either account.  In any event, he  offers
      no critical evaluation of the credibility of the Appellant's account.

20.         Even if I am wrong in that reading, I would not  have  found  an
      error under this heading based on the Judge's assessment of the report
      at [18] of the  Decision.   Having  indicated  (consistently  with  my
      reading of [6.3] of the report) that the expert finds the 2014  events
      to have precipitated the  trauma  and  the  events  of  2017  to  have
      exacerbated them, the Judge points out that whether those events  were
      in fact the cause of the trauma is the very question he has to decide,
      in other words "whether her account of events is shown, to  the  lower
      standard, to be reliable".  That is consistent with the point made  at
      [1] of the summary in MN and others above.  The  Judge  does  not  say
      that he gives  no  weight  to  Dr  Balasubramaniam's  report  in  that
      context.  He accepts that the Appellant's PTSD the fact  of  which  is
      not disputed must have been caused by some trauma but that the  report
      does not "directly" assist in identifying what  is  that  trauma.   In
      other words, it is part of the evidence to be considered but no  more.
      On my reading of [6.3] of the report which appears  to  be  consistent
      with Judge White's reading of it, that is not an erroneous approach.

GROUND TWO

21.         I am however persuaded that there is an error identified by  the
      Appellant's ground two.  This ground concerns the comment made in  the
      final two sentences of [19] of the Decision.   My reasons for  finding
      an error in this regard are as follows.

22.         First, as pointed out at [9] of the grounds, Dr  Balasubramaniam
      did not say that the Appellant was unable  to  discuss  the  traumatic
      events which are said to have led to her PTSD.  As is said at [6.1] of
      the report, she might seek to avoid discussing it.   However,  in  the
      course of an appeal where those events lay at the heart of the  issues
      to be considered, she clearly could not  avoid  discussing  them.   As
      such, the fact of having volunteered details might just as easily be a
      sign that she wished to provide information as quickly as possible  to
      avoid lengthy examination about the events.

23          Second, the physical symptoms which Dr Balasubramaniam  recounts
      at [6.1] of his report are not ones which would necessarily be readily
      observed (for example, a rapid heartbeat).  As  the  Appellant  points
      out, the Judge is not medically qualified to  assess  presentation  in
      this way.

24.         Third, and in any event, the extract from Ms Sanders'  notes  of
      the hearing show that the  Appellant  did  exhibit  signs  of  visible
      distress when discussing these events and the Judge in fact gave her a
      break to recover at that point.

GROUND THREE

25.         I am also persuaded that there is an  error  identified  by  the
      Appellant's ground three.  As is pointed out in the grounds,  although
      the Judge accepted that the Appellant suffers from PTSD, there  is  no
      self-direction about the consideration of her evidence as a vulnerable
      witness in line with what is said in AM (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  or  the  Joint
      Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
      Sensitive Appellant Guidance.

26.         At [6.8] of his report, Dr  Balasubramaniam  comments  that  the
      Appellant "may have memory difficulties and may have  difficulties  in
      recollecting events in  a  chronological  order".   As  the  Appellant
      points out, the Judge has  failed  to  consider  that  as  a  possible
      explanation when looking at inconsistencies or implausibility  of  the
      Appellant's evidence, for example at [40] of  the  Decision  as  cited
      above.  The Judge notes what is said at [6.8] of the report at [44] of
      the Decision but goes on to say that "the appellant does not  seem  to
      have difficulties of this kind".  As Ms Sanders pointed out,  that  is
      inconsistent with what is said at [40] of the Decision that "[i]t  was
      not possible to get a clear and consistent answer" about events  which
      were said to be  "a  crucial  part  of  her  account".   There  is  no
      consideration of the potential  impact  of  memory  difficulties  when
      assessing the Appellant's evidence.

27.         As Ms Sanders accepted, at the heart  of  this  appeal  lies  an
      identity issue.  If, as the Judge found, the Appellant is not who  she
      says she is (which depends largely  on  what  a  Judge  makes  of  the
      documentary evidence and not her oral evidence) then  it  is  unlikely
      that  her  account  can  be  considered  credible.   Nonetheless,  the
      Appellant did give oral evidence which was taken into account  by  the
      Judge when reaching his conclusion based on  all  the  evidence.   For
      that reason, I am satisfied that the error  made  when  assessing  the
      oral evidence is or may be material to the outcome.

28.         Finally, I record that Mr Walker's concession on behalf  of  the
      Respondent was that the Judge had erred because he had dealt with  the
      medical evidence in a way which was contradictory and had applied  his
      own opinion which he was not qualified to give.  He conceded that  the
      main part of the Appellant's  claim  was  backed  up  by  the  medical
      evidence so the Judge had failed properly to take  into  account  that
      medical evidence.

CONCLUSION

29.         For those  reasons,  I  conclude  that  grounds  two  and  three
      disclose errors of law  in  the  Decision  and  I  therefore  set  the
      Decision aside in its entirety.  The  credibility  of  the  protection
      claim will therefore need to be  considered  completely  afresh.   For
      that reason, I agreed with the representatives that this appeal should
      be remitted for a de novo hearing.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P-J  S  White
promulgated on 23 April 2020 is set aside in its entirety.  No findings  are
preserved. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing
before a Judge other than Judge P-J S White.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 5 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
