

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14284/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Liverpool                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 22 August 2017             |On Friday 25 August 2017             |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms S Thomas, Solicitor, Compass Immigration
                 Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Holt  promulgated  on  22  February  2017  ("the   Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 19 December 2016 refusing his  protection  and  human
       rights claims.  The focus of the appeal  to  this  Tribunal  is  the
       protection claim.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Iran.   He arrived in the  UK  on  28
       August 2014 and claimed asylum on 30 August 2014.   That  claim  was
       refused on 7 January 2015 and an earlier appeal against that refusal
       dismissed with appeal rights being exhausted on 22  September  2015.
       The Appellant made further submissions on 28 October 2015 which were
       refused on 29 October 2015.  Further submissions were then  made  on
       28 October 2016, again refused but accepted as amounting to a  fresh
       claim by the Respondent's decision under appeal.


    3. The basis of the Appellant's protection claim is his  conversion  to
       Christianity.  He says that he is a Jehovah's Witness. That was also
       the basis of his first claim and therefore his  first  appeal.   The
       Judge therefore correctly took as her starting point,  the  findings
       of the  first  Judge  (Judge  Lloyd-Smith).   Having  given  further
       reasons for not accepting the Appellant's  credibility,  Judge  Holt
       indicated  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
       genuinely rejected Islam and any conversion would not  come  to  the
       attention of the Iranian authorities.  He would not therefore be  at
       risk on return to Iran.


    4. The Appellant's grounds are three-fold.  First,  he  says  that  the
       Judge has placed too much weight on the  findings  of  Judge  Lloyd-
       Smith.  Second, he says that the Judge has misunderstood some of the
       evidence, in particular that of his  witnesses,  Mr  Carter  and  Mr
       Edmans.   He  also  says  under  this  head  that  the   Judge   has
       discriminated against Jehovah's witnesses whose  ministers  have  no
       formal status or training.  He says therefore  that  the  criticisms
       made of these witnesses are unfounded.  Finally, he  says  that  the
       Judge has failed to give proper attention to  the  evidence  of  the
       Appellant himself, particularly in relation to his knowledge of  his
       religion and evangelising activities.


    5. Permission was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 25  April  2017
       in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


           "The grounds assert the  Judge  attached  undue  weight  to  the
           decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal  against  an  earlier
           decision of the Respondent which the Tribunal had promulgated in
           [on] 20 May 2015 and insufficient weight to the evidence of  the
           Appellant's present  circumstances.   Crucially,  the  Judge  at
           para.24 of her decision [the Judge] found none of  the  evidence
           before her suggested  the  findings  in  the  [of  the]  earlier
           Tribunal decision were wrong.  She  then  set  out  her  reasons
           including that since that decision the Appellant had  become  an
           active member of a  congregation.   Certain  findings  are  made
           about the nature  of  the  congregation  at  para.24(v)  without
           reference  to  any  evidence  to  support  those  findings.   At
           para.24(vii) the Judge accepted the Appellant had been through a
           baptism/conversion ceremony.
           The Judge made no findings as to the weight to be given to  that
           evidence or how relevant a change  of  circumstances  since  the
           earlier Tribunal decision it showed.  Indeed, her conclusion  at
           para.26 that she cannot judge whether the Appellant is a genuine
           and permanent convert goes to the  heart  of  what  she  had  to
           decide and appears to undermine  her  reliance  on  the  earlier
           decision.  These are arguable errors of law and so permission is
           granted."


    6. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


    7. In short summary, the Appellant's grounds are  that  the  Judge  has
       given undue weight to the decision of the  first  Immigration  Judge
       and insufficient weight to the  evidence  post-dating  that  appeal,
       particularly the fact that the Appellant  has  continued  to  attend
       church for over two years on a regular basis and has been baptised.


    8. I can deal shortly with the first ground  relating  to  the  way  in
       which the first Immigration Judge's decision was treated.  The Judge
       properly directed herself at [8] to the fact that this is  a  second
       appeal and, as such, in accordance with the case of Devaseelan, that
       earlier decision should be  her  starting  point.   She  also  noted
       though that she needed to take account of matters arising after that
       decision and facts which were not at that stage relevant.  When  she
       turned to consider the evidence, therefore, starting at [17] of  the
       Decision, she did so by first setting out a summary of the  findings
       of Judge Lloyd-Smith before going on to look at the evidence  before
       her.  That is the correct approach.  Although there is reference  at
       later points in the Decision to whether  the  later  evidence  shows
       that the findings should be altered by that evidence, that is not an
       indication that the Judge was not applying  independent  thought  to
       the evidence before her and assessing the case on that evidence.   I
       therefore reject the suggestion that the Judge gave undue weight  to
       the first Immigration Judge's findings.


    9. I turn then to consider the remaining grounds.  The analysis of  the
       evidence and findings  thereon  is  to  be  found  at  [24]  of  the
       Decision.  Although Ms Thomas made one point about the import of the
       Asylum Policy Instruction  in  this  case,  consideration  of  which
       appears at [21] of the Decision, I can disregard that.   Ms  Thomas'
       submission about that was that  the  Appellant  can  "tick  all  the
       boxes" in the passage there cited.   However,  that  begs  the  very
       question  it  seeks  to  answer.   As  Mr  Bates  pointed  out,  the
       assessment of credibility in cases  like  this  is  not  a  tick-box
       exercise.  The issue whether a person is a genuine convert and is to
       be believed as to his/her conversion  is  a  matter  for  assessment
       based on all the evidence in the individual case.
   10. With that preface, I deal with the criticisms made of  the  findings
       made at [24]  of  the  Decision.   For  the  most  part,  those  are
       criticisms as to the weight to be given to the  evidence  and/or  an
       assertion  that  certain  facts  have  been  misunderstood.    Those
       submissions can be summarised as follows:-

               . [24(v)]: Judge has misunderstood the evidence: the evidence
                 is that 90-95% of the congregation are not  asylum-seekers.
                 The majority may be Farsi speakers but that is not the same
                 thing;

               . [24(vi)]: Judge has failed to have regard to the  evidence:
                 there is a worksheet monitoring the number of  hours  which
                 the Appellant has spent evangelising;

               . [24(vii)]:  Judge  has  failed  properly  to  consider  the
                 evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  undergone  a   baptism
                 ceremony;

               .  [24(viii)]:  Judge's  criticisms  of  witnesses  based  on
                 unfounded  point  about  qualification  and   standing   of
                 ministers in Jehovah's  witness  churches;  Judge  has  not
                 properly applied Dorodian; Judge has failed to have  regard
                 to the rigours of the system of conversion and  baptism  in
                 Jehovah's  Witness  churches;  Judge  has  failed  to  give
                 appropriate weight to the witness'  evidence  or  explained
                 why that evidence is rejected.


   11. I can deal with the first three bullet points shortly.  Even  if  it
       is right that the Judge misunderstood the evidence  in  relation  to
       the proportion of the congregation who are asylum seekers,  that  is
       not the point of that paragraph.  The point the Judge makes is  that
       the Appellant attends church as a way of mixing with  those  of  the
       same background rather than because he is a genuine  convert.   That
       is the point repeated at [26] of the Decision.  The  Judge  accepted
       that the Appellant had been evangelising "to  the  evident  approval
       and pleasure" of the church elders.  However, the point made in that
       paragraph is  similar  to  that  in  the  preceding  paragraph;  the
       Appellant evangelises for the most part only to other Farsi speakers
       and therefore to mix with  others  of  his  background  rather  than
       because he is a genuine convert  who  genuinely  wishes  to  convert
       others.  As the Judge there observes, that is relevant to whether he
       would continue that activity in Iran.  In relation to  the  baptism,
       the Judge accepts that  this  occurred.   The  point  made  in  that
       paragraph is that, because the Appellant could not remember where he
       was baptised, it was not an event of such importance to him that  it
       gave credence to the Appellant's claim genuinely to have converted.


   12. I have certain misgivings though about [24(viii)] of  the  Decision.
       I can see no difficulty with a Judge expressing  a  view  about  the
       standing of a minister or other church official who attends to  give
       oral evidence as to an appellant's conversion.   Such  does  not  go
       beyond the bounds of what is envisaged by the guidance in  Dorodian.
       My first concern though is that the Judge gives less weight  to  the
       evidence of Mr Carter and Mr Edmans based  on  lack  of  "status  or
       training" whilst admitting that there was  no  cross-examination  on
       the point.  If the Respondent did not  take  a  point  as  to  their
       standing, it is perhaps understandable that the  Appellant  did  not
       provide evidence as to their  standing  and  qualification  to  give
       testimony.  If this were a matter  of  concern  to  the  Judge,  she
       should have raised that issue.


   13. I accept Mr Bates' submission that the Judge was  entitled  to  have
       regard to the lack of critical evaluation which these witnesses have
       brought to bear on the issue of the Appellant's conversion (and  the
       conversion of others who they have been asked  to  support).   These
       are witnesses of fact and not in the position of experts.  Only  the
       Appellant can know in fact whether he has converted his religion and
       is now genuinely a believer in his new religion.  The witnesses  can
       only express their view albeit one on  which  they  have  a  certain
       amount of experience.  The Judge is not bound to adopt  their  views
       and has given reasons for rejecting those views.


   14. However, I also take note of Ms Thomas' submission that, by adopting
       the approach which the Judge  did,  she  has  failed  to  take  into
       account that, at least to some extent, that critical evaluation  has
       already taken place because of the quite  robust  system  of  study,
       conversion and baptism within the church itself.  That is not  dealt
       with to any degree by the witness statements of  Mr  Carter  and  Mr
       Edmans and it does not appear to have been the subject of  the  oral
       evidence (at least not in  any  detail).   There  is  however,  some
       documentary evidence on  the  point,  particularly  the  letter  co-
       written by Mr Carter and  Mr  Edmans  and  one  other  gentleman  in
       support of the Appellant's case, dated 23 October 2016 which appears
       at [AB/31].


   15. Were this the only criticism which could be made  of  the  Decision,
       though, I would have been inclined to find it immaterial.  There are
       ample other  reasons  given  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  claim
       genuinely to have  converted.   However,  the  rather  more  obvious
       difficulty with the Decision is what is said at [25] and [26] of the
       Decision.  Indeed, that  appears  to  be  largely  the  reason  that
       permission  was  granted.   The  comments  there  made  have  to  be
       considered in context.  As I have indicated, the reasons for finding
       the Appellant not to be credible in his claim are set out at [24] of
       the Decision.  That paragraph  starts  rather  than  ends  with  the
       finding supported by those reasons and reads as follows:-

            "[24]      My overall finding is that none of the evidence that
           I have been asked to consider makes me find  that  Judge  Lloyd-
           Smith was mistaken when she found that she  did  "not  therefore
           accept that he has converted from Islam  or  intends  to  attend
           Church meetings  in  Iran."  None  of  the  evidence  before  me
           suggested that her  findings  were  wrong  in  relation  to  the
           appellant's claims regarding his (lack of) involvement  in  Iran
           with Christianity; nor the risks that he claimed  to  be  under;
           and his reasons for becoming involved with Jehovah's Witness  in
           the UK.  I therefore also find  that  the  appellant  is  not  a
           genuine convert, the  corollary  of  which  is  that  I  am  not
           satisfied that he would be at risk upon return to Iran.  This is
           because..."


       The paragraphs setting out the reasons then follow.


   16.  If the Decision had ended there, I would, as I indicate, have found
       my misgivings about the treatment of the  witness'  evidence  to  be
       immaterial.  However, the Judge then went on as follows:-

            "[25]      Overall I am not satisfied that  the  appellant  has
           rejected Islam.  However, if I am wrong on that  point  and  the
           appellant has simply lost interest in Islam and has  found  that
           he no longer accepts the tenets of Islam ie  rejected  it  at  a
           personal, philosophical level, I am not satisfied that there  is
           any reliable evidence that he  has  communicated  this  "falling
           out" with Islam to anyone in Iran.  (As a theological difference
           between Christianity and Islam,  I  note,  is  that  evangelical
           Christians do not believe that an individual can  be  born  into
           Christianity.  Instead they have to be "born again" by  actively
           choosing to accept the teachings of Christ).   I  am  sure  that
           rejecting Islam would be seen as grossly  disloyal  by  many  in
           Iran.  However, like Judge Lloyd-Smith, I am not satisfied  that
           the appellant would continue to practise Christian faith  or  to
           profess to be a Christian if he returned to Iran.  And,  as  set
           out above, I am not satisfied that anyone would know or  suspect
           that he had discarded the Islamic beliefs he was raised with.  I
           therefore find that he would also be able to  live  in  Iran  in
           such a way as not to draw attention to his  rejection  of  Islam
           (if indeed he has rejected the religion).

            [26] As set out above I am entirely unable to judge whether the
           appellant is a "genuine" and permanent convert to  Christianity,
           although I find that his social  life  greatly  revolves  around
           Manchester  Persian  Congregation  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses   at
           present.  However, I am not remotely satisfied that  the  factor
           of his current  Manchester  Persian  Congregation  of  Jehovah's
           Witnesses lifestyle would ever come  to  the  attention  of  the
           authorities in Iran."


   17.  There are two difficulties with these paragraphs.   The  first  and
       the most obvious is what is said at [26] of the Decision.  As  Judge
       Shaerf observed when granting permission, this was  the  very  issue
       the Judge had to decide.  She could not fail to make a finding about
       it without falling into error.  Mr Bates sought to persuade me  that
       the error in this paragraph is simply bad  drafting.   He  suggested
       that by "I am entirely unable to judge whether ..."  the  Judge  did
       not mean "I am unable to make a decision whether..." but  "I  cannot
       consider it to be the  case  that...".   He  reminded  me  that  the
       paragraph  begins  with  the  words  "As  set  out  above..."  which
       incorporates the finding at [24] of the Decision that the  Appellant
       is not a genuine convert. That suggestion might have had some  force
       were it not for the use of the word "whether".   If  the  Judge  had
       simply used the word "judge" as  meaning  "find"  or  "assess",  she
       would have said that she was "unable to judge that" the Appellant is
       a genuine and permanent convert.


   18. I appreciate that decisions of this nature are not to be interpreted
       as one would interpret a statute but, where there is some ambiguity,
       it is necessary to look also at the context.  In  so  doing,  it  is
       necessary to consider [26] of the Decision alongside [25].  What the
       Judge appears to be saying in the two paragraphs  read  together  is
       that, if she is wrong about the Appellant having  converted,  it  is
       nonetheless merely a facet of his losing his own faith  and  is  not
       sufficiently important to him that he would continue to profess  his
       new-found faith on return to Iran because it would not be  important
       to him to do so.  There is no reason to suppose that the authorities
       would be aware that the Appellant has been practising the  Christian
       faith in the UK unless the Appellant were to tell them or  continued
       with that faith in Iran.  However, if that is what the  Judge  meant
       to say, she  needed  to  make  a  finding  whether  the  reason  the
       Appellant would not continue his new faith is because  he  does  not
       genuinely believe it and would not wish to do so or whether it would
       be in order to avoid the risk which it  would  pose.   Based  on  HJ
       (Iran), if the latter  were  the  reason,  the  Appellant  would  be
       entitled to succeed.  Further, the comment made at  [26]  then  does
       make sense only in the way in which Judge Shaerf  (and  I)  read  it
       that the Judge felt unable to make a finding on the very issue which
       she had to determine which then lends uncertainty to what appears to
       be her earlier finding that the Appellant is not a genuine  convert.




   19. Principally for those reasons but based also on the misgivings which
       I have expressed about the treatment of the evidence of  the  church
       witnesses at  [24(viii)]  of  the  Decision,  I  conclude  that  the
       Decision does disclose errors  of  law.   Those  errors  go  to  the
       adverse  credibility  findings  made  against  the  Appellant.    In
       accordance with the Tribunal guidance, I therefore  agree  with  the
       parties that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier
       Tribunal for the matter to  be  considered  afresh  by  a  different
       Judge.  None of the findings are preserved.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt promulgated on  22  February
    2017 is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 25 August 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
