
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14192/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 April 2019                      |On 17 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     KKD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Milestone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Malaysia  born  on  18  June  1992  who
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 10 December 2018 to refuse the appellant's  protection
    claim.  In a decision, promulgated on 30 January  2019,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Cary  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

    Ground (i):   The First-tier Tribunal did not  take  into  account  the
                country information and/or submissions relied  upon  by  the
                appellant;

    Ground (ii):  The First-tier Tribunal's  reliance  on  the  absence  of
                physical harm/threats/arrest to the appellant when he was in
                Malaysia led him into error;

    Ground (iii): The First-tier Tribunal's findings that the appellant  is
                excluded from the Refugee Convention as he would conceal his
                sexuality for reasons not connected to  persecution  is  not
                one which was open to him to find;

    Ground (iv)   The First-tier Tribunal has failed to take  into  account
                the most salient points and/or the  appellant's  submissions
                when finding the appellant would not face  very  significant
                obstacles to integration in Malaysia.

 3. For the reasons set out below I am not satisfied that  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal are made out.  The main  thrust  of  the  submissions
    before me related  to  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  background
    material before him.  Although Ms Sanders took me through the evidence,
    including the evidence in the supplementary bundle which was before the
    First-tier Tribunal, in some considerable detail, I  am  not  satisfied
    that any material error is disclosed in the judge's  approach  to  that
    material and I am of the view that the appellant's grounds amount to no
    more than a disagreement with the weight placed on  that  material  and
    the conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The judge, at [5], set out the documents before him including a  bundle
    and a supplementary bundle.  The judge further set out that there  were
    final submissions made by both the respondent  and  the  appellant  and
    that Ms Sanders  had  referred  the  judge  to  her  detailed  skeleton
    argument and the judge summarised that argument at [9].

 5. The judge then went on to correctly direct himself in relation  to  the
    relevant legal position and set out the position in HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 (at paragraph [15]).  The  judge  also
    noted, at [16], that the appellant said that he could not  live  openly
    in Malaysia and noted the appellant's evidence, including at [20], that
    he was not a member of any LGBT  organisations  although  he  supported
    them by attending the meetings.  The  judge  went  on,  from  [21]  and
    following, to summarise the background material.

 6. The judge noted first of all at [21] that homosexual acts were  illegal
    and that the respondent referred to  an  article  confirming  that  the
    "sodomy laws" had only been invoked seven times since 1938 and on  four
    occasions against the former deputy prime minister.  The judge went  on
    to note that the appellant does not identify as part of the transgender
    community who, according to the US State Department Report, can and  do
    face prosecution.

 7. Although Ms Sanders sought to suggest that the judge's treatment of the
    respondent's background materials differed from  his  consideration  of
    the  appellant's  background  materials,   I   do   not   agree.    The
    consideration of the respondent's material was contained  in  a  single
    paragraph at [21].  In contrast, the judge refers  to  the  appellant's
    materials throughout the determination including, as already stated, in
    summarising the appellant's  representative's  skeleton  argument.   At
    [22] the judge referred to  the  various  reports  in  the  appellant's
    bundle and refers to excerpts from some of those reports.   Again,  the
    judge refers to Ms  Sanders'  skeleton  argument  which  describes  the
    mistreatment of gay men and other LGBT persons  as  "endemic"  and  the
    judge carefully indicates and  notes  that  Ms  Sanders  gave  specific
    examples in her skeleton  at  paragraph  8(a)(i)  and  provided  a  key
    passage index (which Ms Sanders helpfully took me through in detail).

 8. The judge noted that there were  various  reports  including  that  the
    Malaysian film censorship board will not approve  films  with  what  is
    described as other "inappropriate culture" and that two LGBT activists'
    portraits were removed from a photography exhibition in August 2018 and
    that in 2018 two gay women accused of  attempting  to  have  sex  in  a
    parked car in a state governed by Sharia law were  fined  and  publicly
    whipped.  The judge notes that  the  appellant  acknowledged  that  the
    killings carried out in a religious court.

 9. The judge went on  to  take  into  consideration  that  the  respondent
    accepted that the appellant  would  be  treated  as  a  gay  person  in
    Malaysia and gay people are discriminated against but that it  was  the
    respondent's view that the appellant, even as an openly gay man,  would
    not be at risk of persecution, but rather  discrimination.   The  judge
    again  referred  and  took  into  consideration  Ms  Sanders'  skeleton
    argument at  [23]  and  the  UNHCR  guidelines.   The  judge  correctly
    directly himself that he had to take  into  consideration  whether  any
    past or future harm to the appellant would be sufficiently  serious  to
    amount to persecution and the judge went on to consider  at  [23]  what
    would amount to persecution.  There was no specific challenge  to  that
    consideration.

10. At [24] the judge reached the conclusion, and gave reasons for finding,
    that there was nothing to suggest that gay men are generally at risk of
    persecution in  Malaysia  from  authorities  or  others.   Although  Ms
    Sanders criticised what she referred to as  a  sweeping  statement  the
    judge went on to explain that finding, including clarifying that  there
    was localised examples of discrimination and  harassment  by  non-state
    actors particularly in those states where Sharia law operates.  It  was
    his finding, which was evidence based and open to him, that  there  was
    nothing to suggest that gay men are reasonably likely  to  be  at  risk
    from the authorities or those connected to them if they  lived  openly.
    The judge also found that the evidence did not  support  the  assertion
    that there was not a  sufficiency  of  protection.   In  reaching  that
    finding the judge took fully into account that the US State  Department
    Report  acknowledged  that  "civilian  authorities  at  times  did  not
    maintain effective control over security forces".  The judge noted that
    this only referred to violence against  transgender  persons  and  that
    anyone facing prosecution is presumed  innocent  until  proven  guilty.
    The judge took into consideration that homosexual acts were illegal but
    the law is rarely if ever enforced and the  laws  are  described  in  a
    Human Rights Watch article which the judge takes  into  account  as  an
    "antiquated relic of British colonialism".  The judge was also  of  the
    view that the appellant's reference to  his  claim  that  he  would  be
    whipped six times if he was returned to  Malaysia  and  imprisoned  for
    twenty years was a reference to what had  happened  to  the  two  women
    which had been referred  to  earlier.   It  was  the  judge's  reasoned
    conclusion, which could not be said to be irrational and  was  open  to
    him, that no adequate evidence had been produced to show that there was
    widespread persecution of members of the gay community.

11. Although the judge took  into  consideration  that  the  appellant  had
    himself not experienced difficulties/suffered harm there, it is not the
    case that he reached the conclusions he did, that there was no risk  of
    persecution in Malaysia, due to the appellant's  lack  of  difficulties
    there.  I am not satisfied that there was any  material  error  in  the
    approach of the Tribunal; the judge was aware of the appellant's claim,
    set out in his witness  statement,  including  that  he  had  kept  his
    relationship discreet and that they met in hotel rooms  and  that  they
    were very careful when they were in public when he was  with  his  then
    partner N.  They pretended they were nothing more than friends.

12. I am satisfied that any arguable error  in  the  consideration  of  the
    appellant's own behaviour in Malaysia is not material given the judge's
    careful consideration and evidence-based conclusions that the treatment
    of gay people in Malaysia does not amount to persecution.  I agree with
    Ms Isherwood's submissions that the material, including as referred  to
    and highlighted in submissions by Ms Sanders  and  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and  the  annex  relied  on  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  were
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal and take the appellant's case  no
    further.

13. It was incorrect to  say  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  evidence
    including in relation to censorship which the judge considered at [22].
     The judge also at [24] confirmed, that even if the appellant  were  to
    live openly in Malaysia, on the basis of the evidence before him  would
    not amount to persecution.  The judge took into consideration  at  [25]
    that  the  appellant  is  Buddhist  and  the  judge  had   taken   into
    consideration,  including  at  [24],   that   some   of   examples   of
    discrimination and harassment by non-state actors was  particularly  in
    those states where Sharia law operates.  The judge's  conclusions  were
    ones that were properly open to him on the evidence.

14. Although the judge's findings that the appellant would live  discretely
    on  return  to  Malaysia  were  criticised,  the  judge  found  in  the
    alternative that any difficulties  he  might  encounter  living  openly
    would not in any event amount to persecution.  There is, therefore,  no
    material error.  How and why the appellant  might  choose  to  live  on
    return to Malaysia does not come into operation as a  consideration  as
    the judge had found on the available evidence, that the appellant would
    not be at risk of persecution even if he were to live openly as  a  gay
    man.  Therefore the appellant's case founders at the second limb of the
    HJ (Iran) test.  Grounds 1 to 3 are not made out.

15. In relation to the alleged error in respect of Article  8,  Ms  Sanders
    made no submissions other than to rely on the grounds of  appeal.   The
    judge again made detailed and closely reasoned findings in relation  to
    Article 8 at [26] and following and it was open for him to find for the
    reasons he did and on the basis of  his  findings  of  fact,  that  the
    appellant would not have any significant  difficulty  in  reintegrating
    into Malaysian society.  Although the  grounds  argue  that  the  judge
    failed to take into consideration he  appellant's  sexuality,  that  is
    incorrect: at [29] the judge considered that the appellant had  had  at
    least one boyfriend in Malaysia and that  this  relationship  had  only
    ended because this individual had 'fancied someone else and he betrayed
    me'.  The judge also considered that the appellant  claimed  they  were
    not able to express their feelings openly but was  not  satisfied  that
    this amounted to a very serious obstacle to the appellant's integration
    in Malaysia.  That was a finding open to the judge  and  he  took  into
    consideration, not only that the reason for the relationship ending was
    nothing to do with the claimed difficulties in Malaysia but  also  that
    they were able to maintain  a  relationship  in  Malaysia  for  several
    years.  Ground 4 is not made out.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  15 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  15 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

