
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/14275/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      Sk
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Meyer, Solicitor appearing through Camden
                    Community Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Congo Brazzaville, (not the DRC),  date  of
    birth [ ] 1981, appealed against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,
    dated 20 December 2016, to refuse an asylum claim made on 27 June 2016.
     The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge P G Wright who  on  2
    October 2017 dismissed her appeal on refugee, Humanitarian  Protection,
    Article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds and allowed the appeal with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended (the
    Rules).  In those circumstances the Judge did not make any findings  on
    Article 8 ECHR either in relation to the Appellant's health or in terms
    of private life in the United Kingdom outside of the Rules.

3.   The Secretary of State's  decision  letter  considered  the  matter  by
    reference to the asylum claim, Humanitarian Protection and  Articles  2
    and 3 ECHR in terms of risk on a return of ill-treatment at  the  hands
    of her claimed persecutors.  The Secretary of State did  not  generally
    consider Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules but did consider Article 3
    ECHR with reference to medical grounds.  She  concluded  there  was  no
    basis because of the case law to show  the  real  risk  of  that  being
    breached.  The Judge received evidence about  the  general  issues  and
    made no findings either by reference to Articles 3 or 8 in relation  to
    health grounds.

4.   The application for permission to appeal was  solely  confined  to  the
    Judge's findings allowing the appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules.  There was no cross-appeal by the Claimant in  relation  to  the
    dismissal of her claims for protection in the UK.  Ms  Meyer  indicated
    that that was a mistake or an omission which should not  have  occurred
    but was not the fault of the Claimant.  Mr Tufan's  position  was  that
    the Secretary of State in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  expressly
    confined them to challenging the decision with reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and was not challenging the asylum  and  protection
    claims which I take it embraced Articles 2 and 3 ECHR as well.

5.   Ms Meyer would were she able to wish to pursue the challenge  to  those
    adverse findings on the asylum protection claim but there are  no  such
    grounds, permission has not  been  given  and  no  draft  grounds  were
    submitted at the hearing in connection with or why, it  was  said,  the
    Judge had erred in law when addressing  the  asylum/protection  claims.
    In those circumstances it did not seem to me having regard to the Upper
    Tribunal's Procedure Rules that it was appropriate for the basis of  an
    appeal to be extended to include a cross-appeal on those  un  specified
    'grounds' and issues.

6.   However, having  looked  at  this  decision,  which  in  many  respects
    attempted to properly address the issues of the protection claim, I can
    see no Robinson obvious reason, to interfere with the Judge's decision.
     I do however find that the Judge's explanation, bearing  in  mind  the
    factual  circumstances  with  which  he  was  faced  in  terms  of  the
    Claimant's presence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  demonstrated  that  the
    consideration required under the Rules was not properly undertaken;  as
    the Secretary of State has  contended:  Given  that  the  Appellant  is
    absent from Congo Brazzaville it seemed to me that  the  assessment  of
    the circumstances she faced on return needed to be more comprehensively
    addressed  as  to  whether  there  were  the  necessary  obstacles   to
    integration bearing in mind the time that she  has  been  out  of  that
    country is relatively short.

7.   For those reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  did  not  properly
    address the issue of return to Congo Brazzaville and the  matter  needs
    to be looked at again.

8.   I am satisfied also that the Judge had  before  him  issues  raised  on
    health grounds under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR  but  failed  to  deal  with
    them.  Which it  is  clear  on  the  case  law  represent  considerable
    difficulties for anyone to cross let alone this Appellant but I do  not
    prejudge that issue.  In the circumstances I  am  satisfied  the  Judge
    made an error of law by not  properly  assessing  the  implications  of
    private life under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules  in
    relation to difficulies on re-integration and the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand.

DECISION

9.   The appeal of the Secretary of state is allowed to the extent that  the
    appeal is remade in the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) upon the  issues  set
    out below.

ISSUES

10.   Private  life  arising   under   the   Immigration   Rules   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  Health issues  relating  to  Articles  3  and  8  ECHR.
    Private life issues relating to Article 8 ECHR outside  of  the  Rules.
    This is without prejudice to the Secretary of State's contentions  that
    the Article 8 is not engaged outside of the Rules.

DIRECTIONS

1.   Relist for hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hatton  Cross.   Not
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  G  Wright  nor  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J Grimmett.

2.   Lingala interpreter required.

3.   Time estimate two hours.

4.   Any further evidence relating to health and  Article  8  issues  to  be
    served on the IAC and on the Secretary of State not later than fourteen
    days before a further hearing.

5.   Skeleton argument addressing the legal issues to  be  provided  by  the
    Claimant's representative not  later  than  fourteen  days  before  the
    further hearing.

6.   The Respondent to serve any reply in respect of the  issues  not  later
    than seven days before the further hearing.

7.   Any further directions and applications in relation  to  the  admission
    of evidence to be made to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   List for a PTR if sought by the parties in writing with reason.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order was made and is continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 6 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
