






Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14304/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 12th June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                              Mr Yasin Faisali

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel, instructed by GMIAU

For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mack and First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on
    the 21st February 2019, whereby the judges  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse the appellant's
    protection claim.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances, I do  not  consider
    it necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 3rd April 2019. Thus the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

    Grounds of appeal

 4. The first ground of appeal asserts that too much reliance was placed on
    what the appellant had allegedly said in the screening interview. It is
    argued that the screening interview is not accurately recorded and  the
    appellant has notified the respondent and the Tribunal of  inaccuracies
    in the interview. It  is  also  asserted  by  the  appellant  that  the
    interpreter must have been speaking in Kurmanji and misunderstood  what
    was said by the appellant.

 5. The appellant's  representatives  some  18  months  after  the  initial
    screening interview wrote to the respondent indicating that there  were
    inaccuracies in the record of the interview. It  is  claimed  that  the
    screening interview

      a) In referring to the appellant's  journey  should  have  included  a
         reference to his being kept in a flat perhaps  in  Bulgaria  for  a
         period of 3 months; and

      b) thereafter that he had made reference not to PJAK but to KDPI.

 6. According to the record of the screening interview the appellant,  when
    asked to set out the basis of his asylum claim at 4.1 of the  screening
    interview, had stated that he feared the  Iranian  authorities  because
    "they had been  informed  that  I  attended  a  meeting  with  (Kurdish
    Political organisation )  Party of Free Life of Kurdistan "PJAK"  .They
    will probably hang me"

 7. The appellant in  seeking  the  amendment  some  18  months  later  was
    alleging that the organisation  that  he  mentioned  in  the  screening
    interview was the KDPI, the Kurdish Democratic Party of  Iran  not  the
    PJAK the Kurdistan Free Life Party.

 8. In his statement the appellant has asserted the interpreter  must  have
    been speaking Kurdish Kurmanji. The representatives have not asked that
    the language spoken by the interpreter be  checked.  It  is  merely  an
    assertion made by the appellant. The point was made that the  appellant
    has not alleged that  any  other  parts  of  the  interview  have  been
    mistranslated,  only  the  parts  identified  principally   where   the
    appellant has given the name of the political  organisation,  which  he
    claimed to be connected with.

 9. The appellant's representative seeks to make the point that there would
    be no difference between the appellant asserting that he had a  meeting
    with PJAK or with the KDPI. Both would result in the authorities taking
    an interest in the appellant.

10. The appellant's representative seeks to rely upon the case of  SB  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD 2019 EWCA Civ 160. The case points out that  a  screening
    interview is just a cursory exercise designed  to  collect  information
    and does not involve  a  significant  examination  of  the  appellant's
    account. In the case the appellant had sought  to  suggest  there  were
    problems with his interview and his screening interview because of  the
    interpreter.

11. The screening interview identifies the interpreter  at  the  start  and
    gives an identification reference. The screening interview also  states
    that the language of the interview was Kurdish Sorani.

12. The claims by the appellant had been  specifically  considered  by  the
    panel. Consideration commences at paragraph 32 (a) and  continues  into
    32(b). They have carefully considered the explanation  given  and  have
    rejected  the  explanation.  The  panel  considered  specifically   the
    discussion between the appellant and the  interpreter  to  ensure  that
    they understood each other. At the end of the interview  the  appellant
    was asked whether he understood the questions  and  indicated  that  he
    did. The panel has gone on  in  a  very  detailed  examination  of  the
    interview to point out how material the discrepancies were and why they
    did  not  accept  the  explanation  given  by  the  appellant.  In  the
    circumstances the panel has considered carefully the discrepancies  and
    was entitled to take such discrepancies into account in  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant. The panel has  given  valid  reasons  for
    coming to the conclusions that they did.

13.  Issue was taken that the panel have elevated evidence that Iran has  a
    sophisticated  state  surveillance  system  to  the  level  of  country
    guidance and have therefore given much greater weight to it by  calling
    it country guidance rather than referring to it as background material.
    It is not being suggested that if the  panel  had  referred  to  it  as
    background information or background country material  that  there  was
    anything wrong with such on the basis of the background materials.  The
    suggestion being that there was  background  evidence  to  support  the
    claim that Et'alaat had a sophisticated  system  of  surveillance.  The
    objection is to the fact that  it  has  been  referred  to  as  country
    guidance.

14. The references appear in paragraph 32 (f). The panel makes clear at the
    commencement of paragraph 32 that they were assessing the evidence  and
    making findings of fact. If one considers  the  concluding  remarks  of
    paragraph 32 there clearly considering background  information  on  the
    activities of Et'alaat. It is clear that there considering the  factual
    evidence as to the available resources and the surveillance  techniques
    of  organisations  such  as  Et'alaat.  They  were  relying  upon   the
    background evidence to indicate that the  appellant's  account  of  the
    raid being carried out at his home was not credible.  Whilst  they  may
    have  misstated  or  miscategorised  that  as  an  element  of  country
    guidance, it is clear that they are making findings of fact and  giving
    reasons for reaching the conclusions that they have.

15. In the circumstances whilst they  may  have  described  it  as  country
    guidance it is clear that there were conducting an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and not applying a legal principle. The panel has given  valid
    reasons for reaching the conclusions that they have.

16. As a final matter it is suggested that in accepting that the  appellant
    was illiterate, they should then have accepted that the appellant would
    not be aware of what was said in leaflets that he was distributing. The
    point was made in the decision that the  appellant's  understanding  of
    politics was extremely vague. In paragraph 32 (i)  it  had  been  noted
    that the appellant knew nothing about the parties that he was  claiming
    to be involved with, did not know the leaders,  the  main  policies  or
    aims. It was being suggested that the appellant was willing to risk his
    life to distribute leaflets for the organisation but knew nothing about
    the organisation.

17. The panel considered that a person distributing leaflets on  behalf  of
    an organisation would at least know something  about  the  organisation
    and would  be  interested  to  know  what  the  leaflets  that  he  was
    distributing were seeking  to  promote.  Despite  the  appellant  being
    illiterate the panel  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  know
    something of the political party and would know something of  what  was
    said in the leaflets. In the circumstances they were not satisfied with
    the explanation given by the appellant that he was involved in politics
    or that he had been distributing leaflets. In the  circumstances  there
    is nothing perverse about expecting the appellant to know something  of
    the policies of the party which he was seeking to promote and something
    of the information that appears on leaflets that he is giving out.

18. The panel has carefully examined all of the  appellant's  account  that
    has given valid reasons for reaching the conclusions that  it  has.  In
    the circumstances there is no material error of law in the decision.

    Notice of Decision

19. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 17 June 2019



