
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14298/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December 2019                |On 21st January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                   Mr A S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Ata & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The appellant appealed with permission against the decision of Judge Minhas
promulgated on 7th August 2019 on four grounds.

In relation to the first ground, which stated the judge failed to regard
the appellant's minority as he travelled through Europe, we pointed out at
the hearing that the appellant was in fact an adult when he travelled
through France because he was an adult when he travelled to the United
Kingdom.

The second ground of appeal contested that the judge failed to apply JT
(Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 876
correctly.  At paragraph 21 the judge states in the determination that as
required by Section 8 of The Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, the appellant's credibility should be regarded
as damaged, which was incorrect, because the Court of Appeal in JT
(Cameroon) held that even where the circumstances listed in Section 8 apply
this does not mean that credibility is inevitably damaged.

We find that that is a material legal error in the decision of the judge
because Section 8 of the Treatment of Claimants Act refers to 'shall take
into account' rather than a mandatory provision dictating that the
credibility was inevitably damaged.

In the third ground the judge erred in relation to the significance of the
age assessment to credibility. The appellant claimed to have been born on
14th October 1999 but was in fact assessed as having been born two years
earlier on 14th October 1997.  The judge states at paragraph 17 and towards
the start of her findings that the outcome of the age assessment procedure
undermines the credibility of the appellant from the outset of his asylum
claim.  That wrongly assumes that the appellant had knowingly declared
himself to be younger than he actually was.

There are, as we note, issues in relation to the production of Taskeras
which give estimated ages and the judge failed to take into account the
possibility that the appellant himself honestly was mistaken about his age.
 Even if it was not accepted it is something that the judge should have
considered and addressed in relation to credibility.  That was a material
error of law.

In the fourth ground, which challenged the reasoning on the house fire (a
house did not need to be vast for it to be impossible to rescue its
occupants), we would not go so far as saying that the reasoning was
perverse, which is a very high threshold, but more that there is inadequate
reasoning.

In relation to the overall credibility findings the judge states at
paragraph 22, "the appellant's case depends entirely on my assessment of
his credibility.  Each inconsistency highlighted in the paragraphs above
undermines the credibility of the appellant".

The fifth ground raised a challenge to the ambiguous credibility findings.
The judge stated at [22] '[t]he core incidents said to have taken place are
not, in my view, likely to have taken place at all'.  We agree this
statement demonstrates not only a failure to make a clear finding but also
appears to apply the wrong standard of proof which in asylum claims is not
the civil standard.

There was some discussion as to whether the report of Dr Giustozzi 'saved
the day' but, as Ms Revill pointed out, it was not just whether the
appellant would be recruited by the Taliban but also whether he would be
perceived by the Taliban as a spy and his case was put in the alternative
on that basis.  The report did not assist on this basis.  Although the most
recent country guidance case of AS (Safety of Kabul) CG [2018] UKUT 00118
was raised, we accept there was some force in Ms Revill's argument that if
the appellant was perceived as a spy he might be found anywhere even if he
relocated to Kabul but that is a matter which will have to be determined by
the First-tier Tribunal.

We note that the credibility findings were a holistic and cumulative
assessment and yet contain some fundamental flaws in approach.  We consider
therefore that the judge has materially erred in law. The decision should
be set aside for the reasons we have given.  There are no preserved
findings of fact.

The judge erred materially for the reasons identified. We set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Signed Helen Rimington                       Date 16th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

