
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/14160/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th August 2019                   |On 11th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    m D M
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi, promulgated on 21st March  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 22nd February 2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 11th August
    1997.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  13th
    December 2018 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he feared mistreatment  in
    Iraq because the Kurdish authorities suspected him of being involved in
    the sale of a truck to ISIS because it  was  registered  in  his  name.
    However, his initial  claim  had  been  different.   In  his  screening
    interview on 8th August 2016 at Yarl's Wood Immigration Removal Centre,
    he had said that he had come to the UK because, "I have come to have  a
    good life to study without any problem".

Error of Law

 4. At the hearing before me  on  7th  August  2019,  there  was  agreement
    between Ms Aboni, appearing as Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on
    behalf of the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  and  Mr  Howard,  the
    Appellant's solicitor, that the judge below had indeed erred in law  in
    an important material respect.  This was to do with the judge's finding
    that the Appellant had come from the "Kurdish area" (paragraph 38),  on
    the assumption that Kirkuk was in the IKR, when it was in fact not  the
    case at all.

 5.  Therefore, if the Appellant maintained that he came from  Kirkuk,  and
    that this was a "contested" area, then the country guidance case of  AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, was important in recognising that there was
    at present a state of internal armed conflict in  a  province  such  as
    "Kirkuk" to which return would not be possible.

 6. Mr Howard, pointed out that  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim on the basis that "ISIS are no longer in
    control of many errors including Kirkuk (paragraph 24).   However,  the
    judge had then gone on to consider whether the Appellant was at risk of
    "indiscriminate violence in the area to which the Respondent  seeks  to
    return him, and whether he can return to his home in the  Kurdish  area
    safely" (paragraph 38).  Yet, the Appellant came from Kirkuk.   He  did
    not come from the IKR.  The implication of this was that the  Appellant
    came from the IKR, and therefore was returnable to  the  "Kurdish  area
    safely".

 7. Indeed, Mr Howard submitted that the judge went on to proceed precisely
    on that assumption when he observed that the court in AA (Iraq)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944, had "also found that the IKR was virtually violence free,
    although the Respondent would not return the  Appellant  to  that  area
    unless he originated from it" (paragraph 41).   The judge had then gone
    on to say that a Kurd who did not originate from the IKR  could  obtain
    entry for ten days and renew this for a further ten days  if  he  found
    employment, he could remain longer.  The judge held that there  was  no
    evidence that the IKR actively removed Kurds from the  IKR  when  their
    permits came to an end.  Having said all of this the judge then fatally
    concluded that "this was not relevant in the case of the  Appellant  as
    he is from the Kurdish area and he states that issue  aside  he  is  at
    home with his parents" (paragraph 41).  Mr Howard  submitted  that  the
    Appellant was not from the Kurdish area.  What had been set out in  the
    case of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 was accordingly entirely relevant
    to the Appellant's situation.

 8. For her part, Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  although  there  had  been  a
    detailed Rule 24  response  from  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    opposing the application for appeal, she would have to agree that there
    was a material error in the judge's determination in the fact  that  it
    was being implied  that  Kirkuk  was  in  the  IKR  (paragraph  38  and
    paragraph 41).  The Appellant's case was that his family is in  Kirkuk.
    He is also from there.  The judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was from the IKR.  The  judge's  fundamental  assumption  was
    that the IKR was safe.  If the assessment of the appeal began from that
    premise then the factual evaluation was bound to be one that could  not
    be relied upon.  She agreed that there was an error  of  law  and  this
    matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I have accordingly  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law (see Section
    12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that it falls to be set aside for the  reasons
    as set out above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision falls to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remake the  decision.   This  appeal
is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined  by  a  judge
other than Judge Obhi pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b).

This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019

