

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14248/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 May 2019                              |On 21 May 2019                 |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                MELAT KEBEDE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwinycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.  She has appealed  against
          a decision of First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge  Dearden  sent  on
          20 February 2019, in which her appeal was dismissed on asylum  and
          human rights grounds.

FTT decision


       2. Judge Dearden made extensive and  comprehensive  adverse  findings
          of fact regarding the appellant's asylum  claim.   In  particular,
          he rejected the claim that the appellant:

          - was detained for reasons relating to her political opinion;
          - escaped with the assistance of an officer;
          - married this officer in the circumstances claimed;
          - was the victim of violence at the hands of this man;
          - escaped from him whilst they were on holiday in Europe.

       3.  The  FTT  rejected  the  credibility  of  the  entirety  of   the
          appellant's asylum claim but also  went  on  to  find  the  asylum
          claim not be well-founded when the claim is taken at its highest.

Grounds of appeal

       4. The grounds of appeal against the FTT's decision  focus  on  human
          rights only and do not  in  any  way  address  the  FTT's  factual
          findings.  The grounds  merely  submit  that  the  FTT  failed  to
          assess  the  claim  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  breach
          Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  No further particularisation  is
          provided for this sweeping assertion save that it is  asserted  at
          [5] of the grounds, that:


                 "in  addition  to  the  appellant's  political  views,  the
                 appellant's personal circumstances, as a lone woman  and  a
                 victim of domestic violence would make  her  vulnerable  to
                 severe destitution upon  return  to  Ethiopia  and  further
                 prevent  her  from  being  able  to  reintegrate"  for  the
                 purposes of 276ADE of the Immigration Rules."

       5. Judge Pedro granted permission to appeal in a  decision  dated  29
          March 2019, observing that it is arguable that the FTT  failed  to
          address Article 8.

Hearing

       6. At the beginning of the  hearing,  Mr  Howard  accepted  that  the
          grounds of appeal: do not challenge the FTT's factual findings  or
          the assessment of the appellant's asylum claim; Articles 2  and  3
          of the ECHR stand or fall with the asylum  claim  and  in  reality
          solely focus upon Article 8; and this is based  upon  the  alleged
          failure to assess the appellant's ability to re-integrate  in  the
          light of her personal circumstances, in particular  her  political
          opinion, lone woman status  and  her  claim  to  be  a  victim  of
          domestic violence.


       7.  When  I  sought  further  clarification   from   Mr   Howard   he
          acknowledged that the  FTT  did  not  accept  any  aspect  of  the
          appellant's account, including her claimed  anti-regime  political
          opinion and the circumstances relevant to her marriage  i.e.  that
          she would return as a woman  who  escaped  her  husband  following
          domestic violence.  He also accepted that the submissions and  the
          evidence before the FTT, entirely focused upon asylum.   The  very
          general and generic submissions in the skeleton argument  relevant
          to Article 8 and 276ADE are consistent with that approach.

       8. Mr Howard acknowledged that the only ground that  he  pursued  was
          the FTT's failure to address the alternative submission  that  the
          appellant is at risk of serious harm in Ethiopia because she  will
          return as a woman.   Mr  Howard  accepted  that  this  is  not  an
          argument that  was  expressly  made  to  the  FTT.   The  skeleton
          argument does not refer to this.  Mr Howard  was  also  unable  to
          take me to any evidence dealing  with  the  specific  position  of
          lone women and  accepted  that  the  country  background  evidence
          available to the FTT was limited  to  the  position  of  women  in
          general.  After hearing from Mr Howard I indicated that I did  not
          need to hear from Mr Diwinycz.


Error of law discussion

       9. Mr Howard conceded that  the  assertion  that  there  would  be  a
          breach  of  Article  8  or  very  significant  obstacles  for  the
          appellant's  reintegration  in  Ethiopia  could  not  be  properly
          pursued, in the light of the FTT's adverse findings of  fact.   He
          confirmed that the only error of law in  the  FTT's  decision  was
          predicated upon the judge's failure to address  the  circumstances
          to be faced by a lone woman in Ethiopia.   There  are  significant
          difficulties in the way of that submission.  First,  the  FTT  did
          not accept that she would be a  lone  woman  on  return.   In  any
          event, the submission was not made to the  FTT.   Finally  and  in
          addition, Mr Howard was unable to (and did not)  take  me  to  any
          country background evidence available to the FTT relevant  to  the
          position of lone women.


      10. The grounds of appeal, as drafted and argued before  me,  are  not
          made out for the reasons I set out above.

Decision


      11. The FTT's decision did not involve the making of an error  of  law
          and I do not set it aside.




Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
16 May 2019
