
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Civil Justice Centre (remote     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing)                             |                                     |
|Heard on: 10th September 2020        |On: 16th September 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     XL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimons, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of China born in  1974.  She  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Frantzis) to dismiss her appeal on protection grounds.  Judge  Frantzis
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds with reference to Article  4
    ECHR and the Respondent has not appealed against that decision.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's case was  that  she  feared  returning  to
    China because she owed a significant amount of  money  to  loan  sharks
    there. The original sum had been borrowed in 2015 to  pay  for  medical
    treatment for her father. The interest was such that  the  amount  owed
    grew and grew and she had no way of paying it back. She was  threatened
    and beaten by these people. By 2017 she was forced  to  give  them  her
    shop, then her only livelihood. She fled her local  area  in  order  to
    escape the debt but the loan sharks tracked her down. She borrowed more
    money from a cousin in order to give the  loan  sharks  at  least  some
    money, but eventually she felt she had no choice but  to  leave  China.
    She arranged to travel to the United Kingdom, on what she  believed  to
    be a genuine work visa. Once she was here she found that she  had  been
    deceived, and that in fact she had been trafficked for the purposes  of
    sexual exploitation: upon her arrival the agents  who  facilitated  her
    journey required her  to  work  as  a  prostitute.   She  came  to  the
    attention of the Respondent after she was found working in a brothel in
    Manchester.


 3. The Appellant was refused protection because  the  Respondent  did  not
    believe her account, which she found to be internally  inconsistent  in
    several key respects.

    The First-tier Tribunal Decision


 4. The First-tier Tribunal begins  its  decision  by  recording  that  the
    Appellant was to be treated as  a  vulnerable  witness.  The  Competent
    Authority has found 'reasonable grounds' to conclude  that  she  was  a
    victim of trafficking, and she has been diagnosed with PTSD. Having had
    regard to expert evidence from a Senior Caseworker at the Poppy Project
    the Tribunal accepted the Appellant's testimony about being  trafficked
    and how she came to be working in the brothel.  The  Tribunal  accepted
    that she was there against her will and was being held for the  purpose
    of sexual exploitation.

 5. Turning to the historical narrative the Tribunal found  that  it  could
    not be satisfied, even to the lower standard, that the  Appellant  left
    China because she was living in fear of loan sharks. Noting that no one
    factor attracted more weight than another, the Tribunal noted that  the
    Appellant failed to claim asylum at the first  opportunity,  and  there
    was no explanation as to why. Unlike her experiences of sexual violence
    - for which there  is  a  well-documented  psychological  phenomena  of
    delayed reporting - no such reason had been advanced in respect of  the
    'loan shark' element of the account.   The account she gives  may  well
    be plausible in the context of the country background material, but  it
    was not credible. She says she had no option but to borrow  the  money:
    that is inconsistent with her evidence that she owned a shop and  other
    property and she  knew  these  people  to  be  violent  thugs.  Despite
    maintaining regular contact with her  family  in  China  no  supporting
    evidence has been produced from them.   On appeal the Appellant claimed
    that her sister had been forced to leave her  job  because  of  threats
    from the loan sharks, but she had not mentioned this in interview.  The
    Appellant's claim that these men were violent  and  ruthless  does  not
    appear to be consistent with her evidence that she remained  living  in
    her home, and working in her shop, for some 18 months whilst she  still
    owed them money.  Her evidence about being physically assaulted by  the
    loan sharks in 2016 is  inconsistent.   The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    Appellant has at least one physical scar and PTSD, but  concludes  that
    these conditions cannot be probative of the account.


 6. The Tribunal concluded its risk assessment by considering  whether  the
    Appellant would, as a victim  of  trafficking,  face  a  real  risk  of
    exploitation upon return to China.  It had  particular  regard  to  the
    views of the country expert Ms Mirjam Klann Thullesen that  she  would.
    The Tribunal placed weight on Ms Thullesen's conclusions, but  did  not
    accept them.  The Appellant has a family network to whom she  can  turn
    for support, as well as property within  the  country.  She  would  not
    therefore be particularly vulnerable to a risk of re-trafficking.   The
    protection appeal was therefore dismissed

 7. Having had regard to its own finding that the Appellant is a victim  of
    trafficking and  that  she  has  sustained  significant  mental  health
    distress as a result, the Tribunal allowed the appeal on  human  rights
    grounds. I am told that the Appellant has now been invited to enrol her
    biometrics and that the process to grant her leave on that  ground  has
    therefore begun.



    The Challenge: Discussion and Findings

 8. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Fitzsimons' pursued no fewer  than  seven
    grounds of appeal. Some are without any arguable merit and  serve  only
    to clutter the pleadings, obscuring Ms Fitzsimons'  otherwise  well-put
    argument: I deal with these first.


 9. Ground (2) is that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have  "adequate
    regard" to the medico-legal evidence. Implicit in that form of words is
    an acknowledgement that the Tribunal  did  in  fact  take  the  medical
    reports into account.  The  Tribunal  accepted  without  criticism  the
    opinion expressed by Dr Bingham that the Appellant had a  scar  typical
    of being smashed over the head with an ashtray or other  heavy  object.
    PTSD is of course not expected in the absence of exposure to  traumatic
    experiences.  The First-tier  Tribunal  gave  weight  to  Dr  Bingham's
    opinion in that regard. What it could not sensibly do  was  to  elevate
    that opinion to confirmation that the traumas, in particular the  scar,
    were caused in the precise manner described by  the  Appellant:  as  Ms
    Fitzsimons agreed before me, no doctor could do that.  Yet that  is  in
    effect what the grounds suggest that the  Tribunal  should  have  done.
    Reference is made to the Istanbul Protocol and the need to consider all
    of the evidence in the round. That is in my  view  precisely  what  the
    Judge did. The backdrop to that assessment was the fact that this is  a
    case  where  was  a  positive  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked: there was prima facie an alternative  explanation  for  why
    she might have PTSD, and a  scar  on  her  head.   There  is  therefore
    absolutely  nothing  unreasonable  or  impermissible  in  the   Judge's
    conclusion that the medical evidence could not establish who had caused
    the Appellant injury.  That was a matter to be evaluated in the  round,
    having regard to all of the available evidence.


10. Ground (3) is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  an  "impermissible
    approach to plausibility".   This ground is totally  misconceived.  The
    short point  made  is  that  the  Judge  was  somehow  unreasonable  in
    rejecting this  account  of  loan-sharking  in  China  when  it  is  an
    objective fact that loan-sharking exists.   Had the Judge rejected this
    account on the grounds that it was utterly implausible that such things
    occur, the ground would be a good one. But this is  expressly  not  the
    approach taken. At its paragraph 30(iii) the  Tribunal  draws  a  clear
    distinction between plausibility, in this jurisdiction a matter  to  be
    evaluated with  reference  to  the  country  background  material,  and
    credibility, a question for the judge taking all relevant matters  into
    account. A plausible account can in the final  analysis  be  rationally
    rejected as not credible, and that is precisely what has happened here.

11. Ground (7) takes issue with the approach to  the  medical  evidence  in
    respect of the potential  risk  of  suicide  should  the  Appellant  be
    forcibly removed to China. As  Ms  Fitzsimons'  accepted  in  her  oral
    submissions this ground was pointless given that the appeal has already
    been allowed on human rights grounds. I might  also  add  that  it  was
    utterly without foundation since Dr Bingham's evidence  fell  far,  far
    short of establishing any such risk.

12. I now turn to  deal  with  those  grounds  which  require  rather  more
    attention.

13. Grounds (1) and (5) are in essence concerned with the same point:  that
    having found that this woman is an extremely vulnerable victim  of  sex
    trafficking the Judge appeared to forget those findings when  assessing
    the quality of the evidence that she  managed  to  give  in  the  early
    stages of this process.  The Judge hones in on the fact that there  was
    a delay in the Appellant telling her story about the loan  sharks,  and
    as I note above, draws a distinction between  this  and  the  delay  in
    disclosing sexual abuse;  further adverse inference is drawn  from  the
    Appellant's failure  to  explain  at  interview  that  her  family  are
    continuing to experience problems in China.  Ms Fitzsimons submits that
    the distinction drawn between the different sources of pain experienced
    by the Appellant is a false one. If the account given by the  Appellant
    is true, this is a woman who has been through  a  prolonged  period  of
    living under immense stress.   She twice lied to  police  officers  who
    encountered her in the  United  Kingdom,  telling  them  that  she  was
    working as a prostitute of her own accord. We now  know  that  to  have
    been a lie, told in fear and confusion.   Having eventually been  freed
    from her captors she was then held in immigration detention. It was  in
    these circumstances that she was interviewed by an immigration  officer
    in respect of her  claim.  Ms  Fitzsimons  highlights  the  Appellant's
    evidence that at that point she  was  extremely  afraid  and  stressed:
    extremely afraid of her traffickers,  and  extremely  afraid  of  being
    returned to China.   The  Poppy  Project  caseworker  who  gave  expert
    evidence, Ms Thulleson, identified  a  third  source  of  fear  for  an
    individual in the position of the Appellant: a significant mistrust  of
    authority.  Ms Fitzsimons submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to evaluate the evidence given in the context of these facts.


14. I agree. The First-tier Tribunal has conducted a sensitive and  careful
    analysis of the evidence given in respect of the trafficking aspect  of
    the claim. The decision repeatedly returns to the parts of that account
    which were "troubling", "delayed" or "incomplete" but with  no  adverse
    inference drawn: the Tribunal properly recognising  that  it  would  in
    effect be very surprising if the Appellant had been able to narrate her
    experiences without delay or confusion. Why the same cannot be said  of
    the events that preceded her arrival  is  unclear.  True  there  is  no
    substantial body of psychology research pointing to  routinely  delayed
    reporting in respect of such matters, but there didn't need to be.  The
    focus, when assessing whether adverse  inference  should  be  drawn  in
    these circumstances, should surely be on  the  state  of  mind  of  the
    claimant.     The  failure  to  take  into  account   the   Appellant's
    circumstances amounted to a  failure  to  take  material  matters  into
    account.

15. Ground (4) is concerned with  a  specific  finding,  and  can  best  be
    described as an error of fact. One of the  key  reasons  given  by  the
    Tribunal in rejecting the Appellant's account as not credible was  that
    she had no need to risk borrowing money from the loans  sharks  because
    she had a shop and  owned  property  which  she  could  have  sold.  Ms
    Fitzsimons submits that here the Tribunal misunderstood  the  position.
    The evidence was that the Appellant's father was told  that  he  had  a
    blockage on his spine. He had become paralysed and had been  told  that
    he faced imminent death unless he had an operation. The  cost  was  RMB
    180,000.  The Appellant earned approximately RMB 3000  per  month.  She
    received RMB 30,000 from an insurance policy, and used all of  her  RMB
    50-60,000 savings. She still faced a shortfall of RMB 100,000 which she
    needed to find urgently  in  order  to  fund  her  father's  lifesaving
    treatment. The property that the Appellant owned was the house that the
    family lived in, and could not be sold without leaving  them  homeless.
    Ms Fitzsimons submitted that had the Tribunal  had  regard  to  all  of
    those facts, set out in detail in the Appellant's witness statement, it
    could not have concluded that she had no need  to  borrow  this  money.
    This ground is made out.


16. The Appellant has established two material  errors  in  the  Tribunal's
    approach to the protection aspect of this claim and for that  reason  I
    am satisfied that the  findings  at  paragraph  30  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision must be set aside.

17. It follows that the  protection  aspect  of  this  claim  needs  to  be
    revisited. The findings on trafficking are unchallenged and have indeed
    set in motion the processes by which  the  Respondent  will  grant  the
    Appellant the appropriate leave.  The Appellant's  representatives  may
    wish to consult with the Respondent on when this is likely  to  happen:
    as Mr Diwnycz indicated it is routine practice for any grant  of  leave
    to be delayed in these circumstances to await the final outcome of  the
    protection  claim.  In  view  of  the  Appellant's  ongoing  PTSD   her
    representatives will of course take care to ensure that she understands
    that consequence of pursuing of this aspect of her appeal,  and  follow
    her instructions accordingly.  Ordinarily I would retain this matter in
    the Upper Tribunal for remaking. I am however conscious that this is  a
    matter that should not be dealt  with  remotely.  The  Appellant  is  a
    vulnerable witness who requires an interpreter to give her evidence. In
    those circumstances the  interests  of  justice  require  that  she  be
    granted a live oral hearing in the ordinary  way.  That  is  likely  to
    happen far quicker in the First-tier Tribunal than if  it  retained.  I
    therefore remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for determination
    of the protection aspect of the appeal only. It should be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Frantzis.




    Anonymity Order

18. The Appellant is victim of trafficking. Having had regard to Rule 14 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decision and Directions


19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for material error of
    law and it is set aside to the extent identified above:


              i) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
                 on human rights grounds is upheld.


             ii) The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
                 appeal on protection grounds is set aside and  this  aspect
                 of the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


20. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                             14th September 2020

