
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/14091/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2017                     |On 20th September 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan, promulgated on 27th February 2017, following a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 1st February 2017.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

 2. The grounds of application  allege  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following five respects.  First, that the  judge  referred  to  hearing
    evidence from the Appellant's cousin, and sister,  when  there  was  no
    evidence from either person before  the  Tribunal.   Second,  that  the
    judge made incomprehensible findings of fact at paragraph  48.   Third,
    that the judge made references to evidence being vague  and/or  evasive
    without it being clear why it was being viewed in  this  way.   Fourth,
    that the judge did not make  any  criticism  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's  partner  and  friend  and  yet  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's account of being gay.  Finally, that the judge's finding of
    the Appellant's credibility was  seriously  damaged  by  the  delay  in
    making his claim was unsustainable.

 3. On 22nd June 2017, permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. On 12th July 2017 a Rule 24 response stated that the  "Respondent  does
    not oppose the Appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal  and
    invites the Tribunal to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a fresh hearing".

 5. On the day of the hearing before me on 3rd August 2017,  the  Appellant
    was not in attendance and  neither  was  any  legal  representative  in
    attendance.  Mr Armstrong, following a discussion  with  the  Tribunal,
    submitted that although there was a Rule 24 response, he was not  bound
    by this and that it was arguable that there was no  arguable  error  of
    law.  He gave the following reasons.

 6. First, whilst it was true that at paragraph 7 of the determination  the
    judge had stated that, "I hear oral evidence from  the  Appellant,  his
    cousin, sister and oral submissions  from  both  legal  representatives
    ..." it was plain that this was simply a slip and  was  a  proofreading
    matter which ought to have subsequently been corrected  by  the  judge,
    because in the body of the determination, it is plain that no reference
    is made to the evidence from the cousin  or  the  sister,  leading  any
    objective reader to conclude that no such evidence was  actually  given
    on the day of the hearing.

 7. Second, whilst it was being suggested that there were  incomprehensible
    findings at paragraph 48, if one looked at that paragraph, it was quite
    clear that the judge's  fundamental  conclusion  here  was  that,  "the
    Appellant's evidence is that he had gay  relationships  with  [AF]  and
    [SA] in the UK, again there is a lack of evidence with regard to  these
    claimed relationships" and the judge had concluded that, "I  find  that
    the Appellant has invented all these relationships and none of them are
    genuine"   (paragraph   48).    There   was,    accordingly,    nothing
    incomprehensible about the findings in paragraph 48.

 8. Third, the suggestion that the references to the evidence  being  vague
    or evasive by the judge was  not  demonstrated  as  such,  was  equally
    untenable.  This is because if one looks  at  paragraph  46  the  judge
    actually draws a distinction between what the  Appellant  said  in  his
    asylum interview and what he said in his oral evidence at the  hearing,
    thus leading the judge to conclude that he did "not  find  this  to  be
    credible or a consistent evidence" (paragraph 46).  In  the  same  way,
    the judge goes on to explain (at paragraph 47)  that  the  relationship
    with Akhtar was also not "credible or consistent" for the reasons  that
    are given and the judge went  on  to  make  clear  findings  that  "the
    Appellant was making up his evidence as he went along" (paragraph  47).



 9. Fourth, the suggestion that the judge had  made  no  criticism  of  the
    evidence of the Appellant's partner and friend  before  dismissing  the
    Appellant's account of being gay was equally  beside  the  point.   The
    judge could reject the evidence of the Appellant, that he was in a  gay
    relationship, without necessarily finding the evidence of  his  partner
    to be equally implausible.

10. Put another way, it would be otherwise, if  the  judge  had  found  the
    partner's evidence to be credible but had then gone on to say that  the
    Appellant's own evidence was lacking in credibility.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are  quite
    simply that, even though the submissions of Mr Armstrong  this  morning
    may well be entirely arguable, the fact that a Rule 24  response  dated
    12th July 2017 had invited the Tribunal to  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  was  one   of   important
    significance.

12. This is because, although Mr Armstrong appears to have not known  this,
    there is a letter dated 2nd August  2017  from  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives, expressly referring to  the  concession  made  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State in the letter of 12th July 2017, in terms
    that they would "request you to remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing as the Respondent  agreed".   Attached  to
    this  letter  of  2nd  August  2017   from   the   Respondent's   legal
    representatives is the Rule 24 response  of  12th  July  2017.   It  is
    because of the concession made on 12th  July  2017,  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor his legal representatives were in attendance today.

13. They had, however, not ignored this hearing  today.   They  had  simply
    written in on 2nd August 2017 to say that they would request  that  the
    matter be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State was now to  withdraw  the  concession  made  in  the
    letter of 12th July 2017, as Mr Armstrong plainly intended to do,  then
    the appropriate course of action  was  to  put  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives on notice, so that they were in a  position  to  attend
    and make legal representations.

14. Given that the withdrawal of the concession only took place on the  day
    of the hearing before me by Mr Armstrong, this is a matter that plainly
    goes to procedural fairness and the right of the Appellant to be  heard
    through his chosen legal representatives.

15. That being so, the only course of action available to this Tribunal  is
    to do as the Appellant's legal representatives state in their letter of
    2nd August 2017, namely, to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal under Practice  Statement  7.2
    to be determined by a judge other than Judge M A Khan.

17. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

