

                                     [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/14080/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 20 July 2017                          |On 3 August 2017          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between
                           Mr Hajarupan KONAMALAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel
      (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Landes on 8 June 2017 against  the  decision  and
           reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence  who  had
           dismissed  the  protection  and  human  rights  appeal  of   the
           Appellant.  The decision and reasons was promulgated on  12  May
           2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka,  born  there  on  30
           January 1980.  He entered the United Kingdom over 15 years  ago,
           on 22 February 2002, without leave and claimed asylum.   In  the
           claim he advanced at that time he stated that he and his brother
           had been forced to assist the LTTE against their will, to  avoid
           compulsory recruitment.  He said that in September  2001,  while
           transporting food for the LTTE, his brother had been  killed  by
           the Sri Lankan army and the Appellant had been detained for  one
           month.  At Thoppur Army camp the Appellant had been  beaten  and
           tortured.  He was left with scarring to his legs  and  headaches
           from inhalation of pepper smoke.  He was afraid of the LTTE  and
           of the Army.  His father paid a people smuggler to  arrange  the
           Appellant's departure and the Appellant  travelled  overland  to
           the United Kingdom.


      3.    The Appellant's asylum claim was refused by  the  Respondent  on
             11 April 2002 and 12 December 2002,  on  credibility  grounds.
           The Appellant's appeal was heard at Birmingham in the First-tier
           Tribunal's predecessor, the IAA, on 7 March 2003.  The Appellant
           was represented by counsel.  A full bundle had  been  filed  and
           served,  which  included  country  background  materials  and  a
           witness statement made by the Appellant dated 28 February  2003,
           i.e., a few days prior to the appeal hearing.   No  Home  Office
           Presenting Officer appeared.  The Appellant  failed  to  attend.
           The judge refused an adjournment and the appeal proceeded by way
           of submissions.


      4.    The appeal was dismissed in a detailed determination promulgated
           on 7 April 2017.  The judge found that the Appellant was  not  a
           reliable witness.  The judge noted that the Appellant  "disavows
           any  sympathy  or  support  for  the  LTTE:  see  [12]  of   the
           determination. At [13] the judge found that  "The  Appellant  is
           contradictory as to what  medical  advice  and/or  treatment  he
           sought or received.  He has  asserted  that  he  has  been  left
           following his torture by the army  with  physical  injuries  and
           psychological trauma but he has produced no  medical  report  to
           substantiate these allegations, although  he  is  aware  of  the
           existence of a medical centre in Birmingham."   The  judge  also
           examined the Appellant's claims at their highest and found  that
           the 2002 ceasefire was holding and that he was safe to return in
           any event.  His appeal rights were  exhausted  as  at  23  April
           2003.


      5.     On  17  February  2010  the  Home  Office's   Case   Resolution
           Directorate  wrote  to  the  Appellant.   On  24  May  2010  his
           solicitors responded, requesting leave to remain on his  behalf.
           On 10 January 2014 that was refused.  On  22  May  2014  further
           representations were made, which were refused on 1 August  2014.
           On 1  December  2014  the  Appellant's  solicitors  applied  for
           judicial review, which application was refused on 30 July 2015.


      6.    On 11 December 2015, the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  assault
           occasioning actual bodily harm.  He was sentenced to  15  months
           imprisonment.  On 29 December 2015 the Appellant was served with
           notice of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
           intention to make a deportation order against him.


      7.    On 7 January 2016 his solicitors made  further  representations.
           This  time  it  was  claimed  that  the  Appellant  would   face
           persecution because he had taken  part  in  in  public  protests
           against the  Sri  Lankan  government  and  had  participated  in
           operations conducted by the LTTE.  He had  been  in  the  United
           Kingdom for 14 years and had no contact with his family who  had
           left Sri Lanka.  The further representations  were  refused,  on
           credibility grounds and with  reference  (as  to  the  claim  of
           public protests in the United Kingdom), to  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  CG
           [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The  Appellant's  crime  excluded  him
           from  humanitarian  protection:  paragraph  339D(iii)   of   the
           Immigration Rules.  It was held that the Appellant had not  made
           a fresh claim: paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
           Appellant's human rights claim  was  certified.   A  deportation
           order was made on 30 March 2016.


      8.    Judicial review proceedings followed.  These were compromised by
           the Respondent, who granted the Appellant an "in country"  right
           of appeal.  His protection claim in its final form following the
           consent order made on 4 October 2016 was refused  in  a  reasons
           for refusal letter dated  7  December  2016,  to  which  further
           reference will be made as  necessary.   That  decision  was  the
           subject of the appeal which came before Judge NMK Lawrence.


      9.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           the judge had arguably erred in his approach to  the  (numerous)
           medical reports, which  he  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for
           giving little or no weight to, as the case may be.  It was  also
           arguable that the judge had failed to have  regard  to  relevant
           evidence, such as the Appellant's claimed diaspora activity  and
           the country expert report.  The  various  other  grounds  raised
           were discouraged.


      10.   Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice in letter form dated 27 June 2017  opposing  the  onwards
           appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      11.   Mr Bandegani for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  earlier
           submitted and the grant of permission to appeal,  including  the
           grounds which had been discouraged.  He submitted that the judge
           should have permitted  the  Appellant  and  his  expert  medical
           witnesses the opportunity to address the concerns  expressed  in
           the determination.   That  had  affected  the  fairness  of  the
           hearing.  The medical evidence had not been  challenged  by  the
           Home Office and there were no alternative medical  reports.   If
           the judge had medical expertise of some kind then he should have
           declared it to the parties.  The reasons which  the  judge  gave
           for giving little weight to Dr Kane's diagnosis were inadequate.
            As a  GP  there  was  the  ability  to  make  a  mental  health
           assessment and the judge was wrong to suggest otherwise.


      12.   The judge had not applied anxious scrutiny to the  evidence  and
           had failed to look  at  the  materials  produced.   The  judge's
           appraisal of the evidence had not been rational.  The judge  had
           failed to  note  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department had not applied her own  policy  as  to  evidence  of
           torture.   No  submissions  as  to   the   Appellant's   adverse
           credibility had been advanced by the Respondent at the  hearing.
           The  expert  country  report  of  Dr  Nadarajah  had  not   been
           considered by  the  judge  when  examining  the  evidence.   The
           current country background material  had  not  been  considered.
           Torture was in regular use in Sri Lanka and the Appellant was at
           risk  on  return.   The  decision  and   reasons   were   wholly
           inadequate.  The onwards appeal should be allowed and the appeal
           reheard in the First-tier Tribunal by another judge.


      13.   Mr Clarke for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.  The
           judge had been fully entitled to reach his  adverse  credibility
           findings.  There was no material error of law and  the  decision
           and reasons should stand.  Mr Clarke submitted that this  was  a
           Devaseelan* [2002] UKIAT 00702 appeal.  Judge Lawrence had  been
           right to take the earlier determination as his  starting  point,
           because there were important and relevant  findings,  especially
           as to the absence of any supporting medical evidence as  to  the
           claimed torture,  despite  the  possibility  of  obtaining  such
           evidence which had existed  when  the  appeal  was  heard.   The
           Appellant had been represented by counsel at  his  first  appeal
           hearing and the findings reached were not unsafe in  any  sense.
           The judge had been entitled to assess the reasons why no medical
           evidence had been provided: see [42] of Devaseelan* (above).  He
           had directed himself correctly.  There  was  nothing  which  had
           warranted a departure from Devaseelan*.


      14.   There was no requirement for the judge to seek the Appellant  or
           the Appellant's experts' responses to his adverse  view  of  the
           evidence they had provided.  No procedural fairness issue arose.
            JL (China) [2013] UKUT 00145  (IAC)  had  been  followed.   The
           judge had evaluated the medical evidence in an entirely rational
           way. The Respondent's response to the medical  reports  had  not
           been in breach of Home Office policy.  It  was  plain  from  the
           various reasons for refusal letters, not least  the  last,  that
           the Respondent rejected the Appellant's medical and  psychiatric
           evidence, and had given considered reasons  for  that  position.
           It  was  far  from  a  case  where  the  medical  evidence   was
           unchallenged.   The medical evidence was some 15 or  more  years
           post the events the Appellant had put forward in support of  his
           claim and the  judge  was  entitled  to  factor  that  into  his
           assessment.  It was  true  as  the  judge  had  noted  that  the
           Appellant's expert Dr Kane had not seen the first determination.
            The judge had repeatedly returned to the  medical  evidence  in
           his assessment of the Appellant's appeal.  The judge  had  given
           sufficient  reasons  for  giving  the  medical  evidence  little
           weight.  The Appellant had lied in that process, for example  to
           Dr Clarke over his conviction.


      15.   The judge had been entitled  to  observe  that  the  Appellant's
           sympathy for the LTTE had changed completely  since  2003.   The
           judge's assessment of the tattoo was open to  him.   It  may  be
           that the judge had not dealt with the Appellant's Facebook claim
           explicitly but any error of law there was  not  material.    Nor
           was it correct that the judge had failed to take into account Dr
           Nadarajah's  country  background  report:  there  were   several
           references showing that it had been part of the consideration of
           the whole of the Appellant's evidence.


      16.   In reply, Mr Bandegani reiterated his submissions.   JL  (China)
           (above) did not involve a Devaseelan* point.  Judge Lawrence had
           been mistaken to use the first  determination  as  his  starting
           point because the  Appellant  had  not  given  evidence.   Judge
           Lawrence had gone on to commit  a  series  of  errors,  such  as
           wrongly giving little or no weight  to  Dr  Nadarajah's  report.
           Similarly the judge had been wrong to dismiss Dr Katona's report
           because the  examination  was  by  telephone.   Who  could  have
           impersonated the Appellant in the detention  centre  at  a  pre-
           arranged conference call?  The judge had  not  engaged  with  Dr
           Obeyo's report.  GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC)  was
           not the last word on country conditions  in  Sri  Lanka  as  the
           judge had apparently believed.  Dr Kane's report  had  not  been
           properly considered.  The judge had erred in relying on KV.




      Discussion - No error of law


      17.   At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that its
           determination was reserved.  The tribunal has concluded that  no
           material error of  law  was  established  and  its  reasons  now
           follow.


      18.    The  context  of  this  appeal  is  significant.   Sri   Lankan
           protection claims which have been made in large numbers tend  to
           be some of the more  difficult  encountered  in  the  First-tier
           Tribunal (IAC) and its predecessors.    The Appellant's original
           claim was dismissed in 2003 on adverse credibility  grounds  and
           (importantly) in the alternative at its  highest  on  the  basis
           that country conditions had improved and that the ceasefire  was
           holding. The Appellant, who has never  provided  a  satisfactory
           explanation of his failure to attend his original appeal hearing
           (see [51] of his 2017 witness statement), failed  to  return  to
           Sri Lanka, either in 2003 or following the defeat  of  the  LTTE
           and the deaths of its leaders on 18 May 2009.  As the  Appellant
           had asserted to the Secretary of State that he feared  the  LTTE
           for whom he and his late brother had been compelled  to  provide
           assistance as labourers, it is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the
           Appellant could have returned to Sri Lanka in late 2009, or made
           a fresh claim then if he now denied or  wished  to  clarify  his
           previous account.  There  was  no  evidence  placed  before  the
           tribunal to show that the Home Office attempted to  enforce  the
           Appellant's return between 2003 and 2010, but it is  plain  that
           the Appellant knew that his appeal had been dismissed  and  that
           he remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully: see, e.g., [61] of
           his 2017 witness statement: "I can blame the Home Office because
           of my status in this country made me like that".


      19.   The present appeal may recall Ward, LJ's opening remarks  in  TM
           [2012] EWCA Civ 9: "This is another of those frustrating appeals
           which characterise - and,  some  may  even  think,  disfigure  -
           certain aspects of the work in the immigration  field.  Here  we
           have one of those whirligig cases where an asylum seeker goes up
           and down on the merry-go-round leaving one  wondering  when  the
           music will ever stop. It is a  typical  case  where  asylum  was
           refused years ago but endless fresh claims clog the  process  of
           removal."  It should be noted that Lord Justice Ward's comments,
           properly understood, were directed at all elements of the asylum
           process, i.e., both appellants and the Respondent.


      20.   No independent evidence has been provided of any attempt by  the
           Appellant to approach the Home Office (e.g., to seek  assistance
           in arranging his repatriation) until he  was  contacted  by  the
           Home Office in  2010.   He  made  no  fresh  claim  of  his  own
           volition.  Since then, as Judge Lawrence  noted,  the  Appellant
           has pursued a new claim which has been  embellished  in  various
           stages, only emerging in its final  form  once  deportation  was
           facing the Appellant.  Contrary to the guidance  in  JL  (China)
           (above), the various experts retained on the Appellant's  behalf
           have been provided with few details  of  his  first  claim,  let
           alone of the full reasons it was dismissed.  As  Judge  Lawrence
           rightly observed, that placed a large  question  mark  over  the
           value of their reports, because they were all  prepared  on  the
           general premise that the Appellant would assist them by  telling
           them the truth to the best of his recollection and  ability.  As
           the familiar words of the UNHCR Handbook remind us  (see,  e.g.,
           [205]), those are the obligations on the  person  who  seeks  to
           invoke  the  Refugee  Convention  and  to   seek   international
           protection.


      21.   Judge Lawrence had before him not only two or more  inconsistent
           and largely irreconcilable  accounts  of  events  said  to  have
           occurred in  Sri  Lanka  in  2002  and  earlier,  but  also  the
           Appellant's refusal to accept the  guilty  verdict  against  him
           following his trial  for  criminal  offences  committed  in  the
           United Kingdom in 2015, as well as the  absence  of  any  appeal
           against that conviction.   The large volume of medical  evidence
           produced all related to evidence that was mainly  stale  by  any
           standard (apart from the sur place material), some 15  years  or
           more old,  a  story  which  replaced  a  claim  which  had  been
           disbelieved, refused and dismissed on appeal.


      22.   That was perhaps  bad  enough,  but  there  was  more.   In  the
           tribunal's view, few of Mr Badegani's  extensive  criticisms  of
           Judge Lawrence's decision and reasons were established, and even
           those that had marginally more force could not  be  said  to  be
           material,  and  were  not  based  on  a  fair  reading  of   the
           determination as a whole.  Mr Bandegani seemed to have forgotten
           what he said to the judge about Devaseelan* [2002] UKIAT  00702,
           as the judge did exactly as Mr Bandegani had proposed: see  [17]
           of the decision.


      23.   It must also be observed that, from the perspective of the Upper
           Tribunal, minimal assistance if  not  outright  obstruction  had
           been provided to the First-tier Tribunal by the Appellant and/or
           his solicitors, notwithstanding the requirements of  rule  2  of
           the 2014 Tribunal  Procedure  Rule,  the  overriding  objective.
           This was the Appellant's second protection claim,  initiated  by
           him, but his attitude was in some ways similar to that of  2003,
           when he failed to attend his appeal hearing for no  good  reason
           (see [18], above).   He  failed  to  attend  his  second  appeal
           hearing until 1.30pm.  Again, no  satisfactory  explanation  was
           provided.  Nor was any satisfactory explanation provided for the
           failure of the Appellant's solicitors to comply with directions:
           the hearing date of 10 April 2017 was notified  to  them  on  16
           January 2017, following the adjournment granted on that date.


      24.   As the judge rightly noted (see [5] onwards  of  his  decision),
           the appeal had been subject to adjournment on 20  January  2017,
           and another application to adjourn had been made 6  days  before
           the hearing fixed for 10  April  2017  but  refused.   When  the
           appeal came on before Judge  Lawrence,  the  Appellant  was  not
           present and his counsel said he had not been  properly  briefed.
           This  was  wholly  unacceptable:   see   Nwaigwe   (adjournment:
           fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) at  [6]:  "tribunals  should  be
           alert to the doctrine of abuse of process".  Experienced  judges
           of the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) are well aware of  the  tactics
           the judge noted when refusing the repeat adjournment application
           made to him.


      25.   The tribunal observes that such applications tend to create  the
           undesirable impression that an appellant  wishes  to  avoid  his
           appeal hearing.  In a protection appeal where it is alleged that
           a citizen of  a  Commonwealth  country  faces  a  real  risk  of
           persecution by the government of that country whose duty  is  to
           safeguard and protect him, it might reasonably be expected  that
           an  appellant  would  be  anxious  to  have  such  a  scandalous
           injustice publicly aired at the first possible opportunity,  and
           would accordingly cooperate fully with the  First-tier  Tribunal
           to have an effective hearing.  That might be  thought  to  apply
           with particular force where, as with the present  Appellant,  it
           had been claimed that he  was  a  committed  political  activist
           engaged in sur place activities.   That cooperation was not,  of
           course, what happened.


      26.   As to the errors of law asserted, the tribunal  agrees  with  Mr
           Clarke's  submissions.   Judge  Lawrence  was  right  to   apply
           Devaseelan* [2002] UKIAT 00702, noting that  Mr  Bandegani  (who
           had appeared before him) agreed that it was the correct starting
           point, subject to whether the adverse credibility  findings  had
           to be revisited  in  the  light  of  the  medical  evidence  now
           advanced.  The judge proceeded to evaluate the medical  evidence
           produced.  The fact that the medical  professionals  were  being
           asked to work  from  old  or  stale  evidence  without  complete
           information must diminish the value of their conclusions, as the
           judge properly found.  Mr Bandegani's complaint that  the  judge
           in  effect  dismissed  Dr  Kane's  report  out  of  hand  was  a
           misreading of the decision.  Judge Lawrence was entitled to find
           that  Dr  Kane  was  not  possessed  of   pertinent   specialist
           qualifications or experience:  see  [20]  of  the  decision  and
           reasons.   The  judge  nevertheless  considered  the  report  in
           detail, and gave sufficient  reasons  for  according  it  little
           weight.


      27.   Contrary to Mr Bandegani's submission, the judge did not pretend
           to have medical knowledge, and merely  drew  an  uncontroversial
           distinction between physical and mental  illness  by  way  of  a
           simple illustration at [26] of the decision.  There was  nothing
           impermissible in that and no error of law.


      28.   The submission that the judge should have afforded the Appellant
           and/or his expert witnesses the opportunity to  respond  to  the
           judge's  critique  of  the  evidence  was  an  extravagant   and
           unfounded one.  The Respondent's reasons for refusal letters had
           already stated in detail why the  Appellant's  medical  evidence
           was not accepted. Home Office policy had been complied with,  as
           the Appellant had  had  every  opportunity  to  produce  medical
           evidence to support his claim that  he  had  been  a  victim  of
           extensive, degrading physical and mental torture.  There was, of
           course, no requirement for the Appellant  to  produce  any  such
           evidence.  The decision to do so tends to  reflect  the  problem
           with the Appellant's inconsistent testimony.  The Appellant  had
           already had years to prepare his second claim  and  his  appeal,
           including his response to the reasons for refusal  letters,  and
           including  any  further  comments  from  his  experts.   He  was
           represented by solicitors and counsel.  The  battle  lines  were
           drawn long before the hearing.  The judge's task was to evaluate
           whole of the evidence presented,  in  the  round,  with  anxious
           scrutiny, which the judge's decision shows was undoubtedly done.




      29.   The submission that the judge failed to engage  with  the  other
           medical reports is unfounded.  Those reports  were  numerous,  a
           virtual barrage.  The judge identified each of  the  authors  of
           the medical reports by name, including Dr Obuaya, and  explained
           why he gave their reports limited weight.   Complaint  was  made
           that the judge acted  irrationally  or  perversely  when  giving
           little weight to Dr Katona's report, but he was correct to  draw
           attention to the fact that Dr Katona did not actually  meet  the
           Appellant at any stage.  It was open to the judge to  find  that
           it was a perfunctory and inadequate process.  The judge did  not
           say that he gave no weight to Dr Clarke's report but rather (see
           [30] of the decision and reasons) but rather no  weight  to  the
           account the Appellant gave Dr Clarke, including the  Appellant's
           denial of his guilt despite his conviction following due process
           of law.


      30.   Detailed guidance was given in JL (China) about the  preparation
           of medical reports for the First-tier Tribunal, as summarised in
           the headnote.  The opening words  are:  "Those  writing  medical
           reports for use in immigration and asylum appeals should  ensure
           where possible that, before forming their opinions,  they  study
           any assessments that have already been made of  the  appellant's
           credibility by the immigration  authorities  and/or  a  tribunal
           judge (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 [30]; BN  (psychiatric
           evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC)  at  [49],
           [53]))."  The headnote also states: "The  more  a  diagnosis  is
           dependent on assuming that the account given  by  the  appellant
           was to be believed, the  less  likely  it  is  that  significant
           weight will be attached to it (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306
           [23])." And "Even where medical  experts  rely  heavily  on  the
           account given by the person concerned, that does not mean  their
           reports lack or  lose  their  status  as  independent  evidence,
           although it may reduce very considerably the weight that can  be
           attached to them.  The tribunal agrees with Mr Clarke  that  the
           judge's approach and findings  reflected  that  guidance.    The
           points made in JL(China) above relate to content and weight, and
           are applicable to all types of appeal.  That JL (China) was  not
           a Devaseelan* appeal is of no consequence.


      31.   Mr Clarke submitted that the judge might  have  dealt  with  the
           Facebook evidence presented by the Appellant,  but  that  was  a
           counsel of perfection. The Appellant's evidence was set  out  at
           [65], a brief paragraph of his long 2017 witness statement,  but
           no print outs were  produced  either  to  the  judge  or  to  Dr
           Nadarajah.  Dr Nadarajah made  no  mention  of  the  Appellant's
           alleged Facebook activities in his report.   Everything  pointed
           away from the Appellant's being a reliable  witness,  not  least
           his refusal to accept his guilt following his  conviction.    It
           was not a material error of law  not  to  have  dealt  with  the
           Facebook claim, if indeed it could be characterised as an  error
           of law at all, as it was just a part of the Appellant's  claimed
           sur place activities which the judge found fell  well  short  of
           placing the Appellant at real risk on return.


      32.   Mr Bandegani's submission that the judge failed to  engage  with
           the expert report of Dr Nadarajah was similarly unfounded.   The
           judge addressed that report in detail, at a logical stage of his
           "in the round" assessment.  The judge accepted that Dr Nadarajah
           was qualified to act as an expert and went on discuss the report
           (see [32] to [36] of the determination).  The judge gave  proper
           reasons for finding that the  report  attracted  little  weight.
           The judge was correct to point  out  that  the  Appellant  could
           remove the LTTE tattoo  that  he  had  received  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and that Dr Nadarajah said that  no  research  on  such
           visible signs of (claimed) LTTE affiliation had been conducted.


      33.   The judge's careful analysis of the  Appellant's  "fresh"  claim
           revealed it to fall well short of  the  standard  of  reasonable
           likelihood.   The  Appellant's  lack  of  credibility  made   it
           unnecessary to embark on  further  examination  of  the  current
           country background  material.   The  Appellant  has  abused  the
           hospitality extended to him by the United Kingdom and engaged in
           crime, yet he denied his guilt.   The  tribunal  considers  that
           none of the criticisms of the judge's decision and  reasons  has
           substance or merit.  The judge dealt  comprehensively  with  the
           "fresh" claim.  The onwards appeal is dismissed.




      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is DISMISSED


      The decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal stand unchanged




      Signed                 Dated 1 August 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


