
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14047/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2017                            |On 30 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MORRIS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [O A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Prosecuting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Okunowo of Toltops Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, brought with permission, by the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department ("the Secretary of State") against the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller promulgated on 15 August 2017  (the
    FTT decision).  By the FTT decision, the judge allowed  the  appeal  of
    [OA] (for convenience, here referred to as "the appellant") against the
    decisions of the Secretary of State dated 28 April to deport him and to
    refuse his human rights claim.  The FTT Judge allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal both under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights  grounds.
    The Secretary of State appeals on grounds that the FTT Judge  erred  in
    his assessment of the issues of social and cultural integration in  the
    United Kingdom and of very significant obstacles  to  integration  into
    the country to which deportation is proposed and further failed to give
    the required weight to the public interest in view of  the  seriousness
    of the appellant's offending.

The Factual Background

 2. The appellant is now age 26 and a national of Nigeria.  He came to this
    country in 1994 when he was 3 years old with his  mother  to  join  his
    father who had previously moved to the United Kingdom.   Until  today's
    hearing it had not been disputed that he had been lawfully resident  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life.  However that is now in  issue
    and we address that shortly.  On 11  January  2013  the  appellant  was
    convicted of an  offence  of  attempted  robbery  and  sentenced  to  a
    suspended sentence of nine months' imprisonment.  On 20 March  2015  he
    was convicted of robbery and sentenced to a term of two years and  nine
    months'  imprisonment.   In  addition  five  months  of  the   previous
    suspended sentence was activated giving a total term of imprisonment of
    three years and two months.  The facts of that offence are referred  to
    in the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Saggerson. The victim  of
    the robbery was a vulnerable woman on her own.  On the other  hand  the
    appellant himself had been subject to bullying  which,  the  sentencing
    judge found went some way to explaining him committing of the  offence.
    As a consequence on 28 April 2016 the deportation order was made.

 3. In making representations  in  response  to  that  proposed  order  the
    appellant raised a claim based on Article 8, but that claim was refused
    and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded.   As  a  consequence  of   that
    certification he had only an out of country  right  of  appeal  against
    that decision.

 4. On 6 May 2016 the appellant then claimed asylum on  the  basis  of  his
    fear of mistreatment due to his  sexuality.   By  a  decision  dated  5
    December 2016 the Secretary of State refused both the protection  claim
    and the human rights  claim.   In  respect  of  the  asylum  claim  the
    Secretary of  State  certified  the  claim  under  Section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and so  the  asylum  claim
    fell to be refused on that account alone.  The Secretary of State  went
    on to explain why, even if it had not been certified, the asylum  claim
    would have been refused.  The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim in relation to his sexuality and therefore  was  not,
    on that account on risk on return.

 5. The Secretary of State went on to refuse the Article  8  claim  because
    the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  and  the
    Secretary of State saw nothing that demanded a grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.  By paragraph 136 of the decision of  5  December  2016  the
    previous certification of the human rights claim was withdrawn  in  the
    light of the  protection  claim.   The  decision  of  5  December  2016
    therefore gave rise to an  in-country  right  of  appeal  against  both
    aspects of the decision.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and that  appeal  was
    allowed by the FTT decision.  The Secretary of State appealed  to  this
    Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 5 September 2017 arguing that the three
    grounds of appeal then advanced involved arguable errors  of  law  that
    might have made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

The Relevant Legislation

 7. Some of the relevant provisions of the legislation are set out  in  the
    FTT  decision.   In  particular  we  refer  to  Section  117C  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which I do  not  read  out
    but which is to be treated as incorporated into this judgment.  Section
    117C(4) sets out something called Exception 1 and Exception  1  applies
    where three conditions are satisfied cumulatively.  First the  claimant
    has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his or her
    life; secondly the claimant is socially and culturally integrated  into
    the United Kingdom; and thirdly there will be significant obstacles  to
    the claimant's integration into the country  to  which  deportation  is
    proposed.  Those provisions are  mirrored  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Paragraph A398 of those Rules provide as follows:

         "These Rules apply where:

          a) a foreign criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention."

    Paragraph 398 itself says:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the United Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention and

          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than four years but at  least
             twelve months;

          c) ... the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or paragraph 399A applies  and,
             if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will  only
             be outweighed by other factors where there are very compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A."

    That means that, under the Immigration Rules, the  Secretary  of  State
    considers in the first place whether the provisions of 399A as mirrored
    in Section 117C(4) apply and if they do apply, then the  decision  will
    be taken on the basis there set out.  But if paragraph  399A  does  not
    apply and thus 117C does not apply, then the Secretary  of  State  must
    consider the matter under the final words of paragraph 398 and must  be
    satisfied that there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above
    the circumstances described in the three conditions which I  have  just
    described.

The FTT Decision

 8. In a detailed judgment the FTT  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds, both under the Rules and under Article 8  outside  the  Rules.
    He addressed the first two  conditions  in  Section  117C(4)  and  also
    paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  paragraph  42  of  the
    decision, finding that the appellant had been lawfully resident in  the
    United Kingdom for most of his life and secondly that  he  is  socially
    and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.  In paragraph 43 the
    FTT  Judge  addressed  the  third  condition,  finding  that   in   the
    circumstances of his case there are very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into life in Nigeria which outweigh the  public
    interest in deportation.   Thus Exception 1 in Section 117C(4)  of  the
    2002 Act applied and the public interest did not require deportation.

 9. In his reasons,  in  paragraph  43  in  relation  to  very  significant
    obstacles, both there and in  paragraph  40,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    referred to the following factors: the  appellant's  physical  problems
    which caused him chronic pain; the fact that he would be likely  to  be
    picked on in a less sympathetic  society  as  a  result,  both  of  his
    physical problems and his low IQ; his immediate family,  all  based  in
    the UK, would not be able to offer much in the way of  support;   there
    was no evidence of family relatives  in  Nigeria;   it  would  be  very
    difficult, if not impossible for his mother to visit him in view of his
    father's medical condition;  and finally the absence of  the  appellant
    would cause his siblings considerable distress.

10. In the grounds of  appeal,  upon  which  permission  was  granted,  the
    Secretary of State puts forward three grounds.  First that in  relation
    to social and cultural integration the FTT Judge failed to  give  clear
    reasons as to why the appellant is socially and cultural integrated  in
    the United Kingdom given his prior  offending  and  further  the  judge
    failed to give proper or adequate  consideration  to  the  judgment  of
    Bossade [2015] UKUT 415 IAC.  Secondly the FTT Judge's reasons on  very
    significant obstacles to integration are unclear. The factors  of  back
    pain, low IQ and his father's condition do not prevent  integration  in
    Nigeria.  Secondly the FTT Judge's findings of  family  connections  in
    Nigeria were confused and unclear, particularly since he had found that
    the appellant's mother had close friends who retained strong links with
    Nigeria and that the appellant's family had not been as candid as  they
    should have been regarding their own  connections  with  Nigeria.   The
    Secretary of State submitted that the FTT Judge failed to make a  clear
    finding on the assistance of family connections available  in  Nigeria.
    Thirdly, it is said that the FTT Judge failed at paragraphs 43  and  44
    to give the required weight to the public interest  and  in  particular
    failed to engage with the seriousness  of  the  offence  that  involved
    violence and the length of that sentence.

11. However at today's hearing, the Secretary of State seeks permission  to
    amend the grounds of appeal.  The ground sought to be introduced is  as
    follows.  "The FTT Judge materially misdirected himself in law in  that
    he failed properly to take into account the  fact  that  the  appellant
    claimed to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  1995  but  was  not
    granted any leave until being granted indefinite leave to remain on  20
    February  2010  and  therefore  had  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully until 2010.  The FTT Judge therefore failed to consider  the
    first condition in Section 117C(4)."

12. The Secretary of State fairly accepts that in the original  grounds  of
    appeal it was conceded that  the  appellant  had  satisfied  the  first
    condition of Section 117C(4) but  contends  that  that  concession  was
    factually inaccurate and cannot stand.   Accordingly  it  is  submitted
    that the FTT decision is vitiated by legal error.

13. In relation to the application to amend, the appellant very fairly,  if
    we may say so, did not seek to adjourn the hearing of this  appeal  and
    accepted that, in fact, the facts now put before us by the Secretary of
    State are the correct facts and that the appellant did not  have  leave
    to remain in the UK until February 2010.  More generally, going  on  to
    the submissions, the appellant submitted that Section 117C(4)(a) should
    be construed as reading that what is relevant is whether  the  claimant
    has been lawfully resident for majority of the  Claimant's  adult  life
    and in this case this tribunal should not take into account the fact of
    unlawful residence during the period when the appellant  was  a  child.
    Secondly the appellant submits effectively that any error  of  law  was
    not material because the FTT Judge would have allowed the appeal anyway
    and could have allowed it under Rule 398(c), namely  the  threshold  of
    "very compelling circumstances".  The appellant  submits  that  if  you
    look at the facts of the case as recorded in the decision and you  take
    into account also the  current  situation  concerning  the  appellant's
    father's medical condition, the FTT Judge could  and  would  have  been
    satisfied, as we could that  this  is  a  case,  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances.

Conclusions

14. We address, first, the new ground of appeal.  As I have  said,  we  are
    satisfied that there should be  permission  to  amend  the  grounds  to
    include this ground.  Whilst this is very late in the day no  prejudice
    has been shown by the  appellant  in  allowing  the  amendment  and  no
    adjournment has been sought.  As  regards  the  substance  of  the  new
    ground of appeal we consider that the Secretary of  State's  contention
    is well-founded.  There is no doubt that the position  in  relation  to
    the first condition under Section 117C(4) in this case, is  subject  to
    considerable confusion, much of which could be said to lie at the  door
    of the Secretary of State.  As a matter of fact however it appears that
    between arriving in about 1994 and 2010 the appellant was not  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom.  The April 2016 decision letter records
    at page 2 that the appellant's father applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain under a seven year child concession and included  the  appellant
    in that application.  On 5 January 2006 the appellant  and  his  family
    were found to be ineligible for leave to remain on that basis and on 28
    April 2008 the appellant's family completed a legacy questionnaire.  At
    page 4 of the decision the following was stated:

         "You have been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  all  of
         your life.  This is because you claim to have  entered  the  UK  in
         1995 age 4 and you were remaining here without leave until you were
         granted ILR on 20 February 2010."

15. Mr Melvyn very fairly accepts that the first  of  those  two  sentences
    contained a typographical error and should read:  "You  have  not  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for all of your life."  It  may
    be that that is where the error became compounded but  Mr  Okunowo  for
    the appellant does not disagree and it is the second sentence of page 4
    of that decision which accurately reflects the factual  position,  that
    the appellant was here without leave from the age of 4  until  February
    2010.

16. As regards the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it is  not
    clear how this issue of lawful residence risk  was  considered.   Under
    paragraph 3 of the FTT decision and the immigration history,  there  is
    no reference, one way or the other, to the question of the  appellant's
    immigration status in the United Kingdom.  In fact the  only  reference
    to this issue is in the FTT Judge's conclusions at paragraph  42  where
    he states "I accept that he has been lawfully resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life".

17. Despite the oddity of the position and  the  procedural  steps  in  the
    case, it does seem to us that, as a matter of fact, the  appellant  has
    not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life.
    We consider that the conclusion to the contrary in paragraph 42 of  the
    FTT decision is one where the judge proceeded on the basis of a factual
    error and that it is the case that the  FTT  Judge  was  provided  with
    inaccurate information on this issue by both parties and certainly  was
    not provided with accurate information.  That, in our judgment, amounts
    to a procedural error on the part of the FTT Judge through no fault  of
    his own and therefore amounts to an error of law.  We should add,  that
    we do not accept the submission that Section 117C(4)(a) (or 399A is  to
    be construed as meaning for  most  of  the  claimant's  adult  life  as
    opposed to most of the claimant's life and it  is  plain  that  such  a
    gloss on the statutory provision cannot arise.  It follows therefore in
    Exception 1 that the appellant's case does not fall  to  be  considered
    either under paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules or  under  Section
    117C(4) but rather fell to be considered  under  the  higher  threshold
    under paragraph 398 of "very compelling  circumstances".   Accordingly,
    the error of law that was made  was  one  which  was  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

18. Whilst we  note  the  submissions,  fairly  put  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant, that there is material in this case which might amount to or
    which the appellant says does amount to very compelling  circumstances,
    in our judgment it is not for us to second  guess  how  the  FTT  Judge
    would have assessed the matter under  Rule  398  as  opposed  to  under
    399A/Section 117C(4).

19. Whilst there is reference to paragraph 398 in general at  paragraph  33
    we construe that reference, particularly the  reference  to  containing
    similar provisions, as effectively, a reference, through 398, to  399A.
    We do not consider that the FTT Judge did consider the higher hurdle of
    very compelling circumstances over and above paragraph 399A in the  FTT
    decision.  For those reasons we  consider  that  the  FTT  decision  is
    vitiated by a material error of law and should be set aside.

20. We add two following observations, first  we do not therefore go on  to
    consider the initial grounds 1 to 3 of the Secretary of State's grounds
    of appeal since they do not  arise  for  consideration.   Secondly,  on
    remission, it may be that the FTT Judge will consider all  the  factors
    to which he referred in his judgment as part of  his  assessment  under
    "very compelling circumstances" under Rule 398 and the  appellant  will
    of course be at liberty to put forward all the facts and matters relied
    upon last time and any further facts in support of a submission.   This
    is a case where there may be very compelling circumstances but that  is
    not a matter for us.  We will therefore remit the case  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for reconsideration on the  basis  of  a  proper  factual
    immigration history.


Summary of Decision:

(1)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller made a material error of law and his
    decision to allow the appeal is set aside.

(2)  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.



No anonymity direction is made.


|                |[pic]                     |
|Signed          |Mr Justice Morris         |
|Dated           |29 January 2018           |


