
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14257/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     UC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Drummond Miller (Glasgow)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                                  ANONYMITY
I  make  an  order  that  the  disclosure  of  any  matter  leading  to  the
identification of the appellant or her children is  prohibited  pursuant  to
r.14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Failure  to
comply with this order may result in contempt proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, where she was born  in  1986.
    She has been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McGrade who, for reasons given in his decision  dated  5
    February 2019, dismissed her appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision refusing to  grant  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  for
    reasons given in a letter dated 16 December 2018.  The appellant claims
    to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  3  August  2018  and  claimed
    asylum seventeen days later.  She was interviewed  substantively  about
    her claim on 30 November 2018.

 2. The judge summarised the appellant's circumstances and her claim in [6]
    of his decision as follows:

         "6.  The Appellant was born in Batticalao, in the  Easter  province
             of Sri Lanka but moved to Karaitvu shortly after she was born.
              She first met her husband, [VV] in August  2006.   There  are
             three  children  of  the  marriage  namely  [with  appropriate
             anonymity being applied] S C  (born  ...2007),  S  C  M  (born
             ...2013) and M C (born... 2017].   Following  their  marriage,
             the Appellant's husband advised her that he had been a  member
             of the LTTE between 1995 and 2000.  From 2010 onwards, the Sri
             Lankan police repeatedly visited  her  home  looking  for  her
             husband.  To avoid arrest, her husband began to live elsewhere
             and only returned home on an occasional  basis.   Her  husband
             was eventually arrested by the Sri Lankan police  towards  the
             end of 2017.  However, he was  released  the  same  day.   The
             Appellant  continued  to  be  contacted  by  the  Sri   Lankan
             authorities regarding the whereabouts  of  her  husband.   She
             considered it was no longer safe to remain in Sri Lanka.   She
             therefore left Sri Lanka along with her children on  2  August
             2018.  They left Sri Lanka on their  own  passports  but  were
             assisted by agents.  They flew to London and then travelled to
             Glasgow.  Following their arrival in  Glasgow,  the  Appellant
             claimed asylum.  She has since been advised that her father-in-
             law was detained and ill-treated by the authorities.  He  died
             shortly after his release.  She  fears  ill-treatment  by  the
             authorities if she and her family are returned to  Sri  Lanka,
             because of her husband's past involvement with the LTTE."

 3.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  confined   his
    consideration  to  the  asylum  claim,  an  approach  endorsed  by  the
    appellant's representative.

 4. After setting out the appellant's evidence and expressing a  conclusion
    on its reliability and bearing on the claim,  the  judge  concluded  at
    [25] as follows:

         "25. Given the discrepancies and the issues of credibility  that  I
             have identified above, I  completely  reject  the  Appellant's
             account of having been repeatedly approached by the Sri Lankan
             authorities over a period of around eight years  between  2010
             and 2018, as they were interested  in  her  husband.   I  also
             reject her account that her husband was  detained  briefly  in
             2017 and that her father-in-law was detained  and  ill-treated
             for a period of one week after she left Sri  Lanka,  and  died
             shortly  thereafter.   Finally,  I  reject   the   information
             contained in the letter that purports to have  been  forwarded
             by the Appellant's mother that the Sri  Lankan  police  remain
             interested in  the  Appellant.   I  consider  the  Appellant's
             account is so unsatisfactory that I reject even to  the  lower
             standard of proof her claim that her husband was  involved  in
             the LTTE between 1995 and 2000."

 5. The grounds of challenge, in essence, argue that the  judge  failed  to
    consider  the  country  evidence  in  reaching   his   conclusions   on
    credibility.  In particular:

    (a)  The judge failed to consider page 147  of  the  appellant's  first
         inventory of  productions  which  refers  to  those  at  particular
         ongoing risk of torture, including Tamils with a real or  perceived
         association with the LTTE in his conclusion at [19]:

             "19. It is therefore extremely  unclear  as  to  why  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities would continue to have any interest  in
                  the  appellant's  husband  as  late  as  2017,  when   his
                  involvement with the LTTE ended in 2000."

    (b)  By concluding at [23], "It is therefore unclear why she is of  any
         interest to the authorities", it is argued with reference  to  page
         20 of the first inventory of productions, the judge  did  not  take
         into account, "In 2012 the UNHCR identified a range of people  with
         real or perceived links to the LTTE ...  Persons with family  links
         or those who are dependent  on  or  otherwise  closely  related  to
         persons within the above profiles".

    (c)  There was error relating to the judge's conclusion at  [25]  cited
         above.  It is argued that the judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to
         consider the evidence at page 42 of the first inventory "... former
         LTTE fighters and their social circles face  special  scrutiny  and
         are repeatedly questioned by authorities ...".

 6. In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Chohan observed at
    [3]:

         "3.  In respect of the appellant's credibility, the judge has  made
             adverse findings, which were open to the judge  on  the  facts
             and evidence available.  However, there is nothing to indicate
             in  the  decision   that   the   judge   considered   relevant
             jurisprudence and  background  evidence.   That  is  important
             particularly in relation  to  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka
             irrespective of the adverse credibility findings.  Indeed,  it
             does seem that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  issue  of
             return."

 1. After setting out the context  for  the  case  and  a  summary  of  the
    submissions, from [14] to [26] the judge set out  the  aspects  of  the
    appellant's evidence which gave him concerns about her credibility.   I
    quote in particular [15] to [23].

         "15. There are a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
             account.  In her statement provided along with the preliminary
             information questionnaire, the  Appellant  described  how  her
             husband had to leave the family  home  from  around  2011,  in
             order to avoid the attention of the Sri  Lankan  police.   She
             set out the position as follows:-

                  "So from 2011 or so, my husband was not living permanently
                  with the children and me.  From 2011  he  would  come  and
                  visit has once or twice a week." (B35, para 13)

         16.  In her asylum interview,  the  Appellant  indicated  that  her
             husband worked in a garment factory in Colombo.  She indicated
             in her oral evidence that he was working in a garment  factory
             in Colombo between 2007 and  2017.   She  also  accepted  that
             because of the distance between  her  home  and  Colombo,  her
             husband was only able to  come  home  once  per  month.   This
             directly contradicts her claim that the husband was not living
             with her permanently from 2011 onwards because  he  was  being
             sought by the Sri Lankan authorities and that he  would  visit
             only once or twice per week.

         17.  In her oral evidence, the  Appellant  accepted  that  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities were aware that her  husband  worked  in  a
             garment factory in Colombo from 2011.  Despite  this,  on  the
             Appellant's  account,  they  repeatedly  came  to   her   home
             enquiring after her husband, when both the Appellant  and  the
             Sri Lankan authorities knew that he was working in  a  garment
             factory in Colombo  and  presumably  could  have  easily  made
             arrangements to find and detain him there.

         18.  On the Appellant's account, the Sri Lankan authorities visited
             her home for around seven years  in  an  effort  to  find  and
             detain her husband.  She indicates that  by  2017,  they  were
             coming to her home up to 3 times each month  (B36,  para  15).
             Having finally caught up with  him,  the  Appellant  indicates
             that he was released the same day.  She is unable to give  any
             explanation as to why he was released so quickly.   Given  the
             Sri Lankan authorities had  spent  seven  years  visiting  the
             Appellant's home in an effort  to  find  her  husband,  it  is
             extremely surprising that they should choose to let him go  so
             quickly.  I also consider it damages the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's account that she was unable to  provide  even  the
             month in 2007, when her husband was arrested.

         19.  On the Appellant's account, her husband was  involved  in  the
             LTTE as a fighter between 1995 and 2000.  He left Sri Lanka in
             2000 and worked in Qatar for a period of five years.   Shortly
             after his return to Sri Lanka, he married  the  Appellant  and
             operated a school bus service  before  moving  to  work  in  a
             garment factory in Colombo.  It is therefore extremely unclear
             as to why the Sri Lankan authorities would  continue  to  have
             any interest in the Appellant's husband as late as 2017,  when
             his involvement with the LTTE had ended in 2000.

         20.  On the Appellant's account she and her family left  Sri  Lanka
             on their own passports.  She claims that she was able to do so
             as  the  passports  used  contained  her  family  name,  which
             differed from that of her husband.  Given the Appellant claims
             the Sri Lankan authorities visited her home for  a  period  of
             seven years, it seems surprising that they had  no  record  of
             the Appellant's own surname.  This is particularly  so,  given
             the sophistication of the security checks operated by the  Sri
             Lanka authorities for passengers departing  from  airports  in
             Sir Lanka (cf p116-117 Respondent's bundle).

         21.  It is the Appellant's position that, following  her  departure
             from Sri Lanka, her father-in-law  was  arrested  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities and detained for one week.   She  describes
             how he was attacked during his period of detention and that he
             died within one week.  I  have  two  concerns  regarding  this
             aspect  of  the  Appellant's  account.   Firstly,   I   cannot
             understand why the Sri Lankan authorities would  have  thought
             it necessary to detain the  Appellant's  father-in-law  for  a
             period of one week and subject him  to  serious  ill-treatment
             when they had chosen to release his son, who appears  to  have
             been the object of their enquiries, having  detained  him  for
             less than one day.

         22.  Secondly, the Appellant has given no indication  of  when  her
             father-in-law was detained or died, other than stating that it
             happened after she left Sri Lanka, despite being  specifically
             asked for a date in her oral evidence.  Given the significance
             of these events, it is very surprising that the Appellant  was
             unable to recall  when  these  very  significant  events  took
             place.

         23.  A letter and translation were  produced  on  the  day  of  the
             appeal.  I was advised  this  letter  had  been  sent  to  the
             Appellant by her mother.  The letter is very  general  in  its
             terms and indicates that the  police  are  searching  for  the
             Appellant's husband and  have  indicated  to  the  Appellant's
             mother that they wish the Appellant to surrender to the police
             authorities.  Given the Appellant was approached  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities regularly over a  period  of  seven  years,
             they are presumably aware that she has had no involvement with
             the LTTE.  It is therefore unclear why she is of any  interest
             to the authorities.  What I consider is also  of  significance
             is the information that is omitted from the  letter.   On  the
             Appellant's account her mother refuses to speak with her,  but
             speaks with her children.  She indicated that her  mother  had
             told her children of the circumstances of her  father-in-law's
             detention, ill-treatment and subsequent death.  Despite  this,
             the letter makes no reference to his detention,  ill-treatment
             or subsequent death.  Given the significance  of  this  event,
             this is extremely surprising."

 2. The judge's conclusions were expressed at [25] and [26]:

         "25. Given the discrepancies and the issues of credibility  that  I
             have identified above, I  completely  reject  the  Appellant's
             account of having been repeatedly approached by the Sri Lankan
             authorities over a period of around eight years  between  2010
             and 2018, as they were interested  in  her  husband.   I  also
             reject her account that her husband was  detained  briefly  in
             2017 and that her father-in-law was detained  and  ill-treated
             for a period of one week after she left Sri  Lanka,  and  died
             shortly  thereafter.   Finally,  I  reject   the   information
             contained in the letter that purports to have  been  forwarded
             by the Appellant's mother that the Sri  Lankan  police  remain
             interested in  the  Appellant.   I  consider  the  Appellant's
             account is so unsatisfactory that I reject even to  the  lower
             standard of proof her claim that her husband was  involved  in
             the LTTE between 1995 and 2000.

         26.  The Appellant's solicitor accepted that the article  2  and  3
             claims stood or fell with the asylum claim.  I  have  rejected
             in its entirety the Appellant's account of the events that she
             claims caused her to flee Sri Lanka.  I therefore  reject  her
             claims on the basis of articles  2  and  3.   No  other  human
             rights arguments were advanced and I do not consider any other
             human rights issues arise in this appeal."

 3. Unprompted, Mr Winter acknowledged that the credibility  findings  were
    not  challenged  but  qualified  this  by  adding   that   were   error
    established, another judge may approach the evidence  differently.   He
    accepted that the first passage in the decision that is  challenged  in
    the grounds is [19].  It  is  argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider  the  background  evidence  that  was   submitted.    Specific
    reference is made to a report  by  Asylum  Research  Consultancy  dated
    March 2016 which is described as a  Sri  Lanka  COI  Query  Response  -
    Update.  At page 147 reference is made to a UK NGO Freedom From Torture
    Report dated August 2015 covering torture from May  2019  to  September
    2013.  A key finding included:

         "The Sri Lanka authorities take a strong interest in the activities
         of the Tamil Diaspora in the UK and many  returning  to  Sri  Lanka
         with a real or perceived past connection to the LTTE,  at  whatever
         level and whether  directly  and/or  through  a  family  member  or
         acquaintance, have  been  tortured  and  interrogated  about  their
         activities and contacts in the UK."

 4. Mr Winter also acknowledged that there was no challenge to the  judge's
    findings at [20] and [21].  I asked him whether there was evidence that
    family members were detained when there was adverse interest in another
    member and he drew my attention to an Amnesty  Report  dated  September
    2014 that was before the judge, in particular an extract at page 84:

         "The Sri Lankan intelligence services have continued to  hunt  down
         people who fail to  admit  their  association  with  the  LTTE  and
         according  to  former  detainees  who  have   spoken   to   Amnesty
         International the treatment meted out  against  them  by  detaining
         authorities is very harsh.  Systematic abuse including torture  and
         sexual violence of former LTTE members who fail to surrender to the
         authorities or people suspected of unacknowledged  LTTE  links  and
         abuse by their families by members of the security forces continues
         to be reported to Amnesty International by victims."

 5. Mr Winters continued his submissions with  confirmation  there  was  no
    challenge to the reasoning in [22] but as to [23],  he  relied  on  the
    second ground which argues the judge had failed  to  properly  consider
    the background evidence with reference to a report by INFORM for  2017,
    in particular the reference at 3.48:

         "In 2012, UNHCR identified a range of people with real or perceived
         links to the LTTE:

         ...

         Persons with family links or who  are  dependent  on  or  otherwise
         closely associated to persons with the above profiles."

         ..."

 6. The third ground argues the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  consider
    evidence from the Asylum Research Consultancy Report I have referred to
    above, in particular, the extract:

         "Former  LTTE  fighters  and  their  social  circles  face  special
         scrutiny and are repeatedly questioned by authorities,  infiltrated
         by intelligence  personnel,  and  encouraged  to  inform  on  their
         associates."

 7. Mr Winter acknowledged the guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  He contended however that the appellant  was  not  an  "airport
    case" in the sense of what would happen to her on arrival  but  instead
    whether she would be at risk in her home area.

 8. By way of response, Mr Govan submitted that Mr  Winter  had  sought  to
    argue matters beyond the grounds.  He  contended  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account  the  plausibility  point  regarding  the
    lapse of time since the appellant's husband's  claimed  involvement  in
    the LTTE and the continuing interest it is said the authorities had  in
    him.  He challenged particularly that the  second  ground  ignored  the
    reasoning given by the judge for his credibility findings.  Nowhere had
    the judge said that the events could not have happened  but  that  they
    had not happened to this appellant  or  her  husband.   Mr  Winter  had
    nothing to add by way of response except to acknowledge  that  although
    the grounds tail off with a reference to a  failure  by  the  judge  to
    assess risk on return, this would stand and fall with the assessment of
    the appellant's credibility.

 9. In my judgment, the judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  questioning  the
    credibility of the appellant's account by reference to an  acknowledged
    serious inconsistency.  Otherwise the  adverse  findings  were  largely
    based on plausibility concerns.  At the beginning of his decision,  the
    judge set out  the  evidence  for  the  appellant  which  included  two
    inventories of productions and a letter and translation.  There was  no
    reason to believe that the judge did not take these into  account.   It
    is surprising however that the judge made no specific reference  to  GJ
    and Others the headnote of which was produced at the hearing.  The case
    is referred to in the refusal letter found in the  respondent's  bundle
    to which the judge made reference as to  the  interview  (at  [15]  and
    [18]) and as to an article from Refworld (at [20]).

10. Whilst a judge does not need to refer to every piece of evidence before
    him, specific reference to country  information  and  relevant  country
    guidance cases is desirable if there is an  adverse  finding  based  on
    external implausibility.  The  challenge  in  this  appeal  is  to  the
    sustainability  of  findings  in  the  light  of  particular   evidence
    identified in the grounds.  Whilst I am not necessarily persuaded  that
    the judge failed to have proper regard to the country information as  a
    whole, I have nevertheless considered this case on the basis  that  the
    specific passages relied on in the grounds were not taken into  account
    and asked the question whether on any reasonable  view  had  the  judge
    done so, whether it would have made any difference.

11. The guidance given in GJ and others makes it clear  what  is  currently
    driving the Sri Lankan authorities' approach.  In  particular  at  [8],
    the Tribunal explained:

         "8.  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the Diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or after the Sri Lankan government."

12. As will be seen from the decision at [19]  the  judge  raises  a  point
    which I consider fundamental.  Why would  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    continue to have any interest in the appellant's  husband  as  late  as
    2017?  There was no  evidence  before  the  judge  of  the  appellant's
    husband undertaking any activities that could come within the  category
    of those at risk or of interest identified by the Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others.  The country information to which I was directed by  Mr  Winter
    and recorded in the grounds needs to be considered in  the  context  of
    the comprehensive assessment of evidence undertaken by the Tribunal  in
    GJ and Others.  This includes the ongoing risk reported by ARC at p 147
    of the bundle from the Freedom from Torture  report  issued  in  August
    2015 that covered torture between 2009 and 2013  and  thus  within  the
    time frame considered in GJ and others.  Likewise, the extract from the
    UNHCR report in ground 2 predates GJ  and  Others.   The  final  ground
    refers again to the ARC report which  cites  a  Minority  Rights  Group
    report for 2015 refers to scrutiny faced by former  LTTE  fighters  and
    their social circles, their repeated questioning, infiltration and  the
    encouragement on them to report  on  others.   Taking  account  of  the
    appellant's evidence of the events in her husband's  life  recorded  at
    [19] and the guidance given in GJ and Others, I am not  persuaded  that
    this  general  evidence  from  MRG  is  sufficient  to  undermine   the
    reliability of  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  unclear  why  the
    authorities would continue to be interested in the appellant  until  as
    recently  as  2017.   The  country  guidance  decision  represents   an
    authoritative statement on the situation in 2013  and  in  my  judgment
    none of the evidence relied on in the grounds is sufficient to  justify
    a departure from the tribunal's findings.

13. The judge is not required to state how he or she has factored in  every
    piece of evidence relied.  Instead it is for the judge  to  explain  in
    clear terms  what  evidence  was  taken  into  account  in  reaching  a
    conclusion and the reasons for that conclusion.  To that  extent  I  am
    satisfied that Judge McGrade erred but I do not consider  it  material.
    Had the judge specifically referred to the country information referred
    to in the grounds and the guidance given in GJ and  Others,  I  do  not
    consider it could have  made  any  difference  to  the  safety  of  his
    findings.  Despite this error I do not consider the  decision  requires
    to be set aside and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.



Signed                                  Date 14 June 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

