
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA140412016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2017                                |On 30 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                     B H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant, B H, in  respect  of  the  Decision
    and Reasons by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cockrill  ("FTT")  which  was
    promulgated on 30 January 2017 in which he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal, having found that he internal flight was available  to  him  to
    the IKR.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  on
    renewal, who simply stated that permission was granted finding that all
    three grounds were arguable.

3.   In essence the FTT found that the appellant's claim to be  in  fear  of
    ISIS on the grounds of political opinion to be made  out.   He  claimed
    that  he  would  face  indiscriminate  violence  in   his   home   area
    Kapran/Gwer, a contested area [42] and  in  Erbil  part  of  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region (IKR).  The FTT accepted that he could not  be  returned
    to Baghdad [44]. The FTT concluded that the appellant could  return  to
    the IKR [45 &46].

4.   The grounds of appeal contend that the FTT  failed  to  properly  apply
    the country guidance case of AA(Article15(c))(Rev 2 ) [2015]  UKUT  544
    (IAC) at paragraph 20.  The FTT failed to consider  the  likelihood  of
    securing employment in light of his claim that he had not CSID/identity
    documents.

5.    It was further contended that the  FTT  failed  to  attach  sufficient
    weight to materially relevant factors including the  appellant's  young
    age, lack of work experience or of living alone,  the  difficulties  he
    would have obtaining identity documents and as an internally  displaced
    person. The FTT placed excessive weight on the fact that the  appellant
    had distant relatives in the IKR.

Discussion and decision

6.    This  morning  I  have  read  Mr  Fripp's  "Note  on  law"  and  heard
    submissions from both representatives which are set out in  the  record
    of proceedings. I have  additionally  taken  into  account  a  Rule  24
    response from the respondent that  specifically  raised  the  voluntary
    return scheme and preconditions to return to the IKR. Whilst  accepting
    Mr Fripp's emphasis that the test for internal relocation is  "  unduly
    harsh " and for that test not to be agglomerated with the  risks  under
    Articles 2 and 3, I  am  nevertheless  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did properly consider all the relevant issues and  factors  in
    considering the availability of internal relocation  having  regard  to
    the relevant guidance in AA that was drawn to the attention of the  FTT
    at the hearing [31-33]. The FTT considered location in a  non-contested
    area, age, the fact that the appellant had  not  previously  worked  in
    that area and the fact that the appellant is a Kurd  from  Erbil.   The
    FTT accepted that it would be "deeply uncomfortable" for him in IRK. It
    also found  that  he  has  family  members  in  Sulayminiyah.  The  FTT
    considered specifically that the appellant had several  family  members
    and accepted that he did not have close dealings with them but found it
    was reasonable that he could return there and gain  some  support  from
    those aunts and uncles living  in  a  safe  non  contested  area.   The
    appellant stated that he had two paternal uncles and one paternal  aunt
    and that he had met one of his uncles a few years ago at his home.   He
    did not know where they lived. The FTT made no  positive  finding  that
    the appellant's immediate family had remained in their  home  area  and
    accepted that it could be reasonably assumed that they had  fled.   The
    FTT found that  it  was  not  unduly  harsh  and  reasonable  in  those
    circumstances for the appellant to return to IKR where  he  could  gain
    support from his relatives. I find nothing irrational nor  perverse  in
    those findings.  In addition Mr Wilding submitted  that  he  can  avail
    himself of the Assisted Voluntary Return scheme, although  that  matter
    was not specifically considered by the FTT, it is material as this will
    provide him with support for finance and  accommodation.  I  have  also
    taken into account the respondent's Rule 24  response  at  paragraph  3
    which states that the appellant will only be returned once his identity
    is pre-cleared by the Kurdish authorities.  The IKR authorities do  not
    require an expired or current passport or laissez passer.


7.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not apply a  more
    stringent  standard  than  that  required  for   internal   relocation.
    Accordingly I have decided that none of the grounds have been made out.

Notice of Decision

8.    Accordingly the Decision  and  Reasons  shall  stand  and  I  find  no
material error of law.
     The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25.5.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 25.5.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

