
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14028/2016


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2018                   |On 6th April 2018                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     NC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bellara Counsel instructed by Ilford Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on the 17th July  2017  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claim on the grounds of
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Taking all of the circumstances into account I  consider  it
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb on 22nd January 2018. Thus the case appeared before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         2  The Grounds argue that the Judge failed to assess  properly  the
         evidence of a witness and overlooked key background evidence  (COIS
         Report) concerning the lack of protection single for women  and  in
         domestic violence cases.

         3  The whole of the appellant's claim had to be seen in  the  light
         of the up-to-date objective evidence and it is  arguable  that  the
         Judge has not done so. I am also concerned that the judge -  whilst
         accepting the appellant is a truthful witness  -  nevertheless  did
         not accept a core part of her claim  which  was  supported  by  the
         witness and in  respect  of  which  the  Judge  did  not  make  any
         findings. For these reasons the Judge arguably  erred  in  law  and
         permission to appeal is granted on all grounds.

    Facts

 5. To a significant degree the judge found the evidence of  the  appellant
    credible. The appellant is a national  of  Algeria,  who  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as a student. The appellant's father  was  deceased  and
    she in the main lived  with  her  mother,  sister  and  brother-in-law,
    although for a period of time after having been in the UK she  returned
    to Algeria and lived with an aunt.

 6. The appellant had first arrived in the UK in November 2011. At  various
    times she had returned to Algeria, including 2012 and 2013, to apply to
    extend her visa. The appellant left the United Kingdom  in  14th  March
    2013 returning  to  Algeria  but  she  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom
    allegedly on 24th March 2014, although it is unclear on what basis  she
    entered, as at that stage her student visa had ceased.

 7. There is reference in the decision to the fact that the  appellant  had
    lived for a year in Algiers in 2014 without any difficulty, living with
    her aunt. The appellant's brother lived over 200 km away from where the
    aunt lived.

 8. Having entered in March  2014  it  was  only  in  June  2016  that  the
    appellant claimed asylum. The appellant was not lawfully in the UK.  It
    was after June 2016 that there were asylum  screening  and  substantive
    interview.

 9. The appellant had alleged that her brother had taken exception  to  the
    fact that she had been educated in the United Kingdom and that she  had
    to a significant extent  become  independent.  The  appellant  is  well
    educated having a Masters degree in English and coming allegedly from a
    wealthy family. She had  been  able  to  support  herself  through  her
    education.

10. The appellant feared that if she were returned to Algeria she would  be
    subjected to domestic violence by her brother and would be at  risk  of
    being forced into a marriage. In support of her claim she had  produced
    a number of letters from her brother and mother. Whilst the brother  in
    the letters was indicating he wanted the appellant  to  marry  a  groom
    chosen by him, other members of the family  including  the  appellant's
    mother, sister and brother-in-law and uncle and aunts  were  supporting
    the appellant.

11. Whilst the judge accepted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  that  her
    brother took exception to her  education  and  independence,  what  the
    judge did not accept was that as a result of that the  appellant  would
    be at risk of an honour  killing  or  would  be  at  risk  of  domestic
    violence if returned to Algeria. The judge found that  as  the  brother
    was not living at the same address as the appellant and the appellant's
    mother and family but was living separately with his own family and  as
    the appellant was supported by her mother,  sister  and  brother-in-law
    and her aunt and family, the appellant would not be at risk if returned
    to Algeria. In coming  to  that  conclusion  the  judge  took  specific
    account of the fact that the appellant had for periods of time returned
    to Algeria and had managed to live for a period of over 12 months  with
    an aunt without any apparent problem.

12. In part to support her  account  the  appellant  had  relied  upon  the
    evidence of Mr  Poor.  As  part  of  his  submissions  the  appellant's
    representative sought to  argue  that  the  evidence  of  Mr  Poor  was
    corroborative of the appellant's account and corroborative of the  fact
    that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Algeria.  The
    difficulty with that is that it cannot be said that  Mr  Poor  had  any
    independent knowledge  of  the  appellant's  family,  specifically  the
    appellant's brother, or how they, or specifically he, would  treat  the
    appellant on return to Algeria. Mr Poor had come to the United  Kingdom
    over 27 years ago and had no  personal  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
    family's circumstances  or  of  the  appellant's  brother.  It  is  not
    suggested that he had any direct contact with the  appellant's  brother
    or with any of the appellant's family. It is clear  from  paragraphs  5
    and 6 of Mr Poor's statement that he was relying upon what he had  been
    told by the appellant and not upon independent knowledge of the  family
    or the circumstances in Algeria. As such his evidence was not  from  an
    independent source  and  was  merely  repeating  what  the  appellant's
    account was.

13. Whilst the appellant's representative maintained the point he  accepted
    to an extent it was subsidiary to the  main  point  within  the  appeal
    which related to whether the judge had taken account of the  background
    materials submitted, including documents  referred  to  as  R2  and  R3
    submitted by the respondent. The documents are specifically referred to
    within paragraph 30 of the decision.

14. R2 is a  document  headed  Country  Information  and  Guidance-Algeria:
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. It is summarised  in  paragraph
    30 of the decision as referring to  "the  family  code  describing  her
    marriages considered as marking the  passage  to  adulthood,  that  the
    consent of a male guardian is required, but that  consent  is  required
    from the woman so that forced marriages not permitted".

15. During the course of argument no reference was  made  to  any  specific
    paragraph from R2, or indeed R3, which did not accord with the  summary
    set out in the decision. The major part of the document deals with  the
    claims made by lesbian, gay bisexual and  transgender  individuals.  It
    seeks to deal  with  the  risk  that  may  exist  in  respect  of  LGBT
    individuals, the social pressures that will be  brought  to  bear  upon
    them,  whether  an  individual  would  or  would  have  to  resort   to
    concealment  of  their  sexuality  because  they  fear  the   risk   of
    persecution. In the main the document appears  to  be  dealing  with  a
    person's personal sexual identity rather than violence against siblings
    and forced marriages. Both documents were produced by the respondent.

16. That COIS report and the documents referred to,  to  a  lesser  degree,
    also dealt with the difficulties faced by single women in  Algeria  and
    the lack of protection in domestic violence cases.

17. The document does appear to make reference to the fact that women to an
    extent are perceived as fulfilling a specific role and  that  they  may
    suffer  legal  and  societal  discrimination  and  as  such  that  they
    constitute a particular social group but the evidence was not such that
    they were at risk of persecution. The appellant  in  evidence  was  not
    seeking to suggest that she was a member of the LBGT or that her  claim
    was related to her sexual identity but did indicate that she wanted  to
    be independent and marry, if she was to be married, to a person of  her
    own choosing.

18. As referred to in paragraph 30 of the decision R3 was to  an  extent  a
    response to a request [by COIS] for information on sexual and  domestic
    violence. The document dealt with the treatment of single/ lone  women.
    There were limitations upon freedom of  movement  especially  in  rural
    areas and  some  degree  of  discrimination  in  employment,  including
    precondition for freedom of movement  and  employment  in  rural  areas
    being that a woman should veil. However there were also  references  to
    women being  members  of  parliament  and  working  in  a  professional
    capacity.

19. At paragraph 3.1.1 there was reference to action by the  government  to
    raise public awareness of the rights of women  and  to  then  encourage
    them to report domestic violence. The report identifies that the police
    have a reluctance to become involved  in  what  they  consider  private
    family matters. Much of the domestic violence appears however to be  by
    a partner.

20. The summary by the judge seems to encapsulate the  main  points  within
    the report. Accordingly the judge clearly had in mind what  the  report
    said when coming to his conclusions.

21. The judge has given valid reasons for finding that  taking  account  of
    all the circumstances, especially  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    receiving support from members of her family including male members  of
    the family that the appellant would not be at risk of domestic violence
    from her brother if she were returned to Algeria. The judge  has  given
    valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that he has. THe judge  has
    cleared considered the background reports and given valid  reasons  for
    his approach to the facts of the case.

22. The judge clearly did consider the reports  highlighted.  As  indicated
    the evidence of the witness was of limited value. For the  reasons  set
    out the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions on the  facts  as
    presented.

23. In the light of the matters set out the judge has not made  a  material
    error of law.

    Notice of Decision

24. I dismiss the appeal.

25. I make an anonymity direction



Signed

Date 29th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                                   Date 29th March
2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





