
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14119/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                  RS (IRAQ)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Freedom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge O'Brien sitting at Priory Courts,  Birmingham,  on  21  February
    2019) dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his protection claim
    in which he maintained that he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    on return to Iraq on account of his  homosexual  orientation.   In  his
    decision promulgated on 27 February 2019, Judge O'Brien found that  the
    appellant was not credible in his account of being gay.  Alternatively,
    he was not persuaded that the appellant would live openly as a gay  man
    in Iraq, or that he would keep his sexuality secret because of  a  fear
    of persecution.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal.  On 9 May  2019  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Pickup  granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "It is arguable that in going behind a concession of the respondent
         that failing to mention his sexuality in  the  screening  interview
         was reasonable, the decision was procedurally unfair.  It may  also
         be that the Judge failed to give adequate account of the fact  that
         LGBT applicants may be inhibited in disclosing sexual  orientation.
         Similarly, it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  erroneously  required
         corroboration of the claimed sexuality."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity, whose date  of
    birth is 17 February 1993.  He is recorded as having arrived in the  UK
    on 19 November 2015 by clandestine means, and as having claimed  asylum
    on the same day.  He was given a screening  interview  on  20  November
    2015.  He said that he had been born in Kawer Gosik,  near  Erbil.   At
    Part 4.1 he was asked briefly to explain all the reasons why  he  could
    not return to his home country.  He said that he was really  scared  of
    ISIS (Daesh).  He was asked whether anything had  happened  to  him  in
    Iraq.  He said that where he was living they had attacked and they  had
    run away.  They destroyed their houses and their land.   He  was  asked
    where this was.  He answered that it was at  a  village  called  Dusar,
    near Hawija.

 4. It was established through a Eurodac enquiry  that  the  appellant  had
    been fingerprinted by the Bulgarian authorities on 20  September  2015.
    So his asylum claim was refused on safe third  country  grounds  on  29
    March 2016.  But his removal from the UK did not go ahead, and his case
    was returned for review by the Home Office.  Eventually, the  appellant
    was given a substantive asylum interview on 8 October 2018.

 5. He said that his family was living in Hawler, which was in the IKR.  He
    had last spoken to them five days before he left Hawler, which  was  on
    23 August 2015.  Where the family had been living  previously,  he  had
    done farming.  But since they had moved to Hawler, some 6-7 years  ago,
    he had worked in a shop selling smoothies and ice cream.  He was  asked
    what he feared on return to Iraq.  He said he feared his father because
    he had threatened to kill him.  This was because he had found out  that
    he was gay.

 6. Later in his interview, he was asked why he had not mentioned  anything
    about his fear of his father or about his sexuality  in  his  screening
    interview.  He answered that when he had his screening  interview,  the
    officer was female and he was embarrassed.  It was put to him  that  he
    had been asked at the screening interview if he had a preference for  a
    male or female interviewing  officer,  and  he  had  stated  'no'.   He
    replied that this was wrongly recorded.  He had said "yes". He had said
    that he did have a problem [with a female  interviewing  officer].   He
    added that the female interviewing officer did not ask him why  he  had
    left Hawler, and why he had come to this country.  He confirmed that he
    had not encountered any problems from Daesh in Hawler.

 7. On 7 December 2018 the Department gave their reasons for  refusing  the
    appellant's  protection  claim.   The  Department  addressed  both  the
    appellant's claimed fear of ISIS, and his  alternative  claim  that  he
    feared his father since his father had found out he was  gay  after  he
    was caught having sexual relations with a male partner at his place  of
    work.

 8. At paragraph 23 of the RRFL, the following was stated:

         "It is considered reasonable that  you  did  not  feel  comfortable
         discussing your sexuality with a female officer, this is considered
         to be a reasonable mitigating factor as to why you did not disclose
         this aspect of your claim during your screening interview."

    The RFRL went on to state that the appellant's claim as to  his  sexual
    orientation was not accepted because:  (a)  his  account  lacked  basic
    detail  around  his  realisation  of  his  sexuality;  (b)  it   lacked
    consistency around his feelings of being attracted to the same sex in a
    society where it was not accepted; (c) his  account  of  having  openly
    lived as a gay man in the UK was  inconsistent;  and  (d)  his  claimed
    relationships in the UK were lacking in basic detail.  His  account  of
    the discovery  of  his  sexuality  by  his  father,  and  his  father's
    subsequent hostility, was also not accepted due to the fact  that  this
    aspect of his account lacked detail and was inconsistent.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Both parties were legally represented  before  Judge  O'Brien.   As  is
    recorded by the Judge at paragraph [14] of his subsequent decision,  it
    was agreed at the outset that the  appeal  would  be  resolved  by  the
    answers to three issues: whether the appellant was gay; whether he  was
    at risk in his home area from his father; and whether he could relocate
    internally within the IKR or to Baghdad.  It was also agreed  that  the
    printouts from  Facebook  and  Facebook  Messenger  contained  explicit
    homosexual images and conversations. The appellant confirmed the  truth
    of his witness statement and he was cross-examined.

10. In his closing submissions, the Presenting Officer relied on the  RFRL.
    He submitted that there was no reliable  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    claimed sexuality.  His Facebook posts and messages  were  self-serving
    and they all post-dated the refusal.   The  appellant  had  not  called
    evidence from [B] (his claimed sexual partner) and there was  no  trace
    of [B] in the Facebook posts and messages.  The account was  completely
    fabricated. The appellant had not come out in the  UK,  despite  having
    claimed asylum here.  Even if the  appellant  was  gay,  there  was  no
    reason to believe that he would live openly as such in Iraq.

11. In  reply,  the  appellant's  solicitor  submitted  that  it  was  very
    difficult for the appellant to prove that he was gay.  His  experiences
    as a gay man were almost entirely sexual, and he came  from  a  culture
    where it would be necessary  to  hide  his  sexuality.   Therefore,  he
    should be forgiven for finding it difficult to describe  his  feelings,
    and he had rightly not been asked intimate questions about his physical
    relationships.   The  appellant  had  been  reluctant  to  offend   his
    interviewer, who appeared to be a Muslim.  It was  to  the  appellant's
    credit that he had described having had sex with female as well as male
    prostitutes.  He had given a credible explanation for using a pseudonym
    on Facebook, and  for  why  he  could  not  access  earlier  posts  and
    messages.  He had also credibly explained  why  no  evidence  had  been
    provided by [B].  The appellant's failure to mention his  sexuality  in
    his  screening  interview  had  been  considered  reasonable   by   the
    respondent.  His account was consistent with the  background  evidence.
    The evidence showed that he would be at risk as a gay man  wherever  he
    went in Iraq.  The IKR was safer than the remainder of  Iraq.  However,
    he would not be safe from his family in the IKR.

12. In his subsequent decision, the Judge set out his findings of  fact  at
    paragraphs [36] onwards. At paragraphs [40]-[41], the  Judge  expressed
    disagreement with the position taken by the respondent in  the  refusal
    letter.  He was not persuaded  that  the  appellant's  explanation  for
    failing to mention his sexual orientation at  the  screening  interview
    was reasonable.  It was reasonable to expect someone fleeing for  their
    life to be candid about the reason they had left.  In any  event,  even
    assuming that the appellant was embarrassed to disclose his  sexuality,
    it was unreasonable for him to proffer a false basis of claim.  It  was
    relevant that ISIS was a clear and present danger in Northern Iraq when
    the appellant was screened but that this was no longer the case by  the
    time of the substantive interview in  October  2018.   The  appellant's
    change of account suggested someone who realised their  original  basis
    of claim would no longer succeed and who had therefore created  another
    more compelling account.

13. The Judge continued in paragraph [42]:

         "Even at the Appellant's asylum interview, it is now said  that  he
         was less than candid.  This time, the explanation is  that  he  did
         not want to offend the caseworker, who appeared to the Appellant to
         be a Muslim.  It is  also  alleged  that  the  interpreter  wrongly
         interpreted a number  of  questions,  meaning  that  the  Appellant
         failed to mention his attraction as a young teenager to a neighbour
         of similar age.  However, the Appellant's representatives took  the
         opportunity a few days after the asylum interview  to  correct  the
         record, and made no mention of these issues or  the  need  for  the
         corrections now detailed in the Appellant's witness statement.  The
         Appellant's credibility if further damaged as a result."

14. At paragraph [44], the Judge said:

         "The Appellant claims not to be able to access the Facebook account
         he used at the time he met [B] ... but has  not,  in  my  judgment,
         given a satisfactory explanation for why he needed to create a  new
         account rather than re-activate  an  old  account.   The  Appellant
         describes flirting with [B] over Facebook, and  they  remain  in  a
         sexual relationship.  I do not accept the Appellant  stopped  using
         Facebook after meeting [B], especially given  that  he  claims  the
         couple had and have no emotional attachment to each other."

15. At paragraph [45], the Judge said that what was  even  more  concerning
    was the appellant's failure  to  call  any  witnesses  to  confirm  his
    account of his life in the UK.  The Judge continued in paragraph [46]:

         "He claims to have asked [B] to give evidence,  but  that  [B]  has
         refused.  I find it  extremely  unlikely  that  one  refugee  would
         refuse to help another, especially one with  whom  he  has  had  an
         intimate relationship.  It is the Appellant's  evidence  that  they
         continue to visit each other without their relationship having been
         discovered; there is no reason why [B]'s  giving  evidence  on  the
         appellant's behalf would become public."

16. At paragraph [47], the Judge observed that in any event  the  appellant
    claimed to have  had  other  physical  relationships  in  the  UK.   He
    rejected entirely the suggestion that the appellant would be unable  to
    find anyone to confirm the secret gay life he was claiming to  lead  in
    the UK.

17. At paragraph [48], he concluded that the appellant was not gay, and  he
    was only claiming now to be gay because he realised that  his  original
    basis for claim was no longer likely to succeed.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Mohzam (who did not appear below) developed the  case  advanced
    in the  renewed  application  for  permission.   In  reply,  Ms  Holmes
    submitted that the Judge had directed himself appropriately,  and  that
    no error of law was made out.

Discussion

19. Ground 1 is that the Judge went behind a concession  properly  made  by
    the Secretary of State, thereby creating unfairness to the appellant.

20. The general rule is that a Tribunal cannot go behind  a  concession  of
    fact made by or on behalf of the respondent.  But the Tribunal may, and
    indeed must, go behind a  concession  of  law  if  that  concession  is
    legally erroneous.

21. The concession made in the RFRL was not a concession of fact. It was  a
    concession  of  opinion  as  to  what  was  reasonable.  Moreover,   in
    expressing  disagreement  with  the  Caseworker's  opinion  as  to  the
    reasonableness of the appellant's non-disclosure of the true  basis  of
    his claim, the Judge was not breaching the guidance given in  the  Home
    Office Asylum Policy Instructions to Caseworkers,  03.08.2016,  "Sexual
    Orientation  in  Asylum  Claims",  which  had  been  included  in   the
    appellant's bundle at section B.  As pleaded  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    renewed permission application, the  thrust  of  this  policy  is  that
    adverse credibility findings should not be drawn "purely on  the  basis
    of late disclosure (my emphasis)".

22. The Judge did not make adverse credibility findings purely on the basis
    of the appellant's late disclosure of his  "real"  reason  for  fleeing
    Iraq in 2015. This is manifest in the Judge's discussion  at  paragraph
    [42], which I have set out verbatim above.

23. In addition, it was open to the Judge to place weight on the fact  that
    the  non-disclosure  in  the  screening  interview  extended  beyond  a
    suppression of  his  claimed  sexual  orientation.   He  had  also  not
    disclosed his claimed  fear  of  his  father,  who,  according  to  his
    substantive interview, had threatened to kill  him  and  who  had  also
    filed a complaint with the police accusing him of  unlawfully  entering
    the family home to retrieve his CSID and passport, which (in  the  case
    of his passport) he had used to pass through immigration control before
    embarking on a flight from Iraq to Turkey.

24. In YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT  00145,  the  Tribunal  said  at
    [19]:

         "Whenever a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he is usually
         made the subject of a screening interview ...  The purpose of  that
         is to establish the general nature of the claimant's case  and  the
         Home Office Official can decide  how  best  to  process  it.   This
         concerns the Country of Origin; means of travel,  circumstances  of
         arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  preferred  language,  and  other
         matters that might help the Secretary of State  to  understand  the
         case.  Asylum seekers are still expected  to  tell  the  truth  and
         answers given in the screening interviews can  be  compared  fairly
         with answers given later (my emphasis).   However,  it  has  to  be
         remembered that a screening interview is not done to  establish  in
         detail the reasons a person gives support to a  claim  for  asylum.
         It would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary of State  to
         ask supplementary questions or to entertain elaborate answers,  and
         an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage
         would be excusable.  Further, the screening interview may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired  after  a  long  journey.
         These things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between
         the screening interview and the later case are evaluated."

25. In line with YL, it was open to the Judge to draw an adverse  inference
    from the appellant's failure to intimate in his screening interview his
    "real" reason for not being able to go back to  Iraq,  and  instead  to
    supply a reason in the screening interview which he later admitted  was
    wholly fictitious.

26. Ground 2 is that the  Judge  invented  his  own  theory  of  the  case,
    contrary to  the  guidance  given  by  Ouseley  J  in  WN  (Surrendran;
    credibility) DRC [2004] UKIAT 213.

27. The guidance cited from paragraph [33] of WN  includes  the  following:
    "The adjudicator must here be especially careful not to invent his  own
    theory of the case and must deal with what  are  significant  problems,
    not minor points of detail.  In this situation, it is much less  likely
    that the appellant  would  be  aware  that  his  credibility  is  under
    consideration if it were not raised with him, and  is  unlikely  to  be
    fair for the issue to be raised in  the  determination  for  the  first
    time."

28. It is apparent from the context that this guideline  applies  where  no
    matters of credibility have been raised  in  the  refusal  letter,  and
    there is no new material before the adjudicator,  but  the  adjudicator
    wishes to raise issues which concern him.  It is in this  context  that
    the adjudicator must be especially careful not to invent his own theory
    of the case.

29. In contrast, the RFRL put in issue both the credibility of the  claimed
    fear of ISIS and the credibility of the alternative  claim,  which  was
    that the appellant had fled Iraq after he had been  discovered  by  the
    shop-owner having sex  with  a  male  prostitute  when  the  shop-owner
    unexpectedly returned to the shop one night.

30. Against this background, the Judge did not breach the guidance given in
    WN.  It was open to the Judge to draw the inference that the  appellant
    had changed his account because he realised that his original claim was
    no longer going to succeed, given that ISIS  was  practically  a  spent
    force by the time of the substantive interview in October 2018.

31. Ground 3 is that the Judge erred in law in requiring the  appellant  to
    substantiate his claim with extrinsic evidence.

32. The guidance from the API cited in the permission application  includes
    the following:

         "The provision of  any  extrinsic  supporting  evidence  is  not  a
         prerequisite for a genuine claim.  The  Home  Office  accepts  that
         most claimants may not be able to provide any  extrinsic  evidence.
         The Supreme Court has confirmed in RT (Zimbabwe) that there are  no
         hierarchies amongst the Convention reasons.  In such  circumstances
         it would be discriminated to expect  claimants  of  sexuality-based
         claims to surmount a higher hurdle of providing extrinsic  evidence
         to corroborate  their  claims.   Where  a  claimant  has  extrinsic
         evidence, it will be considered, for  example  membership  of  LGBT
         dating sites or  support  groups.   We  do  not  consider  sexually
         explicit material ... is  prohibited.   Where  a  claimant  has  no
         extrinsic evidence, we will consider the claim based on  their  own
         credibility and consistency of statements with what we know.   This
         position is supported by the Qualification Directive."

33. The above guidance to Caseworkers must be set alongside paragraph  339L
    of the Rules, which provides that  it  is  the  duty  of  a  person  to
    substantiate his asylum claim.  Where aspects of a person's  statements
    are not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects  will
    not need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      i) the person has made a genuine effort of substantiate  their  asylum
         claim ...;

     ii) all material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    iii) the person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

     iv) the person who has  made  an  asylum  claim  ...  at  the  earliest
         possible time, unless the person can demonstrate  good  reason  for
         not having done so;

      v) the general credibility of the person has been established.

34. Having addressed issues of internal inconsistency in  paragraphs  [39]-
    [42], the Judge turned at  paragraph  [43]  to  address  the  extrinsic
    evidence.   He  observed  that  the  appellant  had  done  nothing   to
    substantiate his claim except provide a few pictures of him  in  a  gay
    bar, and a small selection of  Facebook  pages  and  messages,  showing
    sexual pictures and conversations: "It is trite to say that someone can
    attend  a  gay  bar  and  participate  in  the  exchange  of   explicit
    photographs and messages without being gay, but instead  to  support  a
    false basis for claiming asylum."

35. I do not consider that the Judge's  line  of  reasoning  discloses  any
    error of law.  He was not holding that the appellant's claim could only
    be proved by the provision of extrinsic evidence.  His finding was that
    the extrinsic evidence which had been provided did not,  in  his  view,
    enhance the credibility of the core claim.  This was a finding that was
    reasonably open to him for the reasons which he gave in paragraphs [43]
    and [44].

36. Ground 4 is that the Judge drew an unreasonable adverse inference  from
    the appellant's failure to be asked to be moved to accommodation  where
    he would not be afraid of homophobia from other asylum seekers.

37. In paragraphs [45]-[47], the Judge made adverse credibility findings in
    respect of the absence of supporting evidence from sources  within  the
    jurisdiction. Viewed globally, the  Judge  in  effect  found  that  the
    appellant had not made a genuine  effort  to  substantiate  his  asylum
    claim as required by  339L(i);  and  that  a  satisfactory  explanation
    regarding any lack  of  any  relevant  material  had  not  been  given,
    contrary to paragraph 399L(ii).

38. As pointed out by Ms Holmes, there is no error of law challenge to  the
    Judge's overall approach in paragraph [45]-[47]. In  particular,  there
    is no error of  law  challenge  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    arising from the appellant's failure to adduce evidence  from  [B],  or
    from any other person with whom the appellant claimed  to  have  had  a
    physical relationship through membership of a  group  called  'All  Sex
    Gay'.

39. The error of law challenge is confined to the finding at paragraph [45]
    that there was no evidence of the appellant asking to be moved from the
    house he shared with other Kurdish asylum-seekers,  so  that  he  could
    express his sexuality openly (as he claimed he wanted  to  do).  It  is
    pleaded that asylum seeker accommodation is  provided  on  a  no-choice
    basis,  and  also  that  any  request  to  be  moved   to   alternative
    accommodation with non-Muslims would be unlikely to be  entertained  by
    Asylum Support.

40. I accept that the  finding  made  at  [45]  is  a  weak  one,  but  the
    overarching finding made in paragraphs [45]  to  [47]  is  not  thereby
    undermined.

41. Ground 5 is that the Judge gave insufficient reasons for  finding  that
    internal relocation was a viable option for an openly gay man.  I  find
    it unnecessary to explore this issue, as  there  is  no  error  of  law
    challenge to the following findings made by the Judge at [49]:  (a)  if
    the appellant was in fact gay (contrary to his  primary  finding),  the
    appellant would not live as an openly gay man in Iraq; and (b) he would
    not keep his sexuality secret in Iraq due to a fear of persecution.  So
    even if the Judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that
    Paragraph 339O applied, his error would not be material in view of  the
    above unchallenged findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
