
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14191/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st February 2020                |On 20th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    S M A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was  previously  made.   As  this  a  protection
    claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and  until  a
    Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  SMA  is  granted  anonymity.  No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him
    or any member of his family.  This direction applies amongst others  to
    all parties. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 28th November 2017 and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused by the
    respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 6th  December  2018.
    The appellant's appeal against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Row for reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated
    on 3rd June 2019.  That decision was set aside for reasons set out in a
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King  TD  promulgated  on  20th
    November 2019. Judge King directed that the matter will be re-heard  in
    the Upper Tribunal with no findings preserved.


 3. The appellant has appealed under s82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    this claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. The appellant claims
    to be a refugee whose removal from  the  UK  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention  and  Directive
    2004/83/EC  of  29th  April  2004  on   minimum   standards   for   the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees (the Qualification Directive).   Alternatively,  he
    claims that his removal to Iraq would be contrary to Article 3 ECHR.


 4. The account of events initially relied upon by the appellant in support
    of his claim for international protection was  set  out  in  a  witness
    statement dated 25th June 2018, and in  the  record  of  the  interview
    completed on 20th November 2018 in the presence of a responsible adult,
    the appellant's support worker.  In the  decision  dated  6th  December
    2018, the respondent accepts the appellant is  an  Iraqi  national,  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and that he is from Kirkuk.


 5. At the resumed hearing before me on 21st February 2020,  I  heard  oral
    evidence from  the  appellant.   I  have  before  me,  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle and the appellant's bundle for the  hearing  listed
    before me, that was sent to the Tribunal on 7th February 2020.  I  also
    have a  supplementary  bundle  from  the  appellant  comprising  of  an
    additional 31 pages of background material.   Mr  Holt  relied  upon  a
    skeleton argument dated 21st February 2020.  The appellant's  claim  is
    summarised at paragraph [2] of  that  skeleton  argument,  but  at  the
    outset, Mr Holt confirmed that the  appellant  does  not  maintain  the
    claim that return to Kirkuk would expose the appellant to the  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence contrary to Article  15  of  the  Qualification
    Directive. He accepts that in light of the country guidance decision in
    SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT
    00400 (IAC) the appellant now accepts that the  Kirkuk  Governorate  in
    its entirety is no longer a "contested area".


 6. The appellant bears the burden of proving  that  he  falls  within  the
    definition of "refugee".  In essence, the appellant  has  to  establish
    that there are substantial grounds for believing, more simply expressed
    as a 'real risk', that he is outside of  his  country  of  nationality,
    because of a well-founded fear of persecution for a refugee  convention
    reason and he is unable or unwilling, because of such  fear,  to  avail
    himself of the protection of  that  country.   Paragraph  339C  of  the
    immigration rules provides that an applicant who does not qualify as  a
    refugee will nonetheless be granted humanitarian  protection  if  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that if returned, they will  face
    a real risk of suffering serious harm and they are unable, or, owing to
    such risk, unwilling to avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.


 7. A full account of the evidence and the submissions made  before  me  is
    set out in my record of proceedings and has been fully considered by me
    in reaching my decision, whether or not it is expressly referred to  in
    this decision.


The appellant's claim


 8. The appellant was born on 21st  September  2000.   He  lived  with  his
    parents and  sister  in  the  village  of  Qara  Dara,  in  the  Kirkuk
    Governate.  The appellant's sister was born in 2008 and is younger than
    the appellant. The family owned a small grocery shop  in  the  village.
    The appellant attended the local primary school until 2011.  His father
    was killed in an explosion in 2011 and after leaving  school  following
    the death of his father, the appellant helped his mother at  the  shop.
    The appellant, his mother and his sister remained living in  Qara  Dara
    following the death of his father.  The appellant has a maternal  uncle
    who lived in Dibis, the closest town to Qara Dara, a distance of  about
    5-6km away.  The appellant claims that on 16th  October  2017,  he  had
    travelled to Dibis with a neighbour to get supplies for the shop.   His
    neighbour had driven the appellant to Dibis, and whilst  the  appellant
    was getting supplies for the shop, his neighbour went to  complete  his
    own jobs.  That morning, the appellant received a call from his mother,
    and she informed him that people had started to evacuate their  village
    because Al-Hashd al-Shaabi (also  known  as  the  Popular  Mobilisation
    Forces) were on the way to the village.  The appellant  was  told  that
    the local Peshmerga forces had left, and his mother intended  to  leave
    with his sister.  The appellant claims that as news  spread  in  Dibis,
    people there also started to flee, heading  towards  the  IKR,  and  in
    particular, Erbil.  The appellant telephoned his  uncle  who  lived  in
    Dibis, but his phone was switched off. The appellant eventually found a
    Kurdish family who were fleeing the  area  and  they  agreed  that  the
    appellant could travel with them to Erbil. The appellant travelled with
    the family to Erbil and they all spent the first night in a park.


 9. The following morning the appellant received a call from  his  maternal
    uncle on his mobile phone and the appellant was told not to worry about
    his mother because she was safe. The appellant was told  by  his  uncle
    that he would arrange for someone to collect the appellant and take him
    to his uncle. That afternoon the appellant met with an individual named
    Omar, who had been sent by his uncle.  The appellant was taken in a van
    to a house by Omar, and the appellant was  assured  that  he  would  be
    taken to see his uncle the following day.   The  appellant  handed  his
    mobile phone to Omar that evening for it to be recharged.  The next day
    the appellant was again placed in the van and was taken  out  of  Iraq.
    When the appellant asked whether he could see his uncle,  he  was  told
    that they were no longer in Iraq and were now in Turkey. The  appellant
    was told that his uncle had told Omar to take the appellant to  a  safe
    place.


10. The appellant fears Al-Hashd  al-Shaabi,  who  he  says,  hate  Kurdish
    people.  The appellant claims he would not be able to live elsewhere in
    Iraq and he does not know the current whereabouts  of  his  family.  He
    states that he would be alone if returned to Iraq and does not know how
    he would cope. The appellant confirms that he did not leave  Iraq  with
    any documents. He states that when he lived in Iraq, he had an Iraqi ID
    card, but he does not know where that is now. He has  no  idea  how  he
    would get a new card, and he claims he does not have any family members
    who could support him with this.


11. When interviewed, the appellant confirmed that his mother,  sister  and
    maternal uncle were in Iraq and he last had contact with his mother  on
    16th October 2017.  He confirmed that he left Iraq because his  village
    was occupied by Al-Hashd al-Shaabi and that before  that,  neither  the
    appellant nor his family had had any problems  with  the  militia.   He
    confirmed that on 16th October 2017, like any other day, he  went  with
    his neighbour to Dibis.  At the time, there was a large peshmerga force
    in his village and people did not think that Al-Hashd  al-Shaabi  could
    take control of the area. He confirmed that he received a call from his
    mother who told him that everyone was running away  from  Al-Hashd  al-
    Shaabi and that he should not return. That was the last time  he  spoke
    to his mother. The  appellant  confirmed  that  people  in  Dibis  were
    becoming anxious and running away towards  the  Kurdish  provinces.  He
    said that he begged a few families to take him with them  as  he  could
    not return to his village and eventually, a family agreed to  take  him
    with them.  The appellant  said  that  in  the  beginning,  there  were
    problems crossing the border into Kurdistan because people  were  being
    asked for their ID cards.  However, because of  the  number  of  people
    crossing the border, people were allowed to enter without an  ID  card,
    but identities were being checked the  following  day.   The  appellant
    said that he did not have his CSID, and the  following  day,  the  male
    from the family that he travelled with, was afraid the appellant  would
    get into trouble if  police  asked  for  his  ID  card.  The  appellant
    explained to him that he was unfamiliar with the area in Kurdistan  but
    gave him the telephone  number  for  his  mother  and  maternal  uncle.
    Eventually the appellant was contacted by his uncle  and  unbeknown  to
    the appellant at the time, arrangements were made for the appellant  to
    leave Iraq.


The appellant's evidence before me


12. The appellant adopted his witness statements dated 25th June 2018, 17th
    January 2019 and 4th February 2020.  In cross-examination, he confirmed
    that he last had contact with his maternal uncle on 17th  October  2017
    when the appellant was in Erbil.  His maternal  uncle  had  called  the
    appellant on his mobile phone. The  appellant  explained  that  he  was
    unable to contact his uncle again because the appellant  did  not  have
    his mobile phone.  The phone had been taken by the person sent  by  his
    maternal uncle to collect the appellant when  he  was  in  Erbil.   The
    appellant  said  that  he  has  not  managed  to  obtain  any   further
    information about his family in Iraq. He has been to the Red Cross, but
    he is still waiting for them to come back to him with any  information.
    The appellant confirmed that he had a CSID when he was in Iraq, but  it
    was at home when he left.  He said that he did not know of any  of  the
    details or references on the CSID card.


13. I asked the appellant some further questions about his CSID  card.   He
    said that he did not know when it had been issued, and although he  had
    seen the document he could not remember when.  The appellant said  that
    official documents were looked after by his mother and she would  bring
    the documents out when she was looking for something.  It was  in  this
    context that he would from time to time  see  his  CSID  card,  but  he
    himself did not take it anywhere, and had never used it.  The appellant
    confirmed that the CSID  had  various  pieces  of  information  on  it,
    including his name, his parents' names,  his  grandfather's  name,  the
    appellant's date of birth and a photograph.  The  appellant  could  not
    remember when the photograph was taken.  The appellant said that he had
    in fact had two CSID cards.  The first one  had  expired,  and  it  was
    renewed.  The appellant said that he thought he was between 10  and  15
    years  old  when  his  CISD  card  was  renewed.   He  recalls  that  a
    photographer came to their house and had  taken  pictures  of  all  the
    family members, and he understands that all the CSID cards were renewed
    together.  His father had passed away by this time and the photographer
    took photographs of the appellant, his  mother  and  his  sister.   The
    appellant said that his mother and maternal uncle arranged for the CSID
    cards to be renewed, and he does not know where they went or  how  they
    were renewed.


The submissions


14. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni relied upon the matters set  out
    in the respondent's decision dated 6th December 2018.   The  respondent
    noted that the manner in which the appellant claims to  have  fled  the
    Kirkuk Governate in October 2017, is  consistent  with  the  background
    material relating to the invasion of Kirkuk.  However,  it  is  equally
    clear that the appellant was not personally targeted by the Al-Hashd al-
    Shaabi militia when he lived in Qara Dara, nor when he fled from Dibis.
     Mrs Aboni referred to the country guidance set out in SMO,  KSP  &  IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400.   It  is
    noted that although there continues to be an internal armed conflict in
    certain parts of Iraq, involving government forces, various militia and
    the remnants of ISIL, the intensity of that conflict is not such  that,
    as a general matter, there are substantial grounds for  believing  that
    any civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account of his presence there,
    faces a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence
    amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article  15(c)  QD.   She
    acknowledges that  the  situation  in  the  formerly  contested  areas,
    including Kirkuk, is complex and whether the return of the appellant to
    Kirkuk would be contrary to Article 15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,
    "sliding scale" assessment.  Mrs Aboni  submits  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine fear of the security situation in Kirkuk  and  is  not  of  any
    direct adverse interest to the Al-Hashd al-Shaabi militia.   Mrs  Aboni
    submits there is now no generalised risk in Kirkuk  and  the  appellant
    has no profile or personal characteristics that would put him at  risk.
    Mrs Aboni submits that internal relocation to the IKR would be open  to
    the appellant, and there is  no  risk  upon  return  for  a  convention
    reason.  The key issue  is  whether  the  appellant  could  obtain  the
    necessary ID documents. She submits return would be to Baghdad and  the
    appellant would have to make the journey to  Kirkuk  or  the  IKR.  Mrs
    Aboni submits the Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national in the
    United Kingdom to enter Iraq only  if  they  are  in  possession  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport, or a Laissez Passer.


15. Mrs Aboni acknowledges that although the  appellant  could  enter  Iraq
    with a  Laissez  Passer,  a  Laissez  Passer  will  be  of  no  further
    assistance in the absence of a CSID or an INID.  She acknowledges  that
    in SMO the Upper Tribunal held that although replacement  CSIDs  remain
    available through Iraqi Consular facilities, whether the appellant will
    be able to obtain a replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends  on  the
    documents available and, critically, the availability of the volume and
    page  reference  of  the  entry  in  the  Family  Book  in  Iraq.   She
    acknowledges that although the Upper Tribunal held in SMO, at paragraph
    [391], that the number of individuals who do not  know  and  could  not
    ascertain their volume and page reference would be quite small  because
    of the importance of an individual's volume and page reference  in  the
    civil register, and the fact that  those  details  appear  on  numerous
    official documents, the appellant was 17 at the time that he left  Iraq
    and had not  used  his  CSID  himself.   She  accepts  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding the circumstances in which he has lost contact  with
    his family, and thus his ability to obtain  the  information  required,
    has remained internally consistent.  Mrs Aboni  candidly  accepts  that
    here, what was said by the Upper Tribunal at paragraph [393] is  likely
    to be relevant.


         "If an individual genuinely has no relevant documents  to  present,
         via a proxy, to the relevant CSA office, if they genuinely  do  not
         know the volume and page reference in the civil  register,  and  if
         they genuinely cannot contact  a  family  member  from  whom  those
         details cannot be obtained, there will be no realistic prospect  of
         that person obtaining a CSID remotely upon return to Baghdad...."


16. In view of the candid acknowledgment by  Ms  Aboni  that  there  is  no
    realistic prospect of the appellant obtaining a  CSID  upon  return  to
    Baghdad, Mr Holt relied upon  the  matters  set  out  in  his  skeleton
    argument.  The appellant  does  not  assert  that  he  is  entitled  to
    international protection merely because he is not in  possession  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport.  In any event, it was found  in  SMO
    that an appellant "will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of
    return [to Iraq] by reason of not  having  a  current  passport".   The
    appellant's case is that even if  he  were  able  to  obtain  an  Iraqi
    passport or the respondent issued him with a Laissez Passer,  he  would
    be subject to ill treatment amounting to a breach of Article 3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, if removed to Baghdad.


17. Mr Holt submits the appellant would be unable to obtain  a  replacement
    CSID by proxy from the CSA office in Kirkuk.  He  refers  to  paragraph
    [431] of the decision in SMO in which the Upper  Tribunal  was  of  the
    view that the CSA office in Kirkuk has an INID terminal,  and  that  it
    would not be  willing  to  issue  a  CSID  through  a  proxy.   In  the
    circumstances, he submits, the appellant would be unable to travel from
    Baghdad to Kirkuk and cannot internally relocate to the IKR  such  that
    the appeal can be allowed on Article 3 grounds because irrespective  of
    refugee status, the appellant's removal would be contrary to Article 3


18. Mr Holt submits an  individual  must  have  a  CSID  card  or  the  new
    biometric Iraqi National Identity Card, in order  to  live  and  travel
    within Iraq without encountering  treatment  or  conditions  which  are
    contrary to Article 3.  He submits that  in  SMO,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    noted at paragraph [425] that many of the checkpoints  in  the  country
    are manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by the  GOI  and  are
    unlikely to permit an individual without a CSID or an INID to pass.  He
    submits it is because the appellant had to flee Kirkuk,  that  he  does
    not have a CSID and  it  is  his  ethnicity  that  exposes  him  to  an
    increased risk at checkpoints.   Mr Holt  submits  there  is  a  direct
    causal  link  between  the  risk  upon  return,   and   the   immutable
    characteristics of the appellant.


Findings and conclusions


19. It is uncontroversial that the appellant is  an Iraqi Kurd  whose  home
    area is Kirkuk. I find that prior  to  his  departure  from  Iraq,  the
    appellant lived with his mother and younger sister in  the  village  of
    Qara Dara, in the Kirkuk governate.  The  respondent  concedes,  and  I
    find, that the appellant's account of events relating to  the  invasion
    of Kirkuk in October 2017 is consistent with the background material. I
    accept the appellant' account that he fled Iraq after his  village  was
    occupied by the Al-Hashd al-Shaabi militia on  16th  October  2017.   I
    accept the appellant's claim that he was in Dibis at the time and  that
    he received a telephone call from his mother informing him that the Al-
    Hashd al-Shaabi militia were heading to the village and that he  should
    flee and not return home.  I also accept the appellant's evidence  that
    he last spoke to his mother on 16th October 2017 and that he last spoke
    to his maternal uncle on  17th  October  2017.   Both  the  appellant's
    mother and his maternal uncle were in Iraq at the time.  I  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that he does not know of their whereabouts now.  I
    accept the appellant's evidence that he had a CSID, but he left  it  at
    home in Iraq.  The appellant's evidence is that  the  CSID  was  looked
    after by his mother and notwithstanding the importance of the  family's
    volume and page reference in the civil register, he did  not  know  the
    information. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  does  not  know  the
    information given his age.  Although the  details  appear  on  numerous
    official documents, including an Iraqi passport, and birth certificate,
    I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  access  to  such
    documents.


20. However, even undertaking a fact-sensitive, "sliding scale" assessment,
    I am not satisfied that the appellant, as a Kurdish Sunni Muslim,  with
    absolutely no political or security profile, faces a risk on return  to
    Kirkuk.  The appellant has not been involved in  activities  of  voiced
    opposition to, or criticism of the  GOI,  the  KRG  or  local  security
    actors and does not have the  personal  characteristics  identified  in
    headnote 5 of SMO.


21. The appellant has a general fear of the security  situation  in  Kirkuk
    and I was not directed to any evidence which clearly indicates that the
    shift in the balance of power in the Kirkuk governorate has  been,  per
    se, sufficient to expose an individual such as the appellant to a  real
    risk of harm.   The most recent country  guidance  indicates  that  the
    security situation in Kirkuk is no longer  so  serious  as  to  attract
    Article 15(c) protection.


22. The appellant would be returned to Baghdad and the issue is whether the
    appellant is able to travel safely from Baghdad to his home  area.   To
    that end,  I  must  consider  whether  the  appellant  can  obtain  the
    necessary identity documentation (his existing or a new CSID or a newer
    form INID) in order to make the journey from Baghdad to his home  area.
    An Iraqi national living in the UK might  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID
    through  the  consular  section  of  the  Iraqi  Embassy   in   London.
    Notwithstanding the phased  transition  to  the  INID  within  Iraq,  a
    replacement CSID remains available through Iraqi  Consular  facilities,
    but whether the appellant will be able to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID
    whilst in the UK depends on the documents  available  and,  critically,
    the availability of the volume and page reference of the entry  in  the
    Family Book in  Iraq.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  was
    seventeen years old when he arrived in the UK and that he did not  have
    a passport with him when he did  so.  I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant does not know the volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil
    register, and as he no longer has  any  contact  with  his  mother  and
    maternal uncle.  He has no means by which he can obtain the information
    required to support an application.  I find,  on  the  requisite  lower
    standard of proof, that the appellant does not know the volume and page
    number of his patrilineal family's entry in the Family  Book  which  he
    would need in order to obtain a CSID through Iraqi consular facilities.


23. In SMO, the Upper Tribunal held that an individual returnee who is  not
    from Baghdad is not likely to be able to obtain a replacement  document
    there, and certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither the Central
    Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs  are  likely  to  render
    documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.


24. Even if it were possible to obtain a CSID by proxy in  Kirkuk  (and  in
    SMO, the Upper Tribunal doubted it is, when considering  SMO's  appeal)
    Mrs Aboni candidly accepts the appellant has no relevant  documents  to
    present, via a proxy, to the relevant CSA office.   I  have  found  the
    appellant does not know the volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil
    register, and that he is no longer in contact with his family and  does
    not know their whereabouts. It follows that in my judgment, there  will
    be no realistic prospect of the appellant obtaining a CSID upon  return
    to Baghdad.  In SMO, the Upper Tribunal found that any  Laissez  Passer
    issued to facilitate removal  to  Baghdad  will  be  of  no  assistance
    thereafter, in the absence of a CSID or an INID.  In the absence  of  a
    CSID or an INID, the appellant will be unable to  return  to  his  home
    area or to travel to the IKR.


25. This means that there is at least  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant will find himself at Baghdad airport with no means of  onward
    travel. He cannot board a domestic flight to  Kirkuk  and  cannot  pass
    through the many checkpoints on the road north, because in order to  do
    so, he would need a CSID or an INIC.


26. In SMO, The Upper Tribunal  also  considered  the  circumstances  of  a
    Kurdish individual who was returned to Baghdad but who had no  CSID  or
    INID to travel on to his place of birth. It  found  that;  "Baghdad  is
    generally safe for ordinary civilians but whether  it  is  safe  for  a
    particular returnee is a question of fact in the individual case. There
    are no on-entry sponsorship requirements  for  Baghdad  but  there  are
    sponsorship requirements for  residency.  A  documented  individual  of
    working age is likely  to  be  able  to  satisfy  those  requirements".
    Although the appellant is a Sunni Muslim of  working  age,  he  remains
    very young and given his lack  of  connections  to  Baghdad,  his  very
    limited education, and his lack of skills, I accept that he  is  likely
    to require external support that simply would not be available to  him.
    There is no evidence that he has any  extended  family  or  tribe  that
    would be willing and able to provide genuine support to him.


27. In all the circumstances, although I reject the claim by the  appellant
    that  he  is  entitled  to  refugee  status  under  the  1951   Refugee
    Convention, I am satisfied that he does not have access to an  existing
    CSID card and is unable to obtain a replacement whilst he is in the UK.
     The risk upon return is not based upon any immutable characteristic of
    the appellant, but because of the risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    exposed to, travelling from Baghdad to Kirkuk.  The Country Guidance in
    SMO points to the Article 3 risk that may be  encountered  by  somebody
    making their way from Baghdad to another place  in  Iraq  in  order  to
    obtain a CSID or INIC. Applying the guidance in SMO it  follows  in  my
    judgement  that  the  appellant  would,  on  arrival,  be  exposed   to
    conditions amounting to a violation of Article 3 and his appeal must be
    allowed on that basis.


NOTICE OF DECISION


28. The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.



Signed                                                 Date      9th   April
2020




    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
