
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14282/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2019                              |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 28 November 2018 refusing  to  grant
    him asylum in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 27 June  1985.   He  is
    of Tamil ethnicity.

3.   In his claim for asylum the appellant said he  provided  assistance  to
    the LTTE from September/October 2004 until December 2010.  He had  been
    asked by his uncle to help  the  LTTE  members  with  accommodation  in
    Colombo.  He also bought them food and  other  items.   From  April/May
    2009 he was mainly helping people leave Sri Lanka.

4.   On 20 December 2010 he applied for a student visa and  arrived  in  the
    UK on 29 May 2011 to study management.  While  living  here  he  became
    involved in pro-Tamil independence demonstrations  and  he  distributed
    leaflets.

5.   On 21 March 2012 he returned  to  Sri  Lanka  to  attend  his  sister's
    wedding in Colombo.  He told his parents and trusted friends about  his
    activities in the UK.

6.   On 27 March 2012 he was detained  at  a  location  where  he  had  been
    scheduled to meet one of his friends.  He was held at a police  station
    for three to four hours and told that his activities with the LTTE  had
    been disclosed by his friend.  He was tortured  for  eight  days  which
    included being beaten  with  sticks  and  burned  with  a  lighter  and
    cigarettes.  He was released following the payment of a  bribe  by  his
    parents on 3 April 2012 and two days later he fled to the UK  with  the
    assistance of an agent.

7.   When he arrived in the UK he was confused about what he  should  to  do
    and applied to extend his valid student visa which was granted until 21
    May 2014.  He applied for asylum on 26 June 2013.  His father had  been
    detained in Sri Lanka in November 2012, January 2013 and June 2013.

8.   He continued his political activities in the UK with the British  Tamil
    Forum, TGTE and since 1 June 2017 as a volunteer with the  World  Tamil
    Historical Society.

9.   The appellant claimed asylum on 26 June 2013, but his asylum claim  was
    refused on 26 July 2013.   His  appeal  challenging  the  decision  was
    dismissed on 12 September 2013 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Black.   He
    unsuccessfully appealed to the Upper Tribunal who dismissed the  appeal
    on 27 June 2014 with a finding that there was no error of  law  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Black and that the  decision
    should stand.

10.  Further submissions were lodged by the appellant  on  10  October  2018
    which became the subject of the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his
    application on 28 November  2018.   It  was  his  appeal  against  this
    decision that was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Feeney  and
    whose decision is now the subject of this appeal before me.

11.  In reaching her findings of credibility and  fact,  the  judge  applied
    the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The judge  took  into
    account the appellant's new witness statements, a report  by  Dr  Chris
    Smith, whose report the judge noted was not materially  different  from
    the sources of background information relied on by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in GJ, evidence from the appellant's father and uncle, and evidence  of
    the appellant's sur place activities.

12.  The judge did not accept the  appellant's  claim  that  he  was  poorly
    represented during the preparation of his  case  or  at  his  hearings.
    This was because when  he  was  asked  why  he  had  not  produced  the
    information about his uncle at the previous hearing, he relied  on  the
    incompetence of his previous representatives.  The judge however  noted
    that the appellant has not reported his solicitors to their  regulatory
    body and they have not had an opportunity to deal with the concerns  he
    now raises.  The judge concluded that the appellant's  appeal  was  not
    materially affected by any error made by his representatives.

13.  The judge did not believe the appellant's evidence that  he  could  not
    obtain more information from his uncle as he was hiding in India.   The
    judge found that there was limited explanation  as  to  why  the  uncle
    would be hiding in India, especially as the  appellant  had  previously
    said that it had taken his uncle some time to  settle  safely  and  had
    also said that his uncle now had an Indian passport.

14.  The judge found  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the  documents
    themselves as to his uncle's place and date of birth and the  different
    names used by his uncle.   There  was  also  an  inconsistency  in  the
    contact between the appellant's uncle  in  India  and  the  appellant's
    uncle in the UK.  The appellant had said  that  he  moved  out  of  his
    uncle's home some three years ago to live with a family friend but  his
    uncle said the appellant still lived with him together with his family.



15.  For these reasons the judge concluded that she could  not  depart  from
    the findings made by Judge Black and upheld those findings.

16.  The judge's findings upholding the decision by  Judge  Black  have  not
    been challenged and therefore shall stand.

17.  The judge went on to consider the sur place  activities  the  appellant
    claimed he had engaged in since he has been in the  UK  and  his  claim
    that his conduct may be relevant to his risk on return.

18.  It is the judge's findings on these activities that are the subject  of
    challenge by the appellant.

19.   The  judge  noted  that  Judge  Black  did  consider  the  appellant's
    involvement in  diaspora  activities  but  found  his  evidence  to  be
    inconsistent and unreliable with limited evidence beyond the  existence
    of an identity card to support involvement.  The  judge  noted  however
    that there was more evidence before her to show involvement in diaspora
    activities.

20.  The judge noted that it has been nearly five years since the  appellant
    became appeal rights exhausted.  During this time, he has been  engaged
    in diaspora activities.  He has now been  a  member  of  the  TGTE  for
    approximately five years.  His involvement was supported  by  a  letter
    from Mr Yogalingam, the Deputy Minister of Sports and Community  Health
    for the TGTE.  The letter confirmed that the appellant volunteers  with
    the TGTE, organises public events, demonstrations and fundraising.  The
    letter specified the events in which the appellant  has  played  a  key
    role.  Accompanying the  letter  was  a  photograph  of  the  appellant
    shaking hands with Mr Yogalingam.

21.  The judge said she had seen various photographs  of  the  appellant  at
    demonstrations.  There was a letter dated 18 July 2018 from  the  World
    Tamil Historical Society to say that the appellant has been  an  action
    team member since 1 June 2017 and was working as a volunteer.  A letter
    dated 28 November 2013 congratulated the appellant on becoming a member
    of the British Tamil Forum.

22.  During the hearing the appellant gave more evidence about his  diaspora
    activities.   He  provided  information  about  the  demonstrations  he
    attended.  He described the  photographs  and  said  these  related  to
    events for the TGTE and events for the World Tamil Historical  Society.
    He admitted that he has  never  led  the  protests,  but  he  had  been
    involved in organising them.  His attendance at  meetings  (which  take
    place every Sunday) was limited to every two-three  months  because  of
    problems with transport.

23.  The appellant's evidence led the  judge  to  find  that  he  attends  a
    meeting every two or three  months.   She  noted  the  letter  from  Mr
    Yogalingam stated that the appellant attended many meetings.  The judge
    however found that inconsistent with the appellant's own  stated  level
    of involvement.  The judge therefore reduced the weight to attach to Mr
    Yogalingam's letter as he had overstated the extent of the  appellant's
    involvement.

24.  The judge bore in mind that the appellant was a member of the TGTE  and
    had been attending meetings over a long period of time.   She  factored
    this into her assessment of risk.

25.  In terms of organising events, the judge noted that the appellant  said
    he was involved in requesting members of the public to sign a  petition
    to take matters to the International Criminal Court, handing  around  a
    collection tin and also organising a  "pick  up  plastic"  event.   The
    judge noted that the appellant  provided  limited  further  information
    about the role he  played.   She  noted  that  Mr  Yogalingam  did  not
    describe how the appellant  had  active  involvement.   While  she  was
    prepared to accept that the appellant helped with the events, the judge
    said there was limited information other than Mr Yogalingam's  evidence
    to satisfy her that it  is  likely  that  he  was  an  organiser.   She
    therefore reduced the weight she attached to Mr Yogalingam's letter  as
    she was of the opinion  that  he  had  overstated  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's involvement in the past.

26.  The judge noted that the appellant has attended demonstrations  and  in
    evidence said he had  attended  four  or  five  in  total.   Whilst  Mr
    Yogalingam said the appellant took an active role in organising  events
    and public demonstrations, the judge noted that Mr Yogalingam  did  not
    explain how the appellant was involved in  demonstrations.   She  noted
    that the appellant himself  gave  limited  information  as  to  how  he
    organised demonstrations, if at all.  The judge held that as no-one had
    attended to support the appellant, she found that he  did  not  play  a
    significant role within the organisation.

27.  Looking at matters as they stood before her, the  judge  accepted  that
    the appellant was a member of the TGTE, a proscribed organisation.   He
    attends four to six meetings with diaspora groups a  year,  attends  on
    average one demonstration a year, collects money for  diaspora  groups,
    asks people to sign petitions and helped organise a "pick  up  plastic"
    event.  It was against this background that the judge assessed  whether
    the Sri Lankan  authorities  would  perceive  the  appellant  as  being
    actively involved in seeking  to  revive  and  re-fund  the  separatist
    movement within the diaspora, with a view to destabilising the  unitary
    Sri Lankan state.

28.  The judge took into account the decision in  UB  which  concluded  that
    the appellant's membership of the TGTE could be relevant  but  was  not
    determinative of any appeal.  The fact that the appellant  would  still
    need to be stopped, arrested  and  detained  would  still  need  to  be
    considered.  In order to assess  this  the  judge  considered  GJ,  the
    Country Policy and Information Note Sri Lanka:  Tamil  separatism,  and
    the report by Dr Smith.

29.  The judge considered paragraph 351 of GJ:

         "41. '351.    Our overall conclusion regarding diaspora  activities
                  is that the GOSL has sophisticated  intelligence  enabling
                  it to distinguish  those  who  are  actively  involved  in
                  seeking to revive  and  re-fund  the  separatist  movement
                  within the diaspora, with  a  view  to  destabilising  the
                  unitary Sri Lankan state.   Attendance  at  one,  or  even
                  several demonstrations in the diaspora is  not  of  itself
                  evidence that a  person  is  a  committed  Tamil  activist
                  seeking to promote  Tamil  separatism  within  Sri  Lanka.
                  That will be a question of fact in each case, dependent on
                  any diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

             352. The evidence before us indicates that any Tamil who seeks
                  a travel document from  the  SLHC  in  London  or  another
                  diaspora hotspot will have a file created in  Colombo  and
                  will be interviewed in London before a decision is made to
                  issue a TTD.  By the time the DIE in Colombo emails a  TTD
                  to London to be issued to  such  an  individual,  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities will know all they need to  know  about
                  what activities an individual has undertaken  outside  Sri
                  Lanka and, in particular, whether  the  returnee  poses  a
                  real risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the  GOSL  on
                  return'.

             Also

             '268.    We consider that Dr Smith's factor (c) has relevance,
                  in circumstances where the GOSL  has  reason  to  consider
                  that a person  has  significant  involvement  in  diaspora
                  activities which may unsettle the situation in  Sri  Lanka
                  and lead either to the resurgence of the LTTE or a similar
                  militia, or to the revival of the internal conflict'.

         42.  I take into account the CPIN.  I note at 9.3.5 the following:

                  'According to a lawyer who spoke to  the  FFM  team  about
                  Tamils returning to Sri Lanka, 'it is a  given  fact  they
                  will be questioned and may be monitored,  if  not  at  the
                  airport, then when they return to their homes'.

             This was taken from a report titled  'UK  Home  Office's  Fact
             Finding Mission to Sri Lanka, 11 - 23 July 2016,  Section  13:
             Meeting with two lawyers, 21 July 2016'.

             And at 12.1.1,

                  'Those on a watch list are  not  likely  to  be  detained,
                  although there have been some media reports claiming  that
                  individuals, mostly Tamils,  travelling  from  the  United
                  Kingdom have been detained  on  arrival  at  the  airport.
                  DFAT has not been able to verify these reports  but  notes
                  that those on a watch list are likely to be monitored'.

             Section 13 of the  CPIN  contains  information  regarding  sur
             place activities.  It refers to the DFAT reports on Sri  Lanka
             dated 24 January 2017.  That extract records that Sri  Lankans
             living overseas are encouraged  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  or
             invest in the Sri Lankan economy.   It  is  reported  that  in
             general the DFAT assesses  that  Sri  Lankan  authorities  may
             monitor any member of the  Tamil  diaspora  returning  to  Sri
             Lanka, depending on their risk profile.

             At 13.1.2 reference is made to a July 2015 International Truth
             and Justice Project Sri Lankan report on Sri Lanka's survivors
             of torture  and  sexual  violence.   In  that  report  it  was
             recorded that the Sri Lankan security forces had shown  people
             photographs  of  themselves   attending   events   and   other
             commemorations abroad.  This suggested there was a  continuing
             interest in surveillance of diaspora activities".

30.  The judge considered Dr Smith's report in  which  he  stated  that  the
    appellant has been "extremely active" with  the  British  Tamil  Forum.
    Whilst he said that the appellant's activities have been plentiful  and
    that the Sri Lankan authorities are extremely likely  to  be  aware  of
    him, the judge stated that Dr Smith did not refer  to  the  "plentiful"
    activities which he said the appellant has undertaken.  To prepare  his
    report Dr Smith said he had seen a  copy  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statements prepared in 2013 and 2018.  He had seen a copy of the asylum
    interview.  The 2013 witness statement and the  asylum  interview  were
    before Judge Black whose view was that the appellant had  a  low  level
    involvement.  The judge said she had taken into account the appellant's
    2018 witness statements.  There was limited mention of his  involvement
    in diaspora activities in the statements.  The judge said  it  was  not
    clear what else Dr Smith had been shown or what he  had  been  told  by
    others about the extent of  the  appellant's  involvement.   The  judge
    found that Dr  Smith's  analysis  was  predicated  on  the  appellant's
    extensive involvement in diaspora activities.  However, this  extensive
    involvement was not borne out by the evidence before her.

31.  The judge noted that Dr Smith provided examples of TGTE supporters  who
    were at risk on return.  The judge made  observations  in  relation  to
    each.  Mrs Chandrapala was previously assisting the  LTTE  and  held  a
    formal  position  within  the  TGTE.   The   judge   found   that   Mrs
    Chandrapala's situation  could  be  distinguished  from  the  situation
    facing this particular appellant as he had never been involved with the
    LTTE and held no formal position within the TGTE.

32.  The judge noted  that  Mr  Puthirasigamani  was  a  TGTE  activist  and
    independent researcher  who  went  to  Sri  Lanka  to  study  the  life
    conditions  of  rehabilitated  ex-LTTE  combatants  on  behalf  of  the
    International Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of  Genocide.   The
    judge found  that  his  situation  was  different  to  this  particular
    appellant as this appellant would  be  returning  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.  He will not be involved in researching the ill-treatment of ex-
    LTTE members on behalf of a public body.

33.  The judge noted that Mr Rubaranja was a human rights activist  who  was
    previously  involved  in  the  TGTE  in  the  UK.    He   assisted   Mr
    Puthirasigamani with the research identified above.  Dr Smith states he
    was targeted purely because of his TGTE activities.  The judge said she
    was unclear as to how Dr Smith has  concluded  that  Mr  Rubaranja  was
    targeted because of TGTE involvement rather than being targeted for the
    same reasons as Mr Puthirasigamani.  She accepted that Mr Rubaranja was
    asked about the TGTE while he was being detained but there was  limited
    information to support the claim that this was the reason  why  he  was
    targeted in the first place.

34.  The judge noted that Mr Antony was a former  member  of  the  LTTE  and
    held a prominent role in the TGTE which included giving  interviews  on
    well-known Tamil television channels.  His sister was assaulted by  the
    CID.  In contrast the judge held that this appellant does  not  have  a
    prominent role in the  TGTE  and  he  has  not  given  interviews  with
    television channels.

35.  The judge noted that Miss Subramaniy is a well-known traditional  Tamil
    dancer who has performed on stage at many TGTE events.  The judge  held
    that this appellant does not share her profile.  He has attended a  few
    demonstrations as a protester only.

36.  The judge noted that Mrs Velathuyapillai was a  former  journalist  for
    the LTTE radio.  She  was  a  prominent  TGTE  activist  and  was  also
    involved in diplomatic meetings.  Her brother on return  to  Sri  Lanka
    was abducted and questioned about his sister's activities in the  TGTE.
    The judge held that this particular appellant  has  not  been  involved
    with the TGTE to the same degree.

37.  The judge held that she was unclear as to why Dr Smith says  membership
    of the TGTE in itself gives rise to adverse interest.  She  noted  that
    the individuals named in his report seemed  either  to  have  prominent
    roles in the TGTE or to be related to those who do.   The  examples  do
    not address the  type  of  low  level  involvement  undertaken  by  the
    appellant.

38.  The judge noted Dr Smith's report in which he states that  in  February
    2018 there was an incident at the Sri Lankan High Commission which  was
    reported in the media under the headline  "Sri  Lanka  envoy  suspended
    over throat slitting gesture".   Dr  Smith  suggested  that  this  left
    little doubt as to the views amongst the authorities  with  regards  to
    the diaspora.  The judge noted that the  envoy  was  suspended  by  the
    authorities.  She also bore in mind that this gesture was not  directed
    at the appellant himself.

39.  The judge took into account Dr  Smith's  report  that  the  TGTE  is  a
    proscribed organisation and cited extracts from two  letters  from  the
    British High Commission in Sri Lanka.  The letters are that individuals
    belonging to these proscribed organisations  would  face  arrest  under
    anti-terrorism laws.  To date there have been no known arrests based on
    membership of one of the newly proscribed  groups.   Returnees  may  be
    questioned on arrival by Immigration, CID, SIS and TID.   They  may  be
    questioned about what they have been doing whilst  out  of  Sri  Lanka,
    including whether or not they have been involved in one of the diaspora
    groups.  Members of the organisations are not banned from returning  to
    Sri Lanka but will be questioned on arrival and may be detained.

40.  The judge stated that GJ sets out the current categories of persons  at
    real risk of persecution.  Although the appellant has been involved  in
    diaspora activities, the judge said that he has not held a  significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism.

41.  The judge concluded that it is  likely  that  this  appellant  will  be
    questioned when obtaining his travel document.  She accepted that there
    may  be  intelligence  and/or  surveillance  of  him  participating  in
    demonstrations and he may need to disclose  his  involvement  with  the
    TGTE, a proscribed organisation.  However, the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant is fit and well enough to answer questions about  the  extent
    of his involvement, which she has found is limited.   In  reaching  her
    decision the judge took into account that the appellant has never  been
    a member of the LTTE.  He has no connections with the LTTE.  He was not
    detained and tortured as claimed.  There was  no  past  persecution  in
    this case.  His credibility is low.  She found that he has  engaged  in
    some diaspora activities over the course of the last few  years  in  an
    attempt to place himself into one of the risk categories in GJ.

42.  The judge said  she  appreciated  the  perception  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities was significant and that she had taken into account what Dr
    Smith states.  However, even accounting for his membership,  the  judge
    found that the reality is that given his limited involvement  he  could
    not be seen to  be  attempting  to  re-invigorate  the  LTTE.   He  has
    attended some meetings and demonstrations and has organised a couple of
    fundraising events.  When taking into account the length of time he has
    been in the UK, she found that his involvement was  extremely  limited.
    She bore in mind that there have been no known arrests as a  result  of
    TGTE membership.  The  judge  said  she  had  taken  into  account  the
    examples of  arrest  and  detentions  provided  by  Dr  Smith  but  had
    discounted these as material to the appellant's case  for  the  reasons
    already stated by her.  Based on the appellant's level of  involvement,
    it could not be said that he posed any risk whatsoever to destabilising
    the new Sri Lankan state and found that  he  would  be  of  no  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  As a consequence, even if he were to face
    further questioning in his home area, the judge found that he would not
    be at risk of being arrested or detained.

43.  The judge said that since she heard the appeal, the  case  of  KK  (Sri
    Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 172 has been promulgated.  She took into account
    in particular paragraph 32 and bore in mind the  cumulative  effect  of
    the individual factors identified in that decision.  In particular, she
    took into account that the appellant is  being  returned  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who has participated  in  demonstrations.   KK  had  been
    convicted of a serious conspiracy to smuggle Tamils  into  the  UK  and
    there had been considerable media attention in the case.   It  was  the
    combination of these factors that created a risk on return.  The  judge
    held that the media attention in  KK  distinguishes  the  circumstances
    faced by that particular appellant  with  the  appellant  that  is  the
    subject of this appeal.   She  found  that  there  has  been  no  media
    attention directed towards this particular appellant that might  affect
    the Sri Lankan authorities' perception of him.

44.  Mr Walsh took me through the judge's decision which  I  have  cited  at
    great length.

45.  Mr Walsh relied on paragraph 19 and paragraph  24  of  UB  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 85.  Essentially the appeal before the Court of  Appeal
    turned on the failure of the respondent to bring  the  fresh  guidance,
    postdating the decision in GJ,  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or Upper Tribunal.  At paragraph 19 the Court of  Appeal  held
    that the guidance was clearly material and should have been  served  in
    advance.  UB had claimed membership of the TGTE.  The respondent in her
    refusal letter had  not  accepted  that  UB  had  any  links  with  the
    organisation.  At paragraph 23 the Court of Appeal  held  that  if  the
    material had been served, then the issue of TGTE membership would  have
    been of more significance.  At paragraph 24 the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that consideration of the risk to the appellant UB turns not merely  on
    him showing that he was actually a member of the TGTE but relied on his
    membership being detected on arrival in Sri Lanka.

46.  Mr Walsh relied on paragraph 13 of UB which cited the letter  from  the
    British High Commission in  Sri  Lanka  dated  25  July  2014  and  the
    relevant text which reads:

         "The spokesperson  from  the  DIE  stated  that  returnees  may  be
         questioned on arrival by Immigration, CID, SIS and TID.   They  may
         be questioned about what they have been doing  whilst  out  of  Sri
         Lanka, including whether they have been involved with  one  of  the
         Tamil diaspora groups.  He said that it  was  normal  practice  for
         returnees to be asked about their activities in  the  country  they
         were returning from".

47.  In the light of this evidence, Mr Walsh submitted  that  the  appellant
    would face danger if he was asked about his involvement with the  TGTE.



48.  Mr Walsh also relied on Dr Smith's report, paragraph 54,  in  which  he
    states:

         "It is not clear how effective or efficient Sri Lankan intelligence
         is in relation to the diaspora, though  received  wisdom  considers
         that  it  has  improved.   If  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities   have
         identified the appellant, this will provide an additional reason as
         to why his name, will be on the electronic database  and  therefore
         on one of the lists.  It is noted that in February 2012,  during  a
         speech  in  Jaffna,  former  President  Rajapaksa   requested   the
         paramilitary EPDP leader to organise to  infiltrate  hostile  Tamil
         organisations amongst the diaspora to disturb their activities".

49.  Mr Walsh said that evidence of individuals who  were  found  to  be  at
    risk on return following their activities in the diaspora were set  out
    by the judge at paragraph 56.  Mr Walsh accepted that these individuals
    had more involvement with their proscribed groups but  said  that  this
    should not nullify that being a member of the TGTE will  be  a  trigger
    factor to cause adverse interest in the  appellant,  as  stated  by  Dr
    Smith at paragraph 59 of his report.

50.  Mr Walsh submitted that it was wrong to treat the appellant  as  having
    a low level involvement, considering the acceptance of his  membership,
    as not to attract the hostile interest of the Sri Lankan authorities.

51.  Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge had found at paragraph 55 that  the
    appellant  has  attempted  to  place  himself  into  one  of  the  risk
    categories in GJ  and  therefore  had  acted  in  bad  faith.   He  was
    referring  to  the  Danian  principle.   He  said  that  this  may   be
    irrelevant, nevertheless it is the questioning of  the  appellant  that
    may  lead  to  the  authorities  transgressing  the  normal  course  of
    behaviour.  He said this was a question that needed to be answered.

52.  Mr Walsh submitted that the appellant will be  questioned  by  the  Sri
    Lankan High Commission in London if he obtains a travel document.  This
    in turn will lead to further questioning on his return to Sri Lanka.

53.  I find that the judge did not err in law.  I find that the judge  dealt
    with every issue that needed to be considered.  The judge's  conclusion
    that based on the appellant's level of involvement, it cannot  be  said
    that he poses any risk whatsoever of destabilising the new  Sri  Lankan
    state and that he would be of no  interest  to  the  authorities  is  a
    conclusion that, I find, was properly made following  consideration  of
    all the evidence that was before her.

54.  At paragraph 55 of his report Dr Smith states:

         "GJ and Others clearly states that anyone who has a  commitment  to
         undermining Sri Lanka  as  a  unitary  state  will  be  of  adverse
         interest.  By definition the TGTE and its  members  and  supporters
         are actively engaged in working  towards  a  separate  Tamil  state
         within Sri Lanka's border which directly  seeks  to  undermine  Sri
         Lanka".

55.  I find Dr Smith's assertion to mean that all members and supporters  of
    TGTE will be at risk.   However, the judge at paragraph 51 said she was
    unclear as to why Dr Smith said  membership  in  itself  gave  rise  to
    adverse interest.  The judge looked at  the  individuals  named  by  Dr
    Smith in his report and found that those individuals seemed  either  to
    have prominent roles in the TGTE or to be related to those who do.  The
    judge held that the examples did not  address  the  type  of  low-level
    involvement undertaken by the appellant.

56.  The judge concluded that it  is  likely  that  the  appellant  will  be
    questioned when obtaining his travel document, which was a  point  made
    by Mr Walsh.  The judge held that  there  may  be  intelligence  and/or
    surveillance of him participating in demonstrations  and  that  he  may
    need  to  disclose  his  involvement  with  the  TGTE,   a   proscribed
    organisation.  The judge said it was important to assess the perception
    of the authorities and in particular how the authorities will  perceive
    his involvement with the TGTE.  The judge took into  account  that  the
    appellant has never been a member of the LTTE.  He has  no  connections
    with the LTTE.  He was not detained and tortured as claimed.  There was
    no past persecution in this case.  His credibility was low.  Whilst the
    judge found that he has engaged in some diaspora  activities  over  the
    course of the last few years, the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    involvement with the TGTE was extremely limited.

57.  The judge found that there have been no known arrests as  a  result  of
    TGTE membership and that even if he were to face further questioning in
    his home area, he was not at risk of being arrested or  detained.   The
    judge considered Dr Smith's assessment as to how the authorities  treat
    people who are of interest to them on return.  This was  predicated  on
    the appellant being a member of the LTTE  and  known  as  such  to  the
    authorities.  The judge found that  the  appellant  has  never  been  a
    member of the LTTE, was not associated with them and never has been.

58.  I find that the judge placed the appellant's evidence  in  the  context
    of Dr Smith's report.  The judge relied on current case  law.   I  find
    that the judge's findings are well reasoned and sound.  I find that the
    judge's decision discloses no error of law.

59.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  19 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
