

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/14000/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                |               Decision & Reasons     |
|On 20 December 2017                 |Promulgated                           |
|                                    |On 20 February 2018                   |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                MUKAMAL KHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M. Burns, Parkview Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1995.  He appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Siddiqi),
    who on the 15th February 2017 dismissed his protection claim.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he  faces  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm in Pakistan.    When he claimed asylum in June 2016 (after
    being apprehended during an enforcement visit) he told officers that he
    was afraid to return to his home town of Shangla because  he  had  been
    threatened by the Taliban. They had attempted to extort money from him.
    He believes that they were demanding money from him because  they  knew
    that he had been in the UK.


 3. In her letter dated the 7th December 2016 the Respondent  rejected  the
    claim:

           a) For a lack of credibility;


           b) Because the facts as disclosed by the Appellant,  even  taken
              at its highest, did not show a real risk of harm for  one  of
              the reasons adumbrated in the Refugee Convention;


           c) Because the Appellant could reasonably be  expected  to  seek
              the protection of the Pakistani government; and


           d)  Because  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
              relocate within Pakistan in order to avoid problems with  the
              Taliban.


 4. The Appellant appealed  and  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 5.  Judge  Siddiqi  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant.  In   her
    determination she gave several reasons why she disbelieved his account.
     Concluding that there was no currently well-founded risk of harm,  she
    dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant now appeals on the grounds that in reaching its  findings
    the First-tier Tribunal drew adverse conclusions  from  'discrepancies'
    in the evidence that in  truth  were  not  discrepancies  at  all.  For
    instance,  paragraph  23  of  the  determination   highlights   alleged
    discrepancies about how many  times  the  Appellant  gave  the  Taliban
    money. The grounds submit that the evidence summarised does not in fact
    contain any contradictions. It is further submitted that  the  Tribunal
    acted unfairly in finding there to be a  material  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence when the Appellant said on one hand that  he  had  first  been
    threatened in 2000 and on the other that it was in 2012. It is  pointed
    out that the Appellant is illiterate and entirely uneducated  and  that
    he does not even know his own birthday. The fact that he has got  dates
    mixed up should not be held against him.  Similar submissions are  made
    in response to the Tribunal's conclusion that the Appellant was "vague"
    in his evidence.

 7. I need not deal with the substance of the grounds in this appeal at all
    because I am quite satisfied that even if the Appellant could make  out
    the factual core his claim to the appropriate standard this is still  a
    claim that must fall to be dismissed.  That is because in the  unlikely
    event that the Taliban who tried to extort money out of him five  years
    ago are still interested in him, the Appellant can seek the  protection
    of the Pakistani army and police, who have a  significant  presence  in
    the area. If he is reluctant to do that, he can move elsewhere in order
    to avoid any contact with the Taliban, as his wife  and  children  have
    done, near Abbottabad.

 8. Mr Burn's answer to both of those points is to rely on the decision  in
    KU (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 107.    That was  a  decision  where  the
    Court of Appeal restored the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    allow an appeal of an asylum-seeker from Waziristan inter alia  on  the
    basis that he would be unable to seek protection or reasonably relocate
    because of his ethnic identity. Expert evidence  had  been  given,  and
    accepted,  to  the  effect  that  such  a  man,   from  the   Federally
    Administered Tribal Areas that lie on the border between  Pakistan  and
    Afghanistan, would encounter prejudice  and  harassment  if  trying  to
    establish himself in Pakistan 'proper'.  On the  facts  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been satisfied that the Taliban would be able and  willing
    to track him down wherever he went  to  live  in  Pakistan.   Mr  Burns
    relied on the findings in KU to submit a) that the Appellant  was  from
    an area of high Taliban presence, b) that  as  a  result  he  would  be
    viewed with suspicion and mistrust by the  police  in  other  parts  of
    Pakistan.

 9. Unlike the Appellant in KU this Appellant is not from FATA. He is  from
    Shangla district, in the Khyber Pukhtunkhwa (KP)  (formerly  the  North
    West Frontier Province). This is an integral part of  Pakistan  and  is
    quite distinct from Waziristan.  It was an area  with  a  high  Taliban
    presence in 2007, but since the various  offensives  by  the  Pakistani
    security forces the militants have been all but wiped out in that  part
    of the KP.  There was no objective evidence before the  Tribunal  which
    could have justified a finding  that  he  would  be  denied  protection
    because he was from Shangla.  Nor  was  there  any  objective  material
    capable of supporting  Mr  Burns'  assertion  that  he  would  find  it
    difficult to internally relocate for the same reasons.   In  particular
    there was absolutely no evidence to indicate that the  Appellant  might
    have any problems if he went to live with his wife  and  children  near
    Abbottabad.

10. For those reasons any misunderstandings, omissions  or  errors  on  the
    part of the Judge are immaterial. The  Appellant  may  well  have  been
    asked for money by the Taliban in 2012  but  on  the  evidence  at  its
    highest, that does not make out a  case  for  international  protection
    today.




    Decisions

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          21st December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Woodcraft on the 12th June 2017 but granted upon renewed permission by
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on the 14th September 2017


