
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14275/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2019                    |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE NICOL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     C A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bond, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. We have made an anonymity direction because this decision refers to
         the Appellant's asylum claim and the  circumstances  of  two  minor
         children.

      2. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  has  appealed  against  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal ('FtT') Judge G D Davison  sent  on
         25 July 2019, dismissing her appeal on asylum grounds.




Background

      3. The Appellant's asylum claim can be summarised as follows: she  and
         her children have sustained egregious  violence  over  an  extended
         period of time, at the hands of her  husband;  she  has  made  many
         complaints but did not believe that she would  be  able  to  secure
         protection in Nigeria; she therefore fled with two of her children,
         A (born in 2007) and B (born in 2013), with the  assistance  of  an
         agent.

      4. The Respondent refused the asylum claim for  detailed  reasons  set
         out in a 37-page letter dated 13  December  2018.   The  Respondent
         simply did not accept the credibility of the Appellant's account of
         serious and sustained domestic violence in Nigeria.

      5. The Appellant appealed against this  decision  to  the  FtT,  which
         heard her appeal on 24 June 2019.

Appeal proceedings

      6. The  FtT  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  made  adverse
         credibility findings.  The FtT did not accept  that  the  Appellant
         provided a credible account for a  variety  of  reasons  including,
         inter alia: inconsistencies, inherent implausibility of aspects  of
         the account, some  documents  relied  upon  were  forged  and  some
         evidence was obtained cynically to bolster the asylum claim.

      7. The Appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal ('UT') relying upon six grounds of  appeal.   Each  ground
         attacked aspects of the FtT's adverse credibility findings.

      8. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Landes in a  decision
         dated  29  August  2019.   She  made   comprehensive   observations
         regarding the arguability of grounds 4(i) and (ii), and  ground  6,
         but considered that the other grounds had less force.  Nonetheless,
         permission was  granted  on  all  grounds.   It  is  convenient  to
         summarise the points made in grounds 4 and 6 at this point.

      9. Ground 4 submits that the FtT made adverse credibility findings  on
         matters, that were never put  to  the  Appellant,  including  inter
         alia: (i) the Appellant failed to take steps to secure  the  safety
         and custody of the children she had left behind in Nigeria and  who
         were still  living  with  their  father;  (ii)  the  Appellant  had
         cynically obtained a handwritten letter from A and a letter written
         by the Headteacher of B's infant school detailing the  violence  he
         claimed to have witnessed in Nigeria; (iii) a text message from the
         travel agent the Appellant had used in relation to  her  travel  to
         the UK in which the agent had asked   if  the  Appellant  had  been
         given any benefits in the UK.

     10. Ground 6 submits that the FtT failed to make any clear  finding  on
         the evidence  from  the  Nigerian  Human  Rights  Commission  ('the
         Commission') in support of the Appellant's claim that  she  made  a
         complaint to it in March 2018 (prior to her departure from  Nigeria
         in April 2018), in connection with the domestic violence  she  said
         she had suffered.

     11. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 notice dated 29 September  2019.
         This briefly addressed each ground of appeal, with the exception of
         ground 4.

Hearing

     12. Ms  Bond  relied  upon  all  six  grounds  of  appeal,  albeit  she
         acknowledged  that  her  stronger  grounds  of  appeal  were  those
         identified in the decision granting permission to appeal.

     13. Ms Jones relied upon the Rule 24 notice.  During the course of  her
         submissions she made reference to the Judge Davison's typed  Record
         of Proceedings ('the RoP').   We  were  told  that  this  had  been
         provided by the Tribunal to the Respondent as an attachment to  the
         Appellant's grounds of appeal.   We  have  checked  the  file.   No
         application for the RoP has ever been made to the Tribunal, and  it
         appears to have been disclosed in error.  As the RoP was  disclosed
         to the Respondent, we made arrangements for a copy to  be  provided
         to Ms Bond, who was then able to take instructions on it.  The  RoP
         was relevant to ground 4.  Although Ms  Jones  initially  submitted
         that the grounds of appeal were not  made  out,  she  realistically
         acknowledged that, having considered the RoP,  the  Respondent  did
         not dispute that the matters set out at (i) and (ii)  of  ground  4
         (see above) were not put to the Appellant during the course of  the
         FtT  hearing.   Ms  Jones  also  candidly  accepted  that  fairness
         required those matters to be put and for that reason ground  4  was
         made out.  She however invited us to consider whether  this  was  a
         material error in  the  light  of  the  FtT's  many  other  adverse
         credibility findings.  When we pointed out  that  the  FtT  clearly
         based its rejection of the appellant's credibility on a  cumulative
         assessment of the various adverse credibility points (see  [21]  of
         Judge Davison's decision), Ms Jones agreed and indicated  that  she
         could offer no further argument on the issue.

     14. We reserved our decision and now give our reasons in writing.

Error of law discussion

     15. We begin by addressing what we consider to be the strongest  ground
         of appeal: ground 4(ii).  This refers to a letter dated 6  February
         2019 from the Headteacher of B's infant school, that was  available
         to the FtT in the Appellant's bundle at page 120.  This states that
         "on several  occasions",  B  disclosed  to  school  staff  "extreme
         violence"  he  witnessed  and  received  in  Nigeria.   The  letter
         particularises examples of claims of violence on the  part  of  his
         father toward the Appellant and B, as  disclosed  by  B  to  school
         staff.  B is said to be "deeply traumatised" and  the  letter  ends
         with the following "our school is providing [B] with a  safe  space
         in which to explore his emotions caused by complex  trauma".   This
         letter is recorded to have been copied to the  Chair  of  Governors
         and Designated Safeguarding Leads.

     16. The FtT  refers  to  this  evidence  and  a  letter  written  by  A
         particularising the violence he witnessed  at  [30]  before  saying
         this: "I have considered this  evidence  carefully,  but  have  not
         accepted the claims of domestic violence to be made  out.   I  find
         this evidence has been obtained, somewhat  cynically,  to  try  and
         bolster / establish  a  claim  for  asylum."   The  school  letter,
         emanating from the headteacher refers to  multiple  disclosures  of
         violence from a young child, that has been treated  very  seriously
         by  his  school.   This  is  apparently  cogent   and   significant
         corroborating evidence of the  Appellant's  claim.   Ms  Jones  was
         entirely correct to concede that, as the  FtT  Judge  had  a  clear
         concern  that  the  letter  from  the  Headteacher   was   obtained
         "cynically", fairness demanded  that  the  Appellant  be  given  an
         opportunity to address such a serious  allegation.   Ms  Jones  was
         also correct to accept that the RoP makes it clear that at no point
         was  this  concern  ever  put  to  the  Appellant.   In   all   the
         circumstances, in failing to  put  this  matter  to  the  Appellant
         before making a serious adverse finding against her,  the  FtT  has
         acted unfairly.

     17. Although this is just one of many reasons given for  not  accepting
         the Appellant's claim of domestic violence, we are  satisfied  that
         it  played  a  material  role  in  the  FtT's  adverse  credibility
         findings.  When Judge Davison recorded at [21] that he did not find
         the Appellant's claims to be credible, he made it clear  that  this
         was based on all the findings listed "below" and then said this:

             "It was not one  of  these  findings  that  drew  me  to  this
             conclusion but rather having considered the cumulative  weight
             of these adverse points."

     18. We are satisfied that there has been procedural unfairness.  We  do
         not consider  that  in  these  circumstances  any  of  the  adverse
         credibility findings can be preserved and the FtT's  decision  must
         be set aside.  The FtT approached credibility on a cumulative basis
         and it is therefore  very  difficult  to  disentangle  the  various
         adverse points.

     19. Having reached that conclusion, we need not address  the  remaining
         grounds of appeal.   For  completeness,  like  the  FtT  Judge  who
         granted permission to appeal we see very little force in any of the
         remaining grounds  save  for  Ground  6.   The  evidence  from  the
         Commission  was  potentially  corroborative   evidence   that   the
         Appellant had a history of making  formal  complaints  of  violence
         against her husband, and had done so most recently  in  2018.   The
         FtT did not reject the evidence from the Commission (contrast  this
         with other reports from Nigeria at [36]) and accepted at [34]  that
         it was possible that the Appellant made a complaint to it in  2014.
         Although the FtT noted the 2018 complaint at [28],  it  omitted  to
         address this, and we accept that in doing so  committed  a  further
         error of law.



Disposal

     20. We have found that the FtT's findings  are  tainted  by  procedural
         unfairness. The findings of fact  need  to  be  remade  completely.
         That  is  likely  to  involve  a  detailed  fact-finding  exercise,
         including cross-examination that is best done in the  FtT,  bearing
         in mind paragraph 7.2 of the relevant Practice Direction.

Decision

     21. The FtT's decision contains a material error of law and it  is  set
         aside.

     22. The appeal is remitted to the FtT where the decision will be remade
         de novo by a FtT Judge other than Judge G D Davison.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                                       Date: 21  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

