
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14311/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 September 2017                  |On 25 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     d d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person (assisted by Mr Forbes, McKensie Friend)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, D D, is a female citizen of Nigeria who  was
    born in 1985.  She appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Phull)
    against a decision dated 14 December 2016 of the respondent  to  refuse
    her application for asylum and humanitarian protection.  The First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  13  March  2017,  allowed  the
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds (Articles 2, 3 and  8  ECHR).
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeared in person and I  found  that  she  was  able  to
    understand the proceedings.  She was assisted by a McKensie Friend,  Mr
    Forbes of Lifeline Options.  I am grateful to him for his assistance.

 3. In essence, there are two issues before the Upper Tribunal.  First, the
    Secretary of State challenges the judge's reasoning for concluding that
    the appellant and her children (she has three sons, two  of  whom  were
    born in the United Kingdom) to be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  and
    Article 3 ill-treatment in Nigeria.  The appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal focused upon the condition of the child  S  who  was  born  in
    2012.  S suffers from  autism.   Following  the  child's  diagnosis  of
    autism, the father  of  the  child  abandoned  the  appellant  and  her
    children.  The judge found that the appellant had  a  genuine  fear  of
    returning to her home village  in  Nigeria.   It  was  the  appellant's
    contention that, on account of  her  son's  autism,  the  family  would
    suffer discrimination at such a level  as  to  amount  to  persecution.
    There was evidence before the Tribunal  that  children  suffering  from
    autism  are  sometimes  accused  of  being  witches  or  of  possessing
    supernatural powers.   The  respondent  has  acknowledged  the  genuine
    nature of the  appellant's  subjective  fear  but  refused  the  asylum
    application in part on the basis that the family could relocate without
    undue hardship to another area  of  Nigeria  (more  particularly,  Port
    Harcourt, where the appellant had previously  lived.)   The  respondent
    submitted that Port Harcourt is a modern city (one of the largest ports
    in  Nigeria)  where  there  was  "no  prevalence  of  child  witchcraft
    accusations".  The judge noted that,

         "The respondent refers to the Encyclopaedia Britannica in  relation
         to Port Harcourt and said it was considered  to  be  a  modern  and
         forward thinking city.  I find that paragraph  21  of  the  refusal
         letter refers to the commercial activities and commerce of the city
         of Port Harcourt.  It does not deal with  autism.   But  while  the
         respondent may be  right  that  the  city  is  modern  I  find  the
         objective evidence does not support the respondent's claim that the
         city is forward thinking on the issues  that  the  appellant  fears
         e.g. autism as witchcraft, abominable.  There is no  evidence  that
         Port of Harcourt has banned child witchcraft  accusations  or  that
         there are facilities in place that deal with  the  perpetrators  of
         such atrocities against children because there is  nothing  in  the
         respondent's documents to satisfy to a reasonable likely likelihood
         that the public attitudes in Port Harcourt are any more enlightened
         than in any other parts of Nigeria."

 4. The difficulty with this analysis is that, as Mr  Mills  submitted,  it
    both appears to cast the burden of proof  on  to  the  respondent  and,
    notwithstanding any clear evidence, accepts that child autism would  be
    regarded  in  Port  Harcourt  (where  the  appellant  might   otherwise
    reasonably relocate) with such  suspicion  that  the  family  would  be
    exposed to the risk of persecution.  I fully accept that the  appellant
    appears in person and that her resources and ability to  obtain  expert
    evidence has been strictly limited.  There  is  some  evidence  in  the
    appellant's      bundle       taken       from       the       internet
    (www.autismaroundtheglobe.org) which mentions that "in  many  parts  of
    Nigeria today, particularly in rural  areas,  people  with  autism  are
    thought to be possessed or evil".  However,  the  mere  fact  that  the
    country material referred to in the refusal  letter  relating  to  Port
    Harcourt makes no mention of autism was not enough, in my  opinion,  to
    entitle the judge to reach a firm finding that the family would  be  at
    risk of persecution in that city.

 5. I agree also with Mr Mills that the judge's analysis of sufficiency  of
    protection [26] is inadequate.  The judge found that  a  report  before
    her "confirms that police are corrupt and  can  be  easily  bribed  and
    failed to  take  necessary  steps  to  protect  the  child  accused  of
    witchcraft".  Because the appellant has failed to obtain  any  evidence
    to show the likelihood of  witchcraft  allegations  occurring  in  Port
    Harcourt or a similar substantial centre of population in Nigeria it is
    extremely difficult to conclude that, because the police  generally  in
    Nigeria may be easily bribed, the police  in  Port  Harcourt  would  be
    unable or unwilling to offer the family protection should they  require
    it.  Even the judge acknowledged [24] that  there  was  "a  functioning
    police force operating in Nigeria and  that  ongoing  improvements  are
    being made to its services".  This is a classic instance, in  my  view,
    of a judge confusing an absence of evidence with evidence  of  absence;
    there is simply not enough  evidence  either  way  to  show  that  Port
    Harcourt would not be safe or that the police in  that  city  would  or
    would  not  offer  protection  to   the   family   against   witchcraft
    allegations.  Since it is for the appellant to prove  her  case  before
    the Tribunal, it is apparent that she failed to do  so  notwithstanding
    the low threshold of the burden which she had to discharge.

 6. I turn to the second part of the appeal.  At  [30]  et  seq  the  judge
    considered the appellant's private life under paragraph  276ADE  of  HC
    395 (as amended).  At [31], the judge found that there would  be  "very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Nigeria  with
    her child who has autism.  S spent his  entire  life  in  the  UK  with
    support through an education care  plan".   The  judge  reiterates  her
    findings regarding the "societal views about autism and witchcraft" and
    makes the unequivocal finding that the appellant and her children would
    not have family members in Nigeria to whom they might turn for support.
     At [32], the judge considered the best interests of S under Section 55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   She  concluded
    there would not be in S's best interest to be removed to  Nigeria.   At
    [33], she found that, "for all these reasons I  found  the  appellant's
    claim under paragraph 276ADE also succeeds".  She makes it clear in the
    summary of the decision, that she is here  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 7. Mr Mills submitted that the judge's reasoning in respect of  Article  8
    was tainted by the same errors which had been shown  to  exist  in  her
    asylum/Article 3 analysis. He accepted, however, that the consideration
    of whether the family would face very significant  obstacles  to  their
    integration in Nigeria differed materially from the  appropriate  tests
    in the asylum/Article 3 analysis.  Paragraph 276ADE(vi)  provides  that
    an appellant such as in this instant appeal who is  aged  18  years  or
    above and has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  must  show
    that there would be "very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into the country to which she would have to go if  required
    to leave the UK".

 8. I consider that Mr Mills is correct to identify a  distinction  in  the
    evidential requirements required by paragraph 276ADE and in the  asylum
    appeal/Article 3 appeal.  There  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  considerable
    difference between a young family with a  single  mother  returning  to
    live in a country where it has not been proved that, on account of  her
    one child's autism, the family would be  reasonably  likely  to  suffer
    persecution and ill-treatment and, for the purposes of the analysis  on
    Article 8 grounds, the same family  returning  without  an  adult  male
    member to a country where the autistic child has never lived, where  he
    might receive little, if any, assistance  medically  and  where  it  is
    evident (even on the basis that the limited evidence in this case) that
    his education and the integration of the family  as  a  whole  will  be
    hampered by societal attitudes towards the child's autism.  Whilst  not
    obviously relevant in the context of the asylum appeal, the lack of any
    family members in Nigeria is, in my opinion, a significant feature with
    regards Article 8 ECHR. So far as integration in  Nigerian  society  is
    concerned, I would accept (as did Judge Phull) that a  lack  of  family
    support, coupled with the child's autism, are  bound  to  make  matters
    very difficult for the appellant mother.

 9. I find, therefore, that whilst the judge erred in concluding  that  the
    appellant and her family would face  persecution  and  Article  3  ill-
    treatment, it is difficult, even on the basis of the  limited  evidence
    before the Tribunal, to  conclude  that  her  findings  in  respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR  were  perverse  or  inadequately  reasoned.   For  that
    reason, I set aside the asylum and Article 3 ECHR decisions and  remake
    those dismissing the appeal.  However, I do not  propose  to  interfere
    with the judge's findings in respect of Article 8 ECHR;  I  agree  with
    the judge that the appellant  satisfies  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 March 2017 is  set
aside insofar as the appeal concerns asylum  and  Articles  2/3  ECHR.   The
Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 22 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
