
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14176/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2020                   |On 11 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by ABN
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who entered the United  Kingdom
    with entry clearance as a student, probably in 2009.   After  receiving
    further leave to remain in a student capacity, he was granted leave  to
    remain as an entrepreneur until June 2016.  Shortly before  the  expiry
    of that leave, the appellant claimed to be  in  need  of  international
    protection.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of that claim.

2.   On 3 July 2017, the appellant's appeal was due to be  heard  at  Hatton
    Cross.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge caused her clerk to telephone the
    appellant's then solicitors, in order to discover why there had been no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  That  was  at  or  around
    12.30 p.m. on the day of the hearing.  The clerk was informed that  the
    appellant was unwell  and  had  been  taken  to  hospital.   The  judge
    requested the clerk to telephone the solicitors to  "inform  them  that
    medical evidence/evidence from the hospital was required".

3.   Those solicitors had, in fact, earlier faxed a  letter  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, dated 3 July 2017, which said:-

         "The appellant is unwell.   Specifically,  the  appellant  has  had
         chest pains.  The appellant has  been  taken  to  hospital  by  his
         friends.

         We are awaiting evidence as confirmation of this.

         In light of  the  above  we  request  the  appellant's  hearing  be
         adjourned.  It would  be  unfair  to  proceed  such  hearing  (sic)
         without the appellant being present".

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge had, it seems, received  that  letter  by
    the time she turned again to the  appeal,  around  4.30  p.m.   In  her
    decision, she said  that  she  "acceded  to  the  Presenting  Officer's
    request to hear this appeal in  the  absence  of  the  appellant  after
    considering the provisions of Rule 2 and further delay which was not in
    the public interest".  In that regard, the judge took into account  the
    fact that an earlier hearing on 31 January 2017 had been adjourned  for
    the appellant to obtain medical reports and documents from abroad.  She
    also noted that in June 2017 the appellant had made a self-referral  to
    the Central and North West London NHS, owing to problems he was  having
    with his sleep and  nightmares.   He  had  been  offered  a  course  of
    cognitive behavioural therapy.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge analysed the documentary evidence  before
    her.  She  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a  credible
    explanation for aspects of his claim to be  in  need  of  international
    protection.  She concluded that the appellant had not established, even
    to the lower standard  required  of  him,  that  he  was  arrested  and
    detained by the CID and accused of assisting  a  Tamil  activist.   She
    concluded that, despite his claim,  the  appellant  had  not  been  the
    subject of an outstanding arrest warrant.  In this regard,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant "did not attend  the  oral
    hearing to be cross-examined on this and other points".

6.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

7.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Paragraph 5 of the grounds engaged with what the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had said about evidence  from  the  hospital  being
    required, to confirm that the appellant had been admitted  on  3  July.
    Paragraph 5 stated that "it was unfortunate that the evidence  was  not
    available at the date of the hearing but that specific evidence has now
    been provided ... and the reason the evidence was not provided by  4.30
    p.m. on the day of the hearing was due to the fact that [the appellant]
    was not discharged until 1656 hours".

8.   Paragraph 6  of  the  grounds  said  the  evidence  revealed  that  the
    appellant had fallen, the night before  the  appeal  hearing,  and  was
    admitted to hospital with chest pains  and  therefore  could  not  have
    attended the hearing.  Since the appellant's oral evidence was "crucial
    to a determination of credibility",  the  grounds  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision not to adjourn the matter deprived
    the appellant of discharging the burden of proof.

9.   Before us, Mr. Paramjorthy adduced the fax transmission report  of  the
    solicitors, in respect of the faxing of the application for  permission
    and grounds in February 2017.  The  fax  transmission  report  recorded
    that a number of additional  pages  attached  to  the  application  and
    grounds were successfully transmitted.  Crucially, however, these pages
    were either not received by the First-tier Tribunal or, if  they  were,
    they were not put before the judge  who  decided  the  application  for
    permission. The pages comprised an official record of  the  appellant's
    attendance at hospital on the day of the hearing.

10.   As  a  result,  the  judge  deciding  permission  noted  that,  whilst
    paragraph 6 of the grounds referred to medical evidence "that  has  not
    been provided to the Tribunal.  Without  any  medical  evidence,  these
    grounds are not arguable".  The judge accordingly refused permission to
    appeal.

11.   Following  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  refusal  of  permission,   the
    appellant sought permission to appeal from the Upper  Tribunal.   On  1
    December 2017, the Upper Tribunal refused permission  to  appeal.   The
    Upper Tribunal considered that there was "no evidence  to  support  the
    explanation given on behalf of the appellant for his non-attendance  at
    the hearing".  In those circumstances, it was considered that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to proceed in the appellant's absence.



12.  The appellant applied to the High Court for  permission  to  judicially
    review the Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal.  The  High
    Court granted permission, following which the Upper Tribunal's  refusal
    of permission was quashed.

13.  We have already referred to the fact  that  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's admission to hospital  had  been  sent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, along with the grounds.  The evidence is a printout from  the
    hospital's records.  It notes that the appellant was initially seen  at
    12:31 on 3 July 2017 and that he was discharged to his own GP at  15:56
    p.m.

14.  This evidence plainly meets the requirements described by  Carnwath  LJ
    (as he then was) in E & R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] EWCA Civ 49 for establishing that there has  been  an  error  of
    fact, amounting to unfairness, which constitutes an error of law.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  who  dismissed  the  appeal,  cannot   be
    criticised for failing to know about the printout  from  the  hospital.
    It could, however, be said that she imposed an  unrealistic  burden  on
    the appellant and his advisors, in requiring  such  evidence  from  the
    hospital to be produced on the date of the hearing.

15.  Be that as it may, the undisputed  fact  is  that  the  appellant  did,
    indeed, attend the hospital on 3 July 2017, complaining of the symptoms
    described in the solicitor's  letter  sent  to  the  judge.   This  was
    manifestly a good reason for  his  absence  from  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal.  Had the judge been aware of it, she  plainly  would  not  have
    proceeded to determine the  appeal  in  his  absence,  drawing  adverse
    credibility inferences from that absence.

16.  Mr. Melvin helpfully  agreed,  in  the  circumstances,  that  the  oral
    permission hearing  on  29  January  2020  could  immediately  proceed,
    following our indication that permission to appeal would be granted, to
    a hearing of whether the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    should be set aside.  This decision therefore stands both as  a  record
    of the grant of permission and as a  record  of  the  decision  on  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

17.  It is quite plain that the effect of the "E &  R"  error  has  been  to
    deprive the appellant of a fair hearing.  The decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge must, accordingly, be set aside.

18.  Given that the appellant has not had any lawful hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the only appropriate course is to remit the matter to be
    decided afresh, with no findings preserved from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  on  a  point  of
law.  We set that decision aside and remit the matter to be  decided  afresh
by the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               Signed                     Date 7 February
                                   2020


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
