
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14333/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                |                                 |
|On 2 September 2019                   |On 4 September 2019              |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           SHOFIQUE AHMED JAKARIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hossain of counsel
For the Respondent: Mr McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp promulgated on 1 May 2019, which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  a  protection  claim  on  all
   grounds.

3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge made factual  errors
   in relation to the date the Appellant joined the BNP;  the  Judge  placed
   insufficient weight on the  Appellants  witness  statement;  he  did  not
   indicated the standard of proof he applied ;  failed  to  allow  for  the
   impact of the passage of time on his recollection of  events;  failed  to
   take into account the medical evidence and his Article 8  assessment  was
   inadequate.

4. On 4 July 2019First tier Tribunal Judge Keane gave permission to appeal.

5. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Hossain  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that he relied on his  grounds  of  appeal;  the  Judge  simply
   rejected wholesale the Appellants account; he applied the wrong  standard
   of proof; there was a factual error in the decision and he failed to take
   into account the Appellants length of residence  in  the  proportionality
   assessment.

6. On behalf of  the  Respondent   Mr  McVitie  submitted  that   the  Judge
   applied the correct burden and standard of proof ; the weight he gave  to
   the evidence was a matter for him;  the  medical  evidence  from  his  GP
   appeared to be manufactured for the purpose  of  the  claim  and  finally
   having found numerous inconsistencies the Judge was  entitled  to  reject
   the asylum claim. In relation to Article 8 there was no evidence  of  his
   private life in the UK other than his presence for 14 years. There was no
   evidence of what he had done other than work illegally.

7. In reply Mr Hossain  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the
   Article 8 assessment was incomplete.

Law

8.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to   follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to  give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him.

10. Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not  irrational
   just because some alternative explanation has been  rejected  or  can  be
   said to be possible. Nor is  it  necessary  to  consider  every  possible
   alternative inference consistent with truthfulness because an Immigration
   judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If a point of evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

       "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of  the  reasoning  of  an
       adjudicator in respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
       credibility),  particular  care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
       criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the  adjudicator,  and
       does not merely reflect a  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  appellate
       tribunal that it might itself have taken  a  different  view  of  the
       matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

11. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by  the
   Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

       "The duty to give reasons  requires  that  reasons  must  be  proper,
       intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of  this  court
       in Re Poyser and Mills'  Arbitration  [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
       dispute in the present case relates to the last  of  those  elements,
       that is the adequacy of the reasons given by the FtT for its decision
       allowing the appellant's appeal.  It is important to appreciate  that
       adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more and no less.   It
       is not a counsel of perfection.  Still  less  should  it  provide  an
       opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of the  reasons  to
       see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising,  on  their  merits.
       The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,  to  enable  the
       losing party to know why she has lost.   It  is  also  to  enable  an
       appellate court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the  decision
       are so that they can be examined in case some error of  approach  has
       been committed."

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. In suggesting that the Judge's overall  approach  to  the  evidence  was
   flawed the grounds identify one factual mistake made by the  Judge,  that
   he records that the Appellant claimed that he joined the BNP in  1968  as
   one of three dates he gave for this event which is a clear  error  as  he
   was born in 1969. Counsel was unable to identify any other error made  by
   the Judge that may have impacted on his findings or reflected an  absence
   of anxious scrutiny: given the number of adverse credibility findings  in
   the decision as a whole I am satisfied that this one error of fact  could
   not have made a difference and does not fairly reflect  the  careful  and
   detailed analysis made by the Judge.

14. The decision is challenged that the Judge gave  insufficient  weight  to
   the Appellants witness statement. The Judge of course  recorded  that  he
   had been provided with a witness statement from the Appellant as part  of
   the bundle (paragraph 8) but he heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
   who started by adopting that statement  (paragraph  11).  The  Judge  has
   clearly taken into account as he must  the  totality  of  the  Appellants
   evidence, not just his written statement,  in  assessing  his  claim  and
   reaching the various adverse findings he made giving what weight he  felt
   appropriate to that evidence.

15. It is argued that the Judge 'did not exactly indicate which standard  of
   proof he applied'. This is manifestly incorrect as the Judge sets out  at
   paragraphs 5-7 the legal framework and explicitly set out the burden  and
   standard of proof that is  applicable  in  each  of  the  issues  he  was
   required to determine and he was not required to repeat it in respect  of
   each and every finding he made. Mr Hossain was unable to identify for  me
   any example of where this standard had not been applied to  the  evidence
   before him. Mr Hossain appeared to conflate this with weight which is  of
   course a matter for the Judge.

16. The Judge is criticised that failing to take into  account  the  passage
   of time since the  events  described  may  have  had  an  impact  on  his
   recollection and explained the inconsistencies identified by  the  Judge.
   The Judge set out this argument as made by Mr Hossain before  the  First-
   tier  Tribunal  at  paragraph  13  and  sets  out  why  he  rejects  this
   explanation at paragraph 20 and it was open  to  him  to  find  that  the
   number and types of inconsistencies were not explained by the passage  of
   time.

17. In relation to the Judges  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  I  am
   satisfied that the Judges analysis of that evidence  at  paragraph  21-22
   was fair and he reached conclusions as to  weight  that  were  reasonably
   open to him. He did not accord the evidence no weight but gave it  little
   weight as the evidence from the hospital in Bangladesh does not state the
   reason for the Appellants admission to hospital and therefore confirm the
   Appellants claim that he  had  been  shot  in  the  way  he  claims.  The
   Appellant bears the burden of  proof  and  it  was  not,  as  Mr  Hossain
   apparently argued, for the Respondent to try and obtain this  information
   from the hospital  but  for  the  Appellant  to  obtain  such  additional
   evidence if he chose. The GP records record a claim made some time  later
   that the Appellant had been shot and the Judge was entitled to find  this
   took the matter no further as the GP did not examine  the  Appellant  and
   confirm that he had a gunshot wound he simply recorded that  this  was  a
   claim he made.

18. In relation to the Article 8 assessment the Judge  dealt  with  this  at
   paragraphs 26 -30. The Judge was bound to  take  into  account  that  the
   Appellants claim was a private life one only as  he  had  no  partner  or
   child in the UK. The Judge was prepared to accept he had a  private  life
   given the length of residence but he would have  been  entitled  to  note
   that contrary to the assertion of Mr Hossain there  was  no  evidence  of
   integration other than his oral evidence : he produced no evidence of any
   engagement with the community other than working illegally, there  is  no
   evidence of friends in the local community. The absence of clear evidence
   of the nature and quality of his private life beyond length of  residence
   would inevitably have limited the weight he could accord  the  Appellants
   private life.

19. In relation to his private life given his length of residence  the  only
   requirement of the Rules that was relevant was paragraph  276ADE(vi)  and
   he gave adequate reasons why there were no 'very  significant  obstacles'
   to his reintegration in that he had rejected his asylum  claim  so  there
   was no risk, he had lived there the  majority  of  his  life,  spoke  the
   language and understood the culture.  The Judge nevertheless went  on  to
   consider  if  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  and  there  is  no
   suggestion that any were identified by Mr Hossain. He  also  applied  the
   provisions of s117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  as  he
   was required to do and looking at all of the evidence concluded  that  it
   was proportionate for the Appellant to return to his home  country.  This
   was a finding reasonably open to him in the circumstances.

20. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning applying the correct standard of proof.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
3.9.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
