
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14262/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2018                          |On 27th February 2018         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    a r u
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood of IAS Liverpool
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Austin (the Judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th April 2017.

 2. The Appellant is an Ethiopian citizen born in January 1994.  He arrived
    in the UK on 15th June 2016 and claimed asylum based  upon  a  fear  of
    persecution by reason of his support for  the  Oromo  Liberation  Front
    (OLF).

 3. The asylum and human rights application was refused  on  11th  December
    2016 and the appeal was heard by the FtT on 1st February 2017.

 4. Evidence was given by the Appellant and the appeal was dismissed on all
    grounds.  The judge found the Appellant to be an incredible witness and
    did not accept his claim to have been detained in Ethiopia  because  of
    OLF activities, and because it  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  been
    detained, it was not accepted  that  he  had  been  released  following
    payment of a bribe, as he  had  claimed.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant failed to claim asylum  in  Italy  and  France  and  made  an
    adverse credibility finding pursuant to section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are summarised below.

 6. The Appellant challenged the findings of the  judge  at  paragraph  41,
    contending that he had reached an arguably perverse  finding.   It  was
    contended that the judge noted  that  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    beaten nightly, and to have been interrogated about his OLF involvement
    and erred in finding "that he would be reasonably expected to have  had
    a clear knowledge of his own direct involvement as a supporter if  that
    had happened in the way he claims."  The Appellant argued that  it  was
    unclear how being the victim of regular beatings and questioning by the
    Ethiopian  authorities  could  rationally  "clarify"  matters  in   the
    Appellant's mind.

 7. The conclusions of the judge at paragraph 42 were also challenged.  The
    judge had found that there were inconsistencies concerning  the  nature
    of the Appellant's claimed release from detention.   It  was  contended
    that there was no actual inconsistency.  The  Appellant's  evidence  on
    this point had remained the same throughout.  There was no objective or
    other evidence to support the judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant's
    account was inconsistent.  In addition the judge had questioned why the
    Appellant, if he was released would be of  remaining  interest  to  the
    authorities.  It was submitted that the answer  to  this  was  in  fact
    recorded at paragraphs 18 and 19 of the  decision,  which  records  the
    Appellant's evidence that he would be  at  risk  because  he  had  been
    arrested for an illegal activity, and released by payment of  a  bribe,
    not released formally by the authorities.  It was  contended  that  the
    judge had failed to engage with the Appellant's evidence on this point.



 8. The Appellant challenged the findings of the judge at paragraphs  44-45
    in which the judge stated that  particular  weight  was  given  to  the
    provisions of section 8 of the 2004 Act, and the Appellant's failure to
    claim asylum in either Italy  or  France  was  "significant".   It  was
    contended the judge was wrong in law to attach particular weight to the
    failure to claim asylum and the appropriate course  would  have  simply
    been to take the failure to claim asylum into account, but in any event
    it had been found in Uxbridge Magistrates' Court ex-parte Adimi  [1999]
    EWHC 765 (Admin) that a potential  refugee  had  "a  choice  of  refuge
    beyond the first safe territory by land or sea".

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald in the following terms;

         "The grounds of application  say  that  the  judge's  reasoning  is
         perverse as it is unclear how being the victim of regular  beatings
         and  questioning  could  rationally  "clarify"   matters   in   the
         Appellant's mind.  Furthermore his evidence  was  not  inconsistent
         and the judge attached too much weight  to  his  failure  to  claim
         asylum in other countries.

         Looking at what the judge said in paragraph 41 of the decision, the
         reasoning is arguably not entirely clear.  In  these  circumstances
         permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately  and  that  his  comments  at  paragraph  41   had   been
    artificially separated and not considered in context.

11. With reference to paragraph 42 it was submitted that it was open to the
    judge to assess the Appellant's claim  to  have  been  unaware  of  the
    arrangements for his departure, especially given the limited wealth  of
    the Appellant's family.

12. It was submitted that the judge was entitled to place weight on section
    8 and there was nothing in his  assessment  to  indicate  that  he  had
    applied  significant  weight  beyond  that  permitted.   The  judge  at
    paragraph 45 had found that the Appellant's failure to claim asylum  in
    a safe country was significant, but it was contended that that did not,
    as claimed in the grounds, substantiate an  argument  that  significant
    adverse weight was attributed under section 8.

13. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

14. I heard oral submissions from both representatives which are summarised
    below.

15. Mr Wood relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  He observed that there had been  a  considerable
    delay between the hearing of the appeal before the FtT on 1st  February
    2017 and promulgation on 4th April 2017.  I was asked to find that  the
    judge had made a perverse finding in paragraph 41 as explained  in  the
    grounds.

16. The judge was wrong to state in paragraph 42  that  the  Appellant  had
    given an inconsistent account regarding  his  release  from  detention.
    The Appellant would be at risk if returned, if  he  had  been  released
    following payment of a bribe.  Mr  Wood  pointed  out  that  background
    evidence supported the Appellant's claim to have been tortured while in
    detention.  Mr Wood submitted that the judge  was  wrong  to  state  at
    paragraph 42 that the Appellant was not told to leave  the  country  to
    avoid further mistreatment, as at paragraph 16  of  the  FtT  decision,
    which  summarised  the  Appellant's  case,  it  was  stated  that   the
    Appellant's uncle told him it was not safe to remain in Ethiopia.

17. With reference to failure to claim asylum in a  safe  country  such  as
    Italy and France, it was submitted that JT (Cameroon) [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    878 at paragraphs 8 and 21, indicated  that  it  was  wrong  to  attach
    particular weight to behaviour that fell within section 8 of  the  2004
    Act.

18. Mr Wood submitted that the  decision  should  be  set  aside,  with  no
    findings preserved, and remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.

19. Mr  Bates  took  a  different  view,  submitting  that  the  judge  had
    considered the evidence in the round and made sustainable findings.

20. With reference to paragraph 41, Mr Bates  submitted  that  the  finding
    made by the judge was to the effect that if the Appellant had  suffered
    significant ill-treatment as he claimed, he would have been  consistent
    when describing events that led up to that detention and ill-treatment.

21. With reference to paragraph 42 Mr Bates submitted that the judge  meant
    that the Appellant had not been told to leave the country by the person
    releasing him following payment of a bribe.

22. With reference to paragraph 43 it was accepted that the  Appellant  had
    always said that he did not know the  cost  involved  in  securing  his
    release and paying an agent to assist him to travel to the UK.  He  had
    always said that his uncle  had  supplied  the  funds,  but  Mr  Bates'
    pointed out that the judge had rejected that evidence, and it was  open
    to the judge to  make  a  finding  that  it  was  incredible  that  the
    Appellant was "almost entirely ignorant of the  arrangements  made  for
    his departure and the cost involved".

23. With reference to section 8 of the 2004 Act Mr Bates submitted that the
    judge had considered the evidence in the round and did not take section
    8 as a starting point.

24. In response Mr Wood observed that Mr Bates' comments formed part of the
    missing reasons in the FtT decision.  For reasons previously explained,
    Mr Wood submitted the judge had erred  in  law  and  the  decision  was
    unsafe and should not stand.

25. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Findings and Conclusions

26. I consider firstly the challenge to paragraph 41 of the  FtT  decision.
    This is not expressed as clearly as it could be, but in  my  view  does
    not disclose perversity.  It is not disputed that  the  Appellant  gave
    different accounts as to how he came to be arrested.  In my  view  what
    the judge is stating in paragraph 41, is that given  the  ill-treatment
    the Appellant claimed to  have  suffered  in  detention,  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him to recall what activities  he  had  undertaken
    that led to his detention, rather than give differing  accounts  as  to
    the number of times he was involved in leafleting.  I find no  material
    error of law disclosed on this point.

27. In my view the judge erred in making reference  to  inconsistencies  in
    paragraph 42.  It is the Appellant's case that he  was  told  to  leave
    Ethiopia by his uncle.  Therefore the judge's finding that he  was  not
    told to leave the country to avoid further mistreatment appears  to  be
    incorrect.  The judge poses the question, that  if  the  Appellant  was
    released how would he be of remaining interest to the authorities.  The
    answer to that question can be found  in  the  Appellant's  account  at
    paragraph 19 of the decision.  He explained that he had  been  arrested
    for an illegal activity  and  released  by  payment  of  a  bribe,  not
    released formally by the authorities.  I therefore conclude that  there
    are errors within this paragraph, but in my view they are not  material
    to the overall decision.  The judge has made other findings which  have
    not been  successfully  challenged,  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility, and the findings in paragraph 42 do not infect those other
    findings.

28. The third challenge to the decision of the FtT relates to paragraphs 44-
    45 and the fact that  the  judge  attached  particular  weight  to  the
    Appellant's travel to the UK  without  claiming  asylum  in  Italy  and
    France.  I do not find any material error  of  law  disclosed  on  this
    point.  I accept the point made by Mr Bates that the judge did not take
    section 8 of the 2004 Act as a starting point.  I am satisfied that the
    judge considered the evidence in the round.  The judge was entitled, in
    my view, at paragraph 45 to  find  the  Appellant's  failure  to  claim
    asylum in Italy and France to be significant.  I do not find  that  the
    judge was wrong in law to give particular weight to the  provisions  of
    section 8 of the 2004 Act. At paragraph 19 of JT (Cameroon) guidance is
    given that there should be no undue concentration on minutiae which may
    arise under section 8,  and  a  global  assessment  of  credibility  is
    required.  In my view, as previously stated, the judge did undertake  a
    global assessment of credibility.  At paragraph 20 of JT (Cameroon)  it
    is stated that section  8  factors  shall  be  taken  into  account  in
    assessing credibility, and are capable of damaging it, but the  section
    does  not  dictate  that  relevant  damage  to  credibility  inevitably
    results.  At paragraph 21 there is a further statement  that  Tribunals
    must take behaviour falling within section 8 into account in  assessing
    credibility although at one end of the spectrum, there may,  unusually,
    be cases in which conduct of the kind identified in section 8  is  held
    to carry no weight at all in the overall assessment of  credibility  on
    the particular facts.  However where section 8 matters are held  to  be
    entitled to some weight, the weight to be given to them is  entirely  a
    matter for the fact finder.

29. My reading of the FtT decision is that the judge followed the  guidance
    as set out above.  As the fact  finder,  the  weight  to  be  given  to
    behaviour falling within section 8, such as a failure to  claim  asylum
    in a safe country, is entirely a matter for the fact finder.

30. It was common ground between the  parties  before  the  FtT,  that  the
    appeal turned on the question of credibility.  There are  a  number  of
    findings made by the judge in relation to  credibility  that  have  not
    been challenged.  At paragraph 40 the  judge  summarised  a  number  of
    issues in relation to the Appellant's credibility, such as  the  nature
    of his involvement with OLF  and  his  detention,  the  nature  of  his
    release, financing of his release and travel abroad and  his  ignorance
    of the arrangements, and his  claimed  relationship  for  a  period  of
    thirteen months with one agent who travelled with him from Ethiopia  to
    the UK.

31. The judge noted at paragraph 44 that the Appellant had  been  with  the
    agent for ten of the thirteen months that he travelled,  and  he  spent
    three months in detention in Libya, but could not give the name of  the
    agent.  The judge was entitled to take that into account when assessing
    credibility.  The judge also noted the Appellant's  claim  that  having
    been detained in Libya, the agent reappeared and paid for his  release,
    with funds provided by the Appellant's uncle.  The judge  was  entitled
    to draw an adverse credibility finding from that, taking  into  account
    the Appellant's account that not only did he have no idea of  what  had
    been paid, he was not in contact with his uncle in any way.

32. I conclude  that  the  grounds  demonstrate  a  disagreement  with  the
    conclusions reached by the judge, and show  that  the  judge  erred  at
    paragraph 42, but not materially for the reasons  given  above,  and  I
    find no material error of law disclosed in the FtT decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error  of  law  and  is
not set aside.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity direction because the Appellant has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
