
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/14324/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 February 2018                       |     On 5 March 2018                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     y y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Gulsen & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing  following  my  decision,  promulgated  on  2
    November 2017, that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law
    when  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
    decision of 14 December 2016, refusing his protection claim.  My  error
    of law decision is annexed to this remake decision.

 2. In summary I found that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  by
    failing  to  consider  and  apply  the  country  guidance  case  of  IK
    (returnees - records -  IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00034  to  the
    Appellant's case.  It was  accepted  by  both  representatives  at  the
    previous hearing that IK  was  indeed  the  relevant  country  guidance
    decision and that the judge should in fact have applied it or at  least
    provided cogent reasons for not doing so.   I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision, but it was agreed that certain findings  of  fact  should  be
    preserved for the purposes of the  resumed  hearing.   These  were,  in
    particular:

      i) that the Appellant was an ordinary member of the HDP;

     ii) that the authorities regard the HDP and PKK as being  very  closely
         linked;

    iii) that the Appellant was detained on two occasions and ill-treated;

     iv) when released on the second occasion, the Appellant  was  asked  to
         become an informant on the HDP and PKK and also to  report  to  the
         authorities.  He failed to comply with either condition.

 3. The judge did not accept the Appellant's explanation as to why  he  had
    not obtained further information from his family on the subject of  any
    continuing interest in him after his departure from Turkey in May 2016.



 4. I issued directions to the parties following my decision  on  error  of
    law.  In compliance with these directions the Appellant has submitted a
    consolidated bundle and Ms Daykin  has  provided  a  detailed  skeleton
    argument.




The resumed hearing before me

 5.  The  Appellant  attended  the  resumed  hearing  and,  in  line   with
    discussions held at the error of law hearing, gave brief oral  evidence
    on the issue of post-departure contact with his family in  Turkey.   In
    examination-in-chief the Appellant adopted his new witness statement at
    page  14  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  and  confirmed  that  the   two
    corrections set out in a  separate  document  were  to  be  taken  into
    account.

 6. In cross-examination the Appellant  said  the  following.  He  has  had
    contact with his family  in  Turkey  but  only  through  WhatsApp.   He
    explained that he had contact perhaps once a month or so.  He does  not
    speak about his case with his family because he is scared and  believes
    that communications are  monitored  by  the  Turkish  authorities.   He
    explained that the letter from the local Mukhtar had been sent to  him.
    He had asked a friend to ask his brother to  obtain  the  letter.   The
    Appellant was communicating with  his  friend  through  WhatsApp.   The
    Appellant told me that he did not believe that communications with  his
    friend would be monitored because the  friend  lived  in  the  west  of
    Turkey.  The Appellant told me that he believed there was less  concern
    with Kurdish issues in areas away from the south east of Turkey.

 7. There was no re-examination.




Submissions of the parties

 8. In his customary fair and candid manner Mr Duffy  accepted  that  there
    was likely to be a risk to the Appellant in his home area in the  south
    east of Turkey.  However, he submitted that this risk would not  follow
    the Appellant either to the airport or elsewhere in  the  country.   He
    submitted that the Appellant had only ever been dealt with by the local
    police or gendarmes and had not previously come to the attention of the
    counter-terrorism agencies.  He submitted that there would be  no  risk
    at the airport as  his  profile  was  simply  insufficient  to  warrant
    detention at that point.  Similarly, once the Appellant got through the
    airport, he could settle in western Turkey without there being  a  real
    risk to him.

 9. In relation to the current situation in Turkey as regards the  YPG  and
    events over the border in Syria, Mr Duffy submitted that this would not
    in fact have  a  material  bearing  on  the  Appellant's  profile.   He
    accepted that IK remains the applicable country guidance.

10. Ms Daykin relied on her skeleton  argument.   She  submitted  that  the
    evidence showed that there was  an  ongoing  adverse  interest  in  the
    Appellant, particularly  as  he  had  failed  both  to  report  to  the
    authorities and act as an informant on the HDP/PKK.  He  had  had  some
    engagement with Kurdish groups in the United Kingdom.  On return to the
    airport, even if there was  nothing  on  the  GBTS,  other  sources  of
    information were available,  the  Appellant's  history  would  come  to
    light, and this would be sufficient to justify his  detention.   I  was
    referred to pages  C27  and  C57  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  (Policy
    Guidance on relevant  issues  produced  by  the  Respondent).   It  was
    submitted that the current situation in Turkey would only make it worse
    for the Appellant.  I was referred to additional country information on
    the ability of the Turkish authorities to  carry  out  surveillance  on
    communications.  Finally, Ms Daykin noted that the Appellant  had  been
    persecuted in the past and this was a strong indicator of future  risk.






Relevant findings of fact

11. I re-state the preserved findings of fact from the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision, as set out above:

      i) the Appellant was an ordinary member of the HDP;

     ii) the authorities regard the  HDP  and  PKK  as  being  very  closely
         linked;

    iii) the Appellant was detained on two occasions and ill-treated;

     iv) when released on the second occasion, the Appellant  was  asked  to
         become an informant on the HDP and PKK and also to  report  to  the
         authorities.  He failed to comply with either condition.

12. On the issue of any continuing interest  in  the  Appellant  after  his
    departure from Turkey in May 2016, I am willing to accept, on the lower
    standard of proof, to that there  has  been  relevant  contact  by  the
    authorities.  I fully appreciate what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    said about this point but it has remained a live issue  and  additional
    evidence has been adduced without objection by  the  Respondent.   This
    new evidence has not been expressly challenged by Mr Duffy  before  me.
    In any event I find it to be reliable for four main reasons.

13. First, in all other material respects, the Appellant has been found  to
    be a credible witness as shown by the favourable findings made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14. Second, following his second detention the  Appellant  was  not  simply
    released at large, but was released on two conditions: he was  required
    to report and he was required to provide  information  on  the  Kurdish
    organisations HDP and PKK (both being seen to be closely linked in  the
    eyes of the Turkish authorities).  As a matter of  fact  the  Appellant
    complied with neither condition.  It is  reasonably  likely  that  this
    would have excited the adverse interest of the Turkish authorities once
    the failure became apparent, which I find it would have.  I  note  that
    the period of time between the release from the  second  detention  and
    the Appellant's departure from Turkey  was  very  short  (a  matter  of
    days).  This is not a case in  which  the  Appellant  managed  to  hang
    around  in  the  home  area  without  any  adverse  attention  by   the
    authorities pre-departure.

15. Third, the Appellant's own evidence on the  issue  of  contact  by  the
    authorities, contained in the new witness statement is supported by the
    letter of the local Mukhtar at page 39 of the Appellant's bundle.

16. Fourth, the additional  country  information  on  the  ability  of  the
    Turkish authorities to monitor  communications  lends  support  to  the
    Appellant's own explanation for why he was  afraid  of  contacting  his
    family directly post-departure.

17. Taking everything into account I accept that: the  Turkish  authorities
    have harassed the Appellant's family as a direct result of his history.




Conclusions on risk on return

18. In assessing risk on return I apply the country guidance set out in IK.
     Although this is an old decision, the representatives are agreed  that
    this remains applicable to the present appeal.

19. In light of Mr Duffy's position before me, the guidance in IK, and  the
    current country situation, I conclude that there is a very  significant
    risk to the Appellant in his home area.

20. I turn then to the question of risk at the point of return, namely  the
    airport.  Ms Daykin has accepted that  it  is  unlikely  the  Appellant
    would be recorded on the GBTS.  I agree.  He had not been  the  subject
    of legal proceedings. However, we know that there are a number of other
    sources of relevant information available to the authorities.

21. Before turning to consider what might arise out of further enquiries, I
    conclude that the Appellant would, in the first  instance,  be  stopped
    and questioned on basic matters.  We know from  IK  and  other  sources
    that a failed asylum seeker would be readily identifiable  as  such  by
    the Turkish authorities.  It is highly likely that he  would  be  asked
    certain questions as a preliminary matter.  It is of  course  the  case
    that he would have to tell the truth to any questions put to him.  As a
    result of this it is highly likely that additional enquiries  would  be
    made if for no other reason than to check the veracity of what  he  was
    saying and to ensure that the authorities  were  not  allowing  through
    someone who was of material interest to them  (albeit  not  subject  to
    specific legal proceedings).

22. What is reasonably likely to come to light is the following:

      i) the Appellant is Kurdish and originates  from  the  south  east  of
         Turkey;

     ii) he has been detained by the authorities in his  home  area  on  two
         separate occasions;

    iii) it is likely that the reasons for the detentions will be  a  matter
         of record, particularly given that he was not released 'at  large'.



     iv) the Appellant was released on two conditions, neither of  which  he
         has complied with;

      v) he departed Turkey illegally and had resided in the United Kingdom;

     vi) the local authorities in the home area had  maintained  an  ongoing
         adverse interest in him since his departure.

23. In my view this is a significant profile in the  context  of  the  risk
    factors set out in IK.

24. Three additional factors are to be taken into account  at  this  stage.
    First, the Appellant has been persecuted in the past and paragraph 339K
    of the Rules applies.  Second, in light of what is happening across the
    border in Syria at the moment and in relation to the significant threat
    perceived by the Turkish authorities in respect of the Kurdish issue as
    a whole, it is likely that the interest in those deemed to be connected
    with/sympathetic to relevant organisations will be heightened.   Third,
    the Respondent's own Policy Guidance on the issues of Kurdish ethnicity
    and Kurdish political parties clearly states that if a person's fear is
    of persecution or serious harm by the state they will not  be  able  to
    relocate to escape that risk (see paragraph 2.5.1 at pages C27 and  C57
    of the Appellant's bundle).  This is  a  case  in  which  it  has  been
    accepted that there is a risk in the home area. Given the clear  policy
    position adopted by the Respondent under the sub-heading  of  'internal
    relocation' in her own Policy Guidance, it is difficult to see how  the
    Respondent can argue that any risk at the  point  of  return  would  be
    sufficiently reduced to allow the Appellant to avoid the possibility of
    being detained and transferred for further enquiries  by  the  counter-
    terrorism agencies.

25. I conclude that there is a significant risk that this  Appellant  would
    be detained for further enquiries and transferred to the custody of the
    counter-terrorism authorities.

26. Once this occurs it is very likely indeed that he would be  once  again
    ill-treated by the Turkish authorities.  This is consistent  with  what
    is said in IK and the current  country  information  as  cited  in  the
    Respondent's Country Information guidance.   The ill-treatment would be
    motivated by the political opinion imputed onto the Appellant.

27. In light of the above  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee  and  his  appeal
    succeeds on this basis.

28. It also succeeds on the basis that his removal would expose him to ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and that decision has been set aside.

In re-making the decision in this appeal I determine that  the  Respondent's
refusal of the Appellant's  protection  claim  is  contrary  to  the  United
Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

I  also  determine  that  the  Respondent's  refusal  of   the   Appellant's
protection claim is unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998
(in respect of Article 3).

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   [pic]         Date: 26 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14324/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     Y Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Gulsen & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is a challenge by the Appellant to  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Randall (the judge), promulgated on 3  April  2017,  in
      which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      refusal of his protection and human rights claims, dated  14  December
      2016.  The Appellant, a Turkish national of  Kurdish  ethnicity  based
      his claim upon involvement with the HDP  in  South  East  Turkey.   He
      claimed to have been  detained  on  two  occasions,  ill-treated,  and
      released on a condition that he became an informant  and  reported  to
      the authorities.




The judge's decision

   2. The judge made a number of  favourable  findings  in  respect  of  the
      Appellant's  claim  (paragraphs  42-55).   Principally  these  are  as
      follows:

          i) the Appellant was an ordinary member of the HDP;

         ii) the authorities regard the HDP and PKK as being  very  closely
             linked;

        iii) the Appellant was detained on two occasions and ill-treated;

         iv) when released on the second occasion he was asked to become an
             informant on the HDP and the PKK, and also to  report  to  the
             authorities. He complied with neither condition.

   3. The judge ultimately came to the conclusion that  notwithstanding  the
      findings of fact set out above, the Appellant would not be at risk  on
      return.  The judge found that the  Appellant  had  not  been  informed
      about any  ongoing  interest  in  him  on  the  part  of  the  Turkish
      authorities since his departure from that country in May 2016.  He did
      not accept the Appellant's explanation for this  lack  of  information
      (paragraphs 47 and 56).  The judge inferred that there was in fact  no
      continuing interest by the Turkish authorities in the Appellant.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

   4. The first ground of appeal asserts that  the  judge  failed  to  apply
      relevant country  guidance  decisions  to  the  case  before  him,  in
      particular the well-known decision in IK (Returnees - Records  -  IFA)
      Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00034.   Ground  2  complains  that  the  judge
      placed "undue weight" on the subjective fear of the Appellant and  his
      family in respect of the ability of the Turkish authorities to monitor
      telephone calls.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker on
      22 August 2017.

The hearing before me

   6. Both representatives agreed  that  the  decision  in  IK  remains  the
      governing country guidance decision in respect of risk  on  return  in
      Turkish cases.  It was clear that the judge had failed  to  apply  the
      relevant country guidance case, and both representatives  were  agreed
      that this constituted a material error of law.  Neither could indicate
      with any certainty that the decision had in fact been before the judge
      or had been brought to his attention, but it was suggested (correctly)
      that the decision is  referred  to  in  the  Respondent's  Country  of
      Information Guidance which was indeed before the judge,  or  at  least
      was referred to in submissions (see for example paragraph 39).

   7. Miss Peterson sought to rely on the second ground of appeal  as  well,
      although she acknowledged that weight  was  a  matter  for  the  first
      instance fact-finder.

Decision on error of law

   8. It is clear that the judge did materially err in  law  by  failing  to
      consider and apply IK to the Appellant's case.  That decision was, and
      remains, the extant country guidance decision on risk on  return.   If
      it was not specifically  brought  to  the  judge's  attention  at  the
      hearing, that is unfortunate.  However, with all due respect,  country
      guidance decisions are expected to be taken into  account  whether  or
      not they are specifically raised by representatives.

   9. This error is sufficient for me to set aside the judge's decision, and
      that I now do.

Disposal

  10. After some discussion with  the  representatives  I  have  decided  to
      adjourn this appeal in order for  a  resumed  hearing  to  take  place
      before me on a date to  be  confirmed.  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  the
      favourable credibility findings set out previously should be preserved
      for the resumed hearing.  I agree that that is the correct approach to
      take.  In respect of  ongoing  interest  by  the  authorities  in  the
      Appellant between his departure from that country in 2016 and now, the
      adverse finding of  the  judge  would  be  a  starting  point  for  my
      assessment at the next hearing, but Miss Peterson indicated  that  new
      evidence would be forthcoming on this particular issue.  In my view it
      is appropriate to admit further evidence and for it to  be  tested  by
      the Respondent in due course if she so wishes.

  11. The core issue at the resumed hearing will be risk on return in  light
      of IK and any other country information the parties wish to adduce.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and it is set aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 27 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
