
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14201/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th of February 2018                      |On 27 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               SAMAN ALI ZADA
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E King of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on  21st  of  March  1998.  He
      appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Kimnell sitting at Hatton Cross on 2nd of August 2017 to  dismiss  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  9th  of
      December 2016. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application
      for international protection.


   2. The Appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  April  2016  in  a
      clandestine manner and claimed asylum on 15th of  June  2016.  He  had
      travelled through a number of countries  on  his  way  to  the  United
      Kingdom and was fingerprinted in Greece and Germany.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant's asylum claim was that he was  wanted  by  the  Iranian
      authorities because he had distributed leaflets in his  home  area  on
      behalf of a political movement, the Kurdish Democratic Party  of  Iran
      (KDPI), whom he supports. Whilst in Iran the Appellant decided to hand
      out leaflets because he realised the Iranian government abused Kurdish
      people who were treated as second-class citizens.  The  Appellant  did
      not read what was written in the leaflets, he asked others to  explain
      the contents. The Appellant had made enquiries about becoming a member
      of the KDPI in Iran but was told it would take time and he had  to  be
      patient. Since arriving in the United Kingdom, he had used Facebook to
      distribute various videos to his friends.


   4. The Appellant and his friends distributed leaflets  for  five  to  six
      months without anybody stopping them. One day, however,  the  Etelaat,
      the Iranian secret police, came looking  for  the  Appellant  who  was
      warned by his father of this adverse interest. The  family  house  was
      raided the same  day  as  his  father  called  him  alternatively  the
      Appellant did not know exactly when it was raided. The  Appellant  was
      working on the land at the time the Etelaat were looking for  him  and
      thus was not arrested.


   5. Later on, whilst he was in Turkey, having  fled  Iran,  the  Appellant
      discovered that his friends had been  arrested  by  the  Etelaat.  The
      agent the Appellant  was  travelling  with  in  Turkey  spoke  to  the
      Appellant's uncle on  the  Appellant's  behalf  and  discovered,  from
      villagers that the Appellant's father and his  two  friends  had  been
      arrested. The Appellant still had leaflets in his possession and  when
      the Etelaat went to his house  they  discovered  those  leaflets.  The
      Etelaat took the Appellant's father because of their adverse  interest
      in the Appellant. The Etelaat were still looking  for  the  Appellant.
      The Appellant did not claim asylum in either Greece or Germany as  his
      route was controlled by the agent with whom  he  was  travelling.  The
      Appellant attended a demonstration in the United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. The Judge found that the Appellant had answered  questions  about  the
      KDPI correctly at interview and there was no obvious contradiction  or
      inconsistency in the Appellant's account  of  his  sympathy  for  that
      organisation. At [39] the Judge accepted that the Appellant  may  well
      have been involved in  the  distribution  of  flyers  or  leaflets  by
      posting them at times when he could not be detected in public  places.
      What the Judge did not accept was that this activity was known to  the
      authorities in Iran or that the Appellant was wanted because  of  that
      activity. The evidence about the circumstances in which the  Appellant
      came to know of the search for him by the Etelaat was superficial  and
      illogical. The information was thirdhand hearsay.  It  was  admissible
      but carried negligible weight.


   7. The Judge did not  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  (given  at  the
      hearing) that the Appellant's father did not tell the  Appellant  what
      villagers had said about the Etelaat searching for him. The  Appellant
      would have asked for more information if he had been  faced  with  the
      sort of immediate danger he claimed to be in. It was more than  likely
      that if the authorities wanted to arrest the Appellant (and presumably
      others) the arrests would have been co-ordinated and it would not have
      been difficult to find the Appellant  since  he  was  working  on  the
      family's agricultural land. It was not  probable  that  the  Appellant
      would have been given sufficient time after the claimed arrest of  his
      two confederates to make good his escape to the mountains.


   8. The decisive point for the Judge was described by him  at  [42].  When
      asked "did they search your house?" The Appellant replied he  did  not
      know whereas he said in evidence at the hearing that he knew while  he
      was in Turkey from enquiries that the agent had made that  his  father
      had been taken and that when Etelaat went to his house they discovered
      the leaflets. If the Appellant knew that to be the case when he was in
      Turkey en route to the United Kingdom there  was  no  reason  why  the
      Appellant should have said in interview he  did  not  know  whether  a
      search had taken place.


   9.  Although the Appellant had some sympathy for the general aims of  the
      KDPI and may for a short period have distributed and  posted  leaflets
      or flyers the Judge did not accept that that was  discovered  or  that
      the Appellant was wanted by the authorities. The  Appellant's  contact
      with the KDPI in the United Kingdom was likely to be a response to the
      criticism made in the refusal letter that if  the  Appellant  had  any
      real commitment to that organisation he would have made  contact  with
      it in the United Kingdom rather earlier than he did, given that he had
      arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2016. The  Appellant's  low-key
      activity would not have come to the attention of  the  authorities  in
      Iran and the material on the Appellant's Facebook  page  was  recycled
      material from elsewhere and unlikely to cause him any difficulty  upon
      return. It would have been reckless for the Appellant to post anything
      too controversial if it was the case that the Appellant's  father  was
      already being harassed by the Iranian authorities. The Judge dismissed
      the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

  10. The Appellant appealed against this decision  in  grounds  settled  by
      counsel who had appeared for  the  Appellant  at  first  instance  and
      appeared before me. The grounds made four points. The first ground was
      that the Judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for his findings
      about the plausibility of the evidence. This in turn broke  down  into
      two separate complaints. The first of the two  complaints  related  to
      the Judge's concern that the Appellant would have asked more about the
      Etelaat searching for him if he was faced with immediate  danger,  his
      two friends had been detained and Etelaat  sought  him  as  well.  The
      Judge did not explain what further  information  the  Appellant  could
      have obtained from the villagers. The second  complaint  was  that  no
      adequate reasons were given to support  the  contention  that  it  was
      improbable the Appellant could have evaded  arrest.  There  were  many
      cases seen by the Tribunal of people fleeing Iran to claim asylum.


  11. The 2nd ground argued that the Judge had failed to have regard to  the
      Appellant's age. He had just turned 18 when  he  made  his  claim  for
      asylum but was under the age of 18 when the events  he  described  had
      occurred.


  12. The 3rd ground argued there had been  a  failure  to  have  regard  to
      material evidence. In stating  that  the  Appellant  had  contradicted
      himself when asked whether his home had  been  raided  the  Judge  had
      failed to have  regard  to  a  later  answer  the  Appellant  gave  in
      interview which clarified the matter.


  13. The 4th ground criticised the Judge's classification of  part  of  the
      evidence  as  thirdhand  hearsay.  Hearsay  was  admissible.  If   the
      Appellant's departure from Iran was in  reaction  to  the  information
      given by the villagers, were the Appellant and his father justified in
      treating that information as a credible threat? There was a real  risk
      that the evidence given by the villagers was true. If  the  Judge  did
      not believe that the Appellant had received  a  phone  call  from  his
      father relating what the villagers had said then that was not  hearsay
      evidence but direct evidence from the Appellant. It should  then  have
      been assessed in the round with the rest of the Appellant's evidence.


  14. Given that the Judge had found that much of  the  Appellant's  account
      was true, his support of the KDPI and the  distribution  of  leaflets,
      very careful reasoning needed to have been given to justify  rejecting
      the Appellant's claim to be wanted by  Etelaat.  The  benefit  of  the
      doubt ought to have been applied to the Appellant.


15. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 1st of  November  2017.  Granting
    permission to appeal Judge Cruthers noted that the nub  of  the  matter
    concerned [40] to [43] of the determination where the Judge set out his
    reasons for not accepting that the Appellant's activities had  come  to
    the attention of Etelaat. The grounds were arguable but  the  Appellant
    should not take the grant of permission  as  any  indication  that  the
    appeal would ultimately be successful. The Respondent did not reply  to
    the grant of permission.

The Hearing Before Me

  16. Following the grant of  permission,  the  matter  came  before  me  to
      determine whether there was a material error of law in the  First-tier
      determination such that it fell to be set aside. If not, the  decision
      would stand. Counsel for  the  Appellant  relied  on  her  grounds  of
      appeal. The 3rd of the grounds was the most  serious  it  was  argued.
      This related to whether the Appellant had contradicted  himself  about
      whether his house had been searched by the Etelaat.


  17. At question 111 of the substantive asylum interview the Appellant  had
      been asked "how did [your father] know that Etelaat were chasing  you?
      The Appellant's reply was that his father had told  him  that  Etelaat
      were asking for the Appellant by name and they were searching to  find
      the Appellant.  The  next  question,  112,  was  whether  the  Etelaat
      searched the Appellant's house. The Appellant's reply to that  was  "I
      don't know. I'm sure they have been. If not at that time, then  after.
      My father said I'm sure they will go to the home to find you"


  18.  Later on, at question 125 after saying that he,  the  Appellant,  had
      spoken to his family whilst in Turkey he was asked "when you spoke  to
      them, had the Etelaat been to your house?" The Appellant's  reply  was
      that his uncle had made a call to the village to find  out  the  news.
      The uncle had heard from  the  village  that  Etelaat  had  taken  the
      leaflets because the Appellant was not there and they  had  taken  the
      Appellant's father and there was no news of him. Three questions later
      at question 128 the contradiction between the answers at 112  and  125
      were put to the Appellant. The Appellant had said he did not  know  if
      the Etelaat had searched his house but now was saying  that  they  did
      raid the house and found leaflets. The Appellant's explanation was  "I
      meant when I was at the farm and my father called me and said  he  was
      at the mosque and he heard from people that my friends  were  arrested
      and he also heard my name was mentioned. I refer to that moment that I
      wasn't sure. But after two days in Urmiyah [in Turkey] my uncle called
      the village to get an update."


  19. In oral submissions counsel argued that this exchange demonstrated the
      Appellant had given a consistent  account.  He  had  been  asked  what
      happened when Etelaat were searching for him. The Judge  was  mistaken
      when he seemed to think that the Appellant had said he  did  not  know
      about the search. In coming to that  conclusion,  the  Judge  had  not
      taken into account the later more developed explanation given  in  the
      interview. The Judge had not  said  that  the  Appellant  changed  his
      account through the interview, he had  said  that  the  Appellant  had
      changed his  account  from  the  interview  to  the  hearing  but  the
      Appellant's argument was that he had not changed his  account  at  the
      hearing.


  20. Counsel acknowledged that the answer at  question  128  was  not  very
      clearly set out but when he was at the farm the Appellant got  a  call
      from his father at the mosque. He did not  know  whether  Etelaat  had
      come to the house on that first day but he did know they  subsequently
      went to his house. The Appellant's knowledge had progressed as  events
      unfolded.


  21.  Turning to the 4th ground, the Judge had made an error of law at [40]
      when he described the Appellant's evidence as thirdhand  hearsay.  The
      rules in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber were more relaxed than  in
      civil and criminal proceedings. If the Appellant's statement was to be
      treated as hearsay that meant the  truth  of  the  statements  of  the
      villagers was being called into question for example was  it  a  cruel
      joke played by the villagers or did the Appellant mis-hear what he was
      being told. Given that the Appellant had acted on what  the  villagers
      had said it presupposed that  the  Appellant  and  his  father  had  a
      genuine belief in that information.


  22.  At [40] the Judge had gone on to say  that  he  did  not  accept  the
      Appellant's evidence at the hearing that the  Appellant's  father  did
      not tell the Appellant what  the  villagers  had  said  about  Etelaat
      searching for him. Counsel argued that was a different  point  and  it
      was difficult to see what  the  Judge  was  referring  to  there.  The
      Appellant had given evidence that the villagers had  told  his  father
      that Etelaat were searching for him. It was not clear what information
      the Judge thought should have been passed on to the  Appellant  beyond
      the statement that the Etelaat were searching for  the  Appellant  and
      had arrested the Appellant's friends. The Judge had not said  what  he
      expected the villagers would tell the  Appellant.  The  reasoning  and
      conclusions  reached  were  not  sufficient  for  the   Appellant   to
      understand why his evidence had been rejected.


  23. The  Judge's  comment  at  [41]  that  the  arrests  would  have  been
      coordinated was a plausibility point that had Etelaat wanted to arrest
      the Appellant they would have done so in  a  co-ordinated  fashion  to
      prevent escape. Was it so implausible that they had  not  in  the  end
      managed to do that? The Appellant was not at home, he was out  in  the
      fields. On what basis could  the  Judge  properly  conclude  that  the
      Etelaat would have been able to find the Appellant?


  24. The 2nd ground (failure to have regard to the Appellant's age)  was  a
      relatively  simple  point.  The  Judge  had  not   recorded   in   the
      determination that the Appellant was a minor when he left Iran and  so
      his understanding of events had to be considered. That  tied  in  with
      what the Appellant should or should not have asked  his  father  about
      what the villagers had said. The Appellant was 16 at that time.


  25. In reply the Presenting Officer dealt first of all  with  the  claimed
      contradiction over whether the Appellant had or had not said that  his
      house had been searched. The Judge was entitled  to  take  an  adverse
      view that when the Appellant was first asked in  interview  about  the
      search his answer was "I don't know".  The  Appellant's  response  was
      wholly  unsatisfactory.  The  weight  to  be  given  to  the   claimed
      circumstances in which the Appellant came to know about the search for
      him by Etelaat was a matter for the Judge. The  more  the  information
      from the villagers was repeated the more likely there was a chance  of
      misunderstanding. It may have been an assumption  of  the  Appellant's
      father that Etelaat were looking for the Appellant one simply did  not
      know. That tied in with what the Judge went on  to  say  at  [40]  and
      underlined the weakness of the Appellant's evidence. One had  to  look
      at that paragraph as a whole and not try to dissect it. It  was  clear
      what the Judge was trying to say. The Judge had the benefit of hearing
      the Appellant give oral evidence particularly about what the villagers
      were supposed to have said. The Judge's conclusions were open  to  him
      on the evidence.


  26. The point taken by the Appellant against [41] (the coordination of the
      arrests) was a mere disagreement. The Judge's conclusions  there  were
      open to him.  The  Etelaat  had  a  fearsome  reputation  and  it  was
      implausible that they would bungle the search in the way the Appellant
      had described. The Appellant had not been a young  child  at  the  age
      that these things  had  happened,  he  was  16.  It  was  not  such  a
      fundamental  issue  as  to  undermine  the   Judge's   findings.   The
      determination should be upheld.


27. In conclusion counsel returned to the  point  about  the  treatment  of
    hearsay evidence. It was a question of interpretation and one had to go
    back to basics, did the Appellant have an objective fear, was it  well-
    founded? If the Judge had meant that he needed to  set  that  out.  The
    Appellant's  father  was  told  that  Etelaat  were  looking  for   the
    Appellant. One could not be sure they were looking for anyone else.  It
    was not clear what approach the Judge was taking. The  impression  from
    the determination was that the Appellant had changed his evidence  from
    the interview to the hearing but that was not what happened. The  Judge
    had accepted some of the Appellant's  evidence  and  therefore  it  was
    important to clarify whether the Appellant was at risk on those facts.

Findings

  28. This is a reasons' based challenge. The Judge  accepted  part  of  the
      Appellant's case, that he sympathised with the KDPI and  that  he  had
      distributed leaflets for them. What he did not accept was  that  those
      activities had come to the attention of  the  Iranian  authorities  or
      that the Appellant would be at risk upon return because of that or any
      sur place activities. (There was no appeal  in  relation  to  the  sur
      place activities). The Appellant had to show that  that  part  of  his
      claim which was not accepted  was  if  found  credible  sufficient  to
      engage a claim for international protection. The Appellant was not  at
      risk on the basis of those matters that the Judge did accept he  still
      had to show  that  the  authorities  were  aware  of  him  and  had  a
      corresponding adverse interest in him.


  29.  The Judge rejected the Appellant's evidence that  the  Appellant  had
      managed to avoid being arrested by the Etelaat because he was  out  in
      the fields on the day that the Etelaat came looking  for  him  in  the
      Appellant's  village.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  as  at  all
      plausible. That was very much a matter for the Judge on the  basis  of
      the evidence before him. If the Etelaat were looking for the Appellant
      they would presumably have  gone  to  the  Appellant's  home  or,  the
      Judge's point, they  would  have  coordinated  their  search  for  the
      Appellant to include the outlying areas. That they did not do  so  led
      to the Judge to conclude there had been no attempt  to  look  for  the
      Appellant on that occasion.  That  was  adequately  reasoned  and  the
      Appellant's objections to that point are a mere disagreement with  the
      Judge's conclusions.


  30. If the Etelaat were looking for the Appellant the  next  question  was
      whether they had searched the Appellant's house. When that was put  to
      the Appellant his reply was that he did not know but if  not  at  that
      time then after. Later on in the interview the Appellant was asked  to
      clarify this. The context was that on the one hand the  Appellant  had
      said he did not know if the Etelaat had searched his house  only  that
      they must have done (thus an assumption made  by  the  Appellant)  but
      later he became more definite and said they had raided the  house  and
      found leaflets. The Appellant said he was not sure if the Etelaat  had
      searched the house on the day he was contacted by his father  when  he
      the Appellant was out in the fields. But after the Appellant had  been
      for two days in Urmiyah in Turkey his uncle had called the village  to
      get an update.


  31. Much of the Appellant's case turned on the assessment of the  evidence
      of this telephone conversation and whether it had taken place at  all.
      It was a matter for the Judge to assess the  evidence  before  him.  A
      fair reading of the  interview  does  not  support  the  argument  put
      forward by the Appellant that the answers in interview were clear  and
      did not contain contradictions. The Appellant did not know on the  day
      that the Etelaat was first looking for him (when he was  contacted  by
      his father) whether they had  or  had  not  searched  his  house.  The
      information about searching the house came  sometime  later  by  which
      time the Appellant was already in Turkey. It came through a  chain  of
      individuals via the Appellant's uncle. There was no  good  reason  why
      the Appellant was unable to answer the question put to him at question
      112.


  32. The Appellant's answers in interview were not sufficiently  clear  cut
      for the Judge to be able to make a finding that the Appellant had been
      consistent throughout. That was the important point. This was  a  core
      element of the Appellant's claim, that the Etelaat  had  searched  his
      house  and  found  incriminating  leaflets.  Unfortunately   for   the
      Appellant he was unable to put that evidence forward in a coherent and
      consistent manner as to when the  search  had  taken  place.  It  then
      became a matter for the Judge to decide what weight was to be given to
      that evidence. If the Appellant could  not  be  consistent  about  the
      search it was open to the Judge to find no such search had ever  taken
      place.


  33. The Judge referred to information  allegedly  given  by  villagers  as
      thirdhand hearsay. On the Appellant's case  villagers  had  apparently
      told the Appellant's uncle who had told an  agent  who  had  told  the
      Appellant that the Etelaat had raided the house,  taken  leaflets  and
      arrested the Appellant's father.  Since  this  information  was  given
      whilst the Appellant was in Turkey having already left Iran, it  could
      not have been the cause of the Appellant's departure  from  Iran.  The
      Judge's concern about this evidence was that it should have  taken  so
      long before it was passed on  to  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant  had
      quoted his father in  interview  as  saying  that  the  Etelaat  would
      definitely go to the house and the father  advised  the  Appellant  to
      leave the country. That was before the conversation  which  the  Judge
      characterised as thirdhand hearsay.


  34. I do not read the determination as meaning that the Judge was imposing
      a legal test on the evidence at that point  rather  he  was  ascribing
      little or no weight to the Appellant's claim that information of  that
      sort had made its way through to the Appellant  whilst  the  Appellant
      was in Turkey. It was implausible that if that was the  situation  the
      Appellant would not have found out about it  earlier  (by  asking  his
      father obvious questions such as have they been  to  the  house,  what
      happened if/when they did?). This was the point made by the  Judge  in
      the last sentence of [40]. The issue was  whether  the  Appellant  had
      been told anything of that sort rather than what  the  motive  of  the
      villagers might be.


  35. The Judge did not accept that any such information was  given  to  the
      Appellant in Iran or in Turkey. The circuitous way the information was
      said to have been given to the Appellant via  so  many  intermediaries
      merely  served  to  undermine  its  reliability.  The  Appellant   had
      overcomplicated his account, referring to the intermediaries,  perhaps
      in an attempt to deal with the point picked up by  the  Judge  that  a
      more straightforward way of getting information was for the  Appellant
      to ask the questions himself. The Appellant suggested  that  while  in
      Turkey he could not ask any questions  himself,  the  plausibility  of
      that was a matter for the Judge who evidently felt that the  Appellant
      had not asked questions (in Iran or in Turkey) because there  were  no
      questions to ask as the account was false.


  36. The final point raised by the Appellant is that insufficient attention
      was paid to the Appellant's age when assessing the credibility of  the
      claim. The Appellant was 19 at the date of hearing and was  describing
      events which he said had occurred after his 17th birthday. He was  not
      therefore a young child as the Presenting Officer correctly  submitted
      to me. The core part of the Appellant's claim was his  evidence  about
      what he was told whilst in Turkey. At that time, he  was  only  a  few
      months short of his 18th birthday. He could  therefore  reasonably  be
      expected to have a good recollection of what had taken place. That the
      Judge did not believe the Appellant's account (including  the  alleged
      telephone conversation) does not of itself indicate an error  of  law.
      The Appellant was of an age and understanding to be aware of the truth
      or falsity of his claims.


  37. The grounds of onward appeal in this case amount to  no  more  than  a
      disagreement with the cogent findings of the Judge which were open  to
      the Judge on the evidence before him. The grounds do not disclose  any
      material  error  of  law  on  the  Judge's  part  and  I  dismiss  the
      Appellant's onward appeal. There is no Article 8 claim in this case.


  38. I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason  for  so
      doing.







Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


Signed this 21st of February 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 21st of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




