
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14159/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 December 2017                    |On 5 January 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     LK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saeed, Aman Solicitors and Advocates
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, LK, is a male citizen of Afghanistan.   He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M R Oliver) against the decision of  the
    respondent dated 6 December 2016 refusing to  grant  him  asylum.   The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 9 May 2017, dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Fijiwala, who appeared for the  Secretary
    of State, accepted that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    vitiated by error of law.  In particular,  the  judge  had  provided  a
    period of two weeks following the First-tier Tribunal hearing  for  the
    appellant to provide English translations of documents  upon  which  he
    relied.  However, before the expiration of that two  week  period,  the
    judge had promulgated the Tribunal's  decision.   In  consequence,  the
    appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing of his  case.   Secondly,
    the judge has not made any proper findings of fact upon which  to  base
    an assessment of the likely risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  of  this
    appellant.

 3. In the circumstances, I set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    There will need to be a new fact-finding exercise  since  none  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand.  That exercise is better conducted before
    the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now returned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 9 May  2017
is set aside.  None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  M  R  Oliver)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 3 JANUARY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

