
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14083/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2019                    |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     NB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E B
    Grant, promulgated on 7 March 2019. Permission to appeal was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on 7 July 2019.



Anonymity

   2. Such a direction was made previously owing to the vulnerability of the
      appellant and is repeated below.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  during  December  2013,
    having been granted leave to enter as a visitor.  After  her  leave  to
    enter expired on 9 June 2014, she remained without leave. The appellant
    made an asylum application on 13 February 2018.

 4. The appellant's asylum claim was based on her concerns as to what would
    happen to  her  in  Bangladesh  following  a  marriage  which  she  had
    contracted in the United Kingdom which had broken  down.  In  addition,
    the appellant's child, U, aged 4, had additional needs.

 5. In a letter dated 5 December 2018, the Secretary of State rejected  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims.  The  protection  claim
    was refused owing to numerous inconsistencies  within  the  appellant's
    account of her circumstances and the human rights claim was  found  not
    to meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM.  The  respondent  considered
    whether there were any exceptional circumstances but concluded that the
    evidence did not indicate that it would be inhumane  to  remove  either
    the appellant or her child. Humanitarian Protection was  considered  in
    relation to Articles 2 and 3, however  the  respondent  concluded  that
    there were no substantial grounds for believing that there was  a  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Bangladesh.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, there was evidence  that
    the appellant had learning difficulties for which she was eligible  for
    services from  Westminster  Learning  Disability  Partnership;  that  U
    suffered from developmental delay and had been referred for  an  autism
    assessment and both had been abandoned by the appellant's husband.  The
    appellant's case was that she would have no support from her parents in
    Bangladesh and would become destitute and unable to access services for
    U. The judge rejected that claim, finding that the appellant's marriage
    took place with the consent of  her  parents  and  that  on  return  to
    Bangladesh she and her child  would  be  living  with  her  parents  in
    Sylhet. The judge  also  found  that  appropriate  free  treatment  was
    available for U in Dhaka and Sylhet and ultimately, that the balance of
    the Article 8 arguments fell in favour of  the  respondent.  The  judge
    noted that no claim had been made for humanitarian protection.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued that  the  judge's  finding  that  support
    would be available to the appellant was inconsistent with the  evidence
    of the witnesses who were found to be credible. It was  also  contended
    that treatment was not available for someone like the appellant who was
    not based in Dhaka.  It was further contended that the judge was  wrong
    to say that  Humanitarian  Protection  was  not  relied  upon  as  this
    alternative was pleaded in the written submissions. Lastly, it was said
    that the judge erred in the outcome of her proportionality  assessment.



 8. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds. In addition, the judge
    granting permission stated that it was arguable that there had been  no
    consideration of N [2005] UKHL 31 or R(SQ (Pakistan) ) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1251.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 8 August 2019, contended
    that Article 3 on medical grounds did not appear to  have  been  argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal and it was unclear whether  that  formed
    part of the application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which was refused on 12 April 2019.  The appeal was opposed.

The hearing

10. Mr Shah clarified that he was relying on three grounds.  Firstly,  that
    the judge made  inconsistent  findings;  secondly  the  judge  attached
    insufficient  weight  to  the  reports   and   thirdly   that   Article
    3/Humanitarian  Protection  was  an  issue  the  judge   neglected   to
    determine.

11. Starting with the third ground, Mr Shah contended  that  Article  3  on
    health grounds was a live issue, albeit it was not expressly  mentioned
    in the grounds  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  5
    December 2018. He took me to  the  appellant's  bundle  which  included
    lengthy written submissions but was unable to  find  any  reference  to
    Article 3 being argued on health grounds. I drew Mr Shah's attention to
    page 16 where there was a passing reference  to  death  being  a  "near
    certainty."  Mr  Shah  asserted  that  he  had  raised  Article  3  and
    Humanitarian  Protection  at  the  hearing  but  provided  no   witness
    statement to that effect or copy of any record of the hearing he  might
    have made. His explanation for not doing so was that  he  received  the
    Rule 24 response late. I informed the parties that  the  judge's  typed
    record of proceedings lacked  submissions  on  the  appellant's  behalf
    relating to Article 3 or Humanitarian Protection. Mr Shah  argued  that
    in any event, it was an obvious  point  and  Article  3  was  expressly
    mentioned on page 22 of the appellant's bundle.

12. Regarding the first ground, Mr Shah argued that  the  judge  found  the
    appellant's sister and brother in law to be credible witnesses  and  it
    was therefore inconsistent of the judge to reject  their  evidence.  He
    submitted that there had been no assessment  of  the  witness  evidence
    regarding the circumstances the appellant  would  face  in  Bangladesh.
    Lastly, he submitted that insufficient weight was given to the  medical
    evidence which was before  the  judge.  Mr  Shah  emphasised  that  the
    appellant was from a rural part of Sylhet and the judge had found  that
    the appellant could have treatment in  Dhaka,  even  if  treatment  was
    available and accessible, there was a question of affordability.

13. Mr Melvin argued that there was insufficient evidence  in  the  written
    submissions for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  grant  permission  regarding
    Article 3. It was difficult to find anything other  than  the  briefest
    reference to Article 3 and there was no reasoning as to why there would
    be a breach on return. In any event, he argued, the  case  did  not  go
    near the standard required in Article 3 cases.

14. Mr Melvin emphasised  that  Taj  Solicitors  had  produced  no  witness
    statement and there was  nothing  on  file  to  show  that  submissions
    relating to Article 3 were made to the First-tier Tribunal. The correct
    procedure would be for a witness statement from  the  advocate  at  the
    previous hearing and another  advocate  to  attend  the  error  of  law
    hearing. He acknowledged that the Rule 24 response was delayed, however
    he argued that there was  still  sufficient  time  for  counsel  to  be
    instructed and a witness statement to be drafted.

15. As for the judge's credibility findings, these were qualified and there
    was no indication that the judge accepted the  evidence  that  all  the
    family members living in Bangladesh had shunned or ceased contact  with
    the appellant. The judge's findings related only to  the  circumstances
    of the appellant's visit to the United  Kingdom  and  her  wedding.  Mr
    Melvin submitted that the judge looked at the background  evidence  and
    turned her mind to the core issue of whether the appellant could return
    home.

16. After assessing that evidence, Mr Melvin argued,  the  judge  concluded
    that the appellant and her child  would  have  the  support  of  family
    members. The weight to be attached to evidence was  a  matter  for  the
    judge and her findings did not enter the realm of irrationality.

17. In reply, Mr Shah argued that the Upper Tribunal could depart from  the
    grounds of appeal in this case where an issue was Robinson obvious.  He
    maintained that there was no  consistency  with  the  judge's  findings
    notwithstanding Mr Melvin's submissions. The judge  had  not  explained
    why she had rejected the evidence of the appellant's sister and brother
    in law.

18. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision as to  whether  there
    was a material error of law.

Decision on error of law

19. I will firstly assess the judge's findings as to the credibility of the
    appellant's claim that she and U will  be  homeless  and  destitute  in
    Bangladesh because no member of their family  will  support  them.  The
    positive findings at [9-10] of the decision upon which Mr Shah  heavily
    relied were clearly limited to the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    visit and marriage to her husband. I accept that the  judge  found  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant's  sister  to  be  "cogent  and  credible"
    regarding the matters set out in [9]. In the following paragraphs  [11-
    15], the judge simply records the remainder of the oral evidence of the
    sister, as well  as  her  husband  and  the  appellant.  That  evidence
    addressed  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her  parents  and  the
    circumstances she would face if she returned to Bangladesh. Between [16-
    23] of the decision, the judge assessed  that  evidence  in  the  round
    along with the medical evidence, the country background information and
    the decision in SA (divorced woman - illegitimate child) Bangladesh  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00245 (IAC). Contrary to Mr Shah's arguments, the judge did
    not accept all the evidence of the appellant's  sister.  At  [20],  the
    judge gives several sustainable reasons for rejecting  the  claim  that
    the appellant's parents will have nothing to do with her. Those reasons
    include that the appellant's marriage to her husband  was  arranged  by
    her brothers and took place with the approval of her family;  the judge
    did not accept that the marriage would  have  gone  ahead  without  the
    approval of the appellant's parents; there was no evidence  to  support
    the claim that the family in Bangladesh  had  disowned  the  appellant;
    there was no evidence from the appellant's brothers, one  of  whom  had
    sponsored her visit and the appellant spoke to her mother regularly.

20. The judge  concluded  that  the  position  of  the  appellant  was  not
    analogous to that of the appellant in SA. Given that the appellant is a
    married woman whose child was born following that marriage and that she
    has the support of her family, the judge was wholly entitled to come to
    that view. There is no inconsistency in the judge's findings.

21. I will now consider the ground relating to  the  judge's  "failure"  to
    address Humanitarian Protection.  At  [26],  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's claim under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR for the same reasons  she
    dismissed the claim under the 1951 Convention. Mr Shah asserts that  he
    made submissions relating to humanitarian protection.  Other  than  his
    assertion, he has produced no evidence to support that claim and  there
    were no arguments based on humanitarian protection  in  the  record  of
    proceedings. The detailed written submissions which formed part of  the
    appellant's bundle before the judge lacked any mention of  Humanitarian
    Protection.  Furthermore,  neither  in  the  permission  grounds,   the
    skeleton argument produced for the error  of  law  hearing  nor  in  Mr
    Shah's oral submissions  have  any  arguments  been  made  which  might
    indicate that a Humanitarian Protection claim could succeed even if  it
    were considered. Mr Shah argued that it was a "Robinson" obvious  point
    which begs the question why submissions on Humanitarian Protection were
    never made by an experienced representative and firm of solicitors.

22. It  might  have  been  helpful  if  the  judge  had  briefly  addressed
    Humanitarian Protection and the Article 3 case law, however, in view of
    her conclusions that the appellant and U would not face persecution  or
    inhuman or  degrading  treatment  in  Bangladesh  and  that  there  was
    treatment available in Sylhet for U's developmental issues,  there  was
    no basis for a finding that there was a real risk of the appellant  and
    U facing treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Therefore, any error  is
    not material.

23. Mr Shah did not even begin to establish that the conditions  which  the
    appellant would experience in returning to Bangladesh would amount to a
    breach of her rights, or those of U, under Article 3 of  the  ECHR.  He
    simply did not explain why the appeal  ought  to  be  allowed  on  this
    basis, other than  briefly  mentioning  SA.  Mr  Shah  referred  to  no
    evidence to suggest that the appellant's circumstances and that of  her
    child  met  the  high  threshold  required  in  Article  3  cases.  His
    submissions to the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  accepted
    that treatment for learning disabled children was  available,  free  of
    cost. He did not dispute that this  treatment  was  also  available  in
    Sylhet, where the appellant would be returning. He referred  me  to  no
    evidence to show that either  the  appellant  or  her  child's  health,
    mental or physical, would deteriorate in Bangladesh.

24. Lastly, the arguments relating to the judge's proportionality  findings
    amount to mere disagreement with the outcome of the appeal. Contrary to
    Mr Shah's submissions, the judge did not limit the weight she placed on
    the medical evidence, all of which she found to be  reliable.  Mr  Shah
    did not put forward a cogent argument as to  why  the  removal  of  the
    appellant and U to Bangladesh would be a disproportionate outcome.  The
    judge's treatment of the competing issues was manifestly fair. She  was
    entitled to take into consideration the appellant's  overstaying,  that
    the child  was  non-qualifying  under  section  117B(6)  and  that  the
    appellant was already a burden on public funds; balancing that  against
    the best interests of U and the special needs of both the appellant and
    U and conclude that the balance fell in favour of the respondent. There
    is no error in the judge's proportionality assessment.



Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

