
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14116/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision Promulgated Before
On 13th June 2019 On 22nd July 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR R A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr F Aziz, Solicitor from Lie Dat and
Baig,Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge LSL Mensah. In a
      decision promulgated on 27th February 2019 the judge dismissed his
      appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant him protection and to
      find no breach of a protected human rights.

   2. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq, born in December 1991. He
      lived with his parents and brother in Erbil and made a living as a
      tiler. He arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2017 and made a
      claim for protection. He said his difficulties arose following an
      incident on 16 June 2015. He was with his friend who became involved
      in the fight with another man, S, with whom there was previous bad
      feeling. He intervened in the fight but S now has a grievance against
      him. He said that he feared S because of his connections, including
      the fact that his father-in-law was a senior official in the KDP.

   3.  He claims after the incident he and his friend were heading towards
      the hospital for treatment when three vehicles intercepted them. They
      started to attack them. The appellant managed to escape and went to
      the police who did not want to become involved. Shortly after this,
      four police took the appellant away and he was charged with assault.
      He was produced before a judge and detained. His father then arranged
      his release.

   4.  He stayed at his brother's house for a while and then left Iraq. He
      travelled to Turkey, Bulgaria and Serbia. He then crossed into Austria
      and then Germany, where he remained for a year and eight months. He
      made a claim for protection there which was unsuccessful. He then
      travelled to Belgium and then onto France before arriving in the
      United Kingdom.

   5. His claim was refused on 4 December 2018. The truth of the underlying
      claim was not accepted. Inconsistencies in his account were referred
      to. Furthermore, reference was made to his failure to claim after
      Germany in other safe countries. Even if there were any truth in the
      claim he could relocate to a different part of the IKR.

The First tier Tribunal

   6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah heard from the appellant and the
      representatives at the appeal. His identity was not disputed. Under
      the heading 'Findings' the judge referred to the various
      inconsistencies in his account as referred to in the reasons for
      refusal letter. There was a discrepancy as to when the key incident
      occurred between what the appellant said at screening and the
      substantive interview. There was also an inconsistency over whether it
      was S who was the high-ranking KDP official or his father-in-law.
      There was also discrepancy about the length of his detention.

   7. The judge referred to the very specific details the appellant gave as
      to when the incident took place. The judge did not accept there was
      any room for misunderstanding. On the timeframe given it would mean
      the incident took place around March 2015, which was also replicated
      in his witness statement. However, at interview he said it was June
      2015. The judge made the point that the appellant had already been
      through the asylum process in Germany and had made the same claim
      there. The judge concluded that the inconsistencies undermined his
      credibility.

   8. The judge went on to refer to other inconsistencies and the
      discrepancies with the timeframe. His explanation was that he was
      suffering from memory loss but there was no medical evidence to
      support this. The judge also referred to the discrepancy as to how
      long he was detained for. The judge then referred to his not claiming
      in other countries after Germany.

   9. The appellant produced photographs said to be of the man who fears. He
      describes how these were sent by a friend who found them on Facebook.
      The judge found his account in this regard lacked credibility and was
      introduce an attempt to bolster his claim.

  10. There was an inconsistency between whether the appellant's primary
      fear was S or his father-in-law. At screening he said this was a high-
      ranking officer in the KDP. In his substantive interview he said as
      was in fact the bodyguard of his father-in-law who was a senior
      officer in the KDP. The appellant said the substantive interview was
      correct but the screening was incorrect. The judge then referred to
      the appellant's account of going to stay with brother some 9 km away.
      The judge found his evidence inconsistent with checks he said were
      made on his own home.

  11. The judge concluded by finding the appellant's evidence unreliable and
        rejected his evidence in its entirety. The judge found he was not
      wanted by the Iraqi authorities.

  12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge unduly focus upon discrepancies and did not have regard to
      reasonable explanations, including fatigue at screening interview.

  13. The judge then turned to the question of documentation. The appellant
      had told the judge that his identity documents, including his national
      identity certificate, were with the German authorities. The appellant
      told the judge he could not obtain replacement documents. The judge
      rejected his claim that he had no access to documents and found that
      he could be returned

  14. The second ground upon which permission was granted was that it was
      arguable the question of return was not adequately reasoned.

The Upper Tribunal.

  15. Mr Aziz argued that the judge was wrong to rely upon inconsistencies
      arising from the screening interview. At that stage the appellant was
      tired and he did not have a representative. The screening was
      conducted using an interpreter of the telephone and he was told to
      keep his answer short.

  16. He also submitted that the judge erred in relation to the question of
      documentation. He said that paragraph 36 the judge simply said she did
      not accept he could not obtain replacement documents. There was no
      evaluation of what family members there were to assist. The appellant
      has said he was no longer in contact with his family and that his
      original CSID card was with the authorities in Germany.

  17. In response, Mr Bates said that the screening interview was only part
      of the overall assessment. The judge did not simply refer to
      discrepancies between the screening and the substantive interview but
      also referred to discrepancies in the witness statement and in the
      appellant's oral evidence. An example of inconsistency related to the
      statement about his family home is being monitored and the account he
      was staying with his brother.

  18. Mr Bates made the point that the appellant's screening in fact
      contains detailed responses. The appellant made no complaint of being
      tired, either before or afterwards. Furthermore, on three occasions
      the appellant referred in his screening interview to having been
      detained for 30 days. This can be seen at 3.2, 4.1 and 5.4. He was
      legally represented when he made his witness statement and all he said
      was that he simply made a mistake about the length of his detention.
      In his statement he said mistakes in his substantive interview were
      because he could not mentally focus at the time. The judge did take
      into account the possibility of memory loss but observed the appellant
      has submitted no evidence to support this. The judge observed the
      appellant had already been through the asylum process in Germany. The
      appellant had confirmed orally to the judge that his claim in Germany
      was the same as that which he was making before the judge.

  19. On the argument over documentation Mr Bates made the point that the
      judge had not found the appellant credible in respect of his
      substantive claim. This lack of credibility could be carried over in
      relation to his claims about documentation and having no family
      support. On the basis his underlying claim had been rejected he did
      not have to leave in the great haste and could have organised
      documentation. In fact, he accepted he had documentation on his
      journey but said he no longer possessed it. Furthermore, if the
      underlying claim was not true there would be no reason for his family
      to move.

  20. Mr Bates argued that there was no error in how the judge dealt was the
      route of return. If he were returned via Baghdad then with
      documentation there would be no difficulty with onward travel to Erbil
      as stated in AAH. Alternatively, it was possible he could be returned
      directly to the IKR.

  21. In reply, Mr Aziz noted the comment by the presenting officer that the
      interview ended shortly after 9 AM. The appellant had made his claim
      the evening before and he submitted this supported his contention he
      was tired. Furthermore, the judge made no allowance for the fact that
      an interpreter over the telephone was used with the increased
      possibility of mistakes. The presenting officer had suggested that the
      German authorities would have returned the appellant's documentation
      to him after they rejected his claim. However, Mr Aziz made the point
      that the UK practice is that documents are not returned until the
      person is boarding the flight for their home country.

Consideration

  22. The respondent had rejected the appellant's claim on credibility
      grounds. Various inconsistencies were highlighted. On appeal the judge
      considered these. A screening interview is not meant to go into the
      substantive claim in any great detail. The appellants would be advised
      to give short answers and it would be indicated he would have the
      opportunity later to provide details of the claim. It is also possible
      that someone having recently arrived in the country a be particularly
      anxious, especially after it difficult journey overland. In the
      appellant situation however there had been substantial break in
      Germany as a judge reflected upon by his claim in Germany.

  23. Notwithstanding these points it is reasonable to expect consistency
      between the basic information given at screening and the claim
      ultimately made. Paragraph 19 of YL (China) [2004] UKAIT 00145 states
      that asylum seekers are still expected to tell the truth and the
      answers given in screening interviews can be compared fairly with
      answers given later.


  24. As Mr Bates points out, the judge did not focus solely upon
      inconsistencies arising from the screening. Rather, there were a
      number of credibility points and multiple examples of inconsistencies.
      It is not for me to interfere with the fact-finding exercise carried
      out by the judge unless there has been some clear deficiencies in the
      process. I do not find this to be the case here. I find the judge has
      carefully analysed the evidence and the various stages of the claim
      and drawn conclusions that were open.

  25. It is also logical for the judge to evaluate the appellant's claim
      about documentation and lack of family contact in light of the adverse
      credibility findings in the underlying claim. The two are very closely
      linked albeit someone may tell lies about one aspect of their claim
      and be truthful in other parts. It is clear the appellant did have
      documentation because he said he gave his CSID to the German
      authorities. In his substantive interview he repeated this at question
      49. He also states that he had a passport which he posted back from
      Turkey. Consequently, the information exists to establish his identity
      and documentation.

  26.  Paragraph 9 of the grounds may have been drafted by the appellant
      himself but they introduce a circular argument. He states if he does
      not have the original documentation then the Embassy cannot authorise
      a proxy. However he had the original documentation he would not need
      to approach the Embassy. The evidence indicates the documentation can
      be obtained. It would seem likely that if the German authorities had
      his CSID this representative could have corresponded seeking return or
      for details so replacements could be obtained. I was advised at
      hearing the had been no correspondence.

  27. It relation to return it would have been preferable for the judge to
      have focused upon the specific evidence relating to the appellant's
      law is quoted extensively and much of it does not apply to the
      appellant, he is from the IKR. However, the conclusions made about
      documentation and the rejection of the appellant's account of having
      no one to assist are sustainable. There is no material error in
      relation to how the judge dealt with documentation and the
      practicalities of return.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge L Mensah. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand.


Sighed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.
      Date: 16 July 2019










