
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal ref: PA/14062/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|                                     |On 30 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                           JUNIOR ALEXANDER GAYLE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 6 November 2018.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Farmer, promulgated on 19 September 2019.



     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed  on  17  February  2020;
         which include his assertion that he is a British  citizen  (and  so
         not liable to deportation).

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Holmes, dated 11 March 2020.

     vi) The UT's note and directions, dated 30 March and issued on 28 April
         2020, with a view to deciding without a  hearing  whether  the  FtT
         erred in law and, if so, whether its decision should be set  aside;
         and directing both parties to provide details  of  the  appellant's
         claim to citizenship.

    vii) The appellant's application, dated 6 May 2020, for an extension  of
         time of 2 months.

   viii) The UT's decision, declining to extend time, dated 21 May 2020.

     ix) The appellant's submissions, filed on 30 June 2020 (35 pages).

 2. There is no response on file from the SSHD.

 3. The appellant submits that the UT should not decide the case without  a
    hearing.

 4. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted on  the  view  that  it  was
    arguably unfair for the FtT not to have adjourned, of its  own  accord,
    to ascertain whether the appellant is a British  citizen;  not  on  any
    other issue.

 5. The appellant in his grounds, in his application for extension of time,
    and in  his  submissions,  raises  many  matters,  including:  unlawful
    detention; corruption  and  collusion  with  criminality  in  the  Home
    Office; bias, corruption and institutional racism in the FtT; collusion
    of the FtT with the Home Office; negligence and corruption on the  part
    of his former legal representatives; risk on  return  to  Jamaica;  and
    bias and corruption on my own part.  The appellant makes no  meaningful
    proposals to substantiate any of those extreme allegations.   They  are
    irrelevant to the one straightforward question properly raised  by  the
    grounds and the grant of permission: was it procedurally unfair, so  as
    to amount to error on a point of law, for the FtT not to  adjourn,  for
    the purpose above?

 6. The appellant has had ample opportunity to produce anything which might
    show that he has suffered procedural unfairness.

 7. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the UT may now deal  with
    this case fairly and justly, in terms of rules 2 and  34,  by  deciding
    the  foregoing  question  without  a  hearing,  based  on  all  written
    materials before it.

 8. Procedural unfairness may arise either from matters which are before  a
    tribunal at the time, or inadvertently, based on  matters  of  which  a
    tribunal, through no fault of its own, is unaware.

 9. The appellant has not explained why he failed to appear before the  FtT
    to advance his case.

10. The materials on the file do not include anything which was before  the
    FtT at the time of such strength that it should,  of  its  own  motion,
    have adjourned to explore whether the appellant is a  British  citizen.
    There was no more than a vague assertion of an outstanding  application
    to the respondent.

11.  The  appellant  says  that  he  has  British  citizenship,  which  the
    respondent has recognised; but if so, that could easily be demonstrated
    by producing the relevant  document.   To  date,  he  has  provided  no
    evidence to establish either  citizenship  or  recognition.   There  is
    therefore nothing to show that unfairness may have arisen,  even  based
    on materials not known to the FtT at the time.

12. It remains possible, although there is not much to  demonstrate  it  at
    the moment, that the appellant is legally a  citizen;  but  any  remedy
    rests in other proceedings.  It is not a possibility  which  shows  any
    error by the FtT on the case which was put before it.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

15. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


        Hugh Macleman

     UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.


