
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14107/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 July 2019                       |On 31 July 2019                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             Mr Waseem Popalzai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and is now an adult.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 18 September
    2017.  His claim was heard by Judge Landes, who dismissed his appeal in
    a decision dated 13 December 2017.  On 27 April 2018 the appellant made
    further submissions which were treated by the respondent as a fresh
    application and refused in a decision dated 6 November 2018.  The
    appellant appealed against the decision and Judge S Aziz of the First-
    tier Tribunal who dismissed the appellant's claim for asylum and
    humanitarian protection in a decision dated 18 March 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
    Hutchison on 19 June 2019, stating that it is arguable that the judge
    has erred in law, through no fault of his own, by relying on the
    country guidance case of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]
    UKUT 00118 in coming to his decision as it is now known that the said
    case has been held by the Court of Appeal to have been decided in error
    when considering the level of violence in Kabul which may make a
    material difference to the outcome or the fairness of the proceedings.

 3. Judge Landes found that the appellant is not credible and he did not
    find his account to be coherent or plausible.  The judge was not
    satisfied even to the low standard of proof applicable that the
    appellant's father was killed by his uncle or even that the appellant's
    father is indeed dead.  The judge was not satisfied that the
    appellant's uncle is a member of the Taliban or poses any threat to the
    appellant.  He also did not find credible the appellant's claim that
    his father was working for the Americans at the time that the appellant
    left Afghanistan.  Essentially, Judge Landes found that the appellant
    has been sent to the United Kingdom as an economic migrant.

 4. In respect of risk on return First-tier Tribunal Judge Judge Landes
    said that the current country guidance case on Article 15(c), which is
    AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 163, that the conditions in
    the appellant's home province of Nangdahar are not so severe as to mean
    that the appellant is in need of humanitarian protection.  The judge
    said that he was presented with a relatively large amount of background
    material but it was not suggested to him either in the skeleton
    argument or submissions that he should depart from AK and no reference
    was made to any material in the bundle which would justify this course.
     Judge Landes dismissed the appellant's appeal and said that the
    appellant can safely return to Nandahar.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz in accordance with the principles
    set out in the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 found that that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes was his starting
    point, which is entirely correct and there was no dispute about that.
    The judge found that the only additional evidence which was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal were originals of two letters although the
    photocopies had been provided to Judge Landes when he deliberated on
    the appeal.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz stated at paragraph 80 of his decision
    that in relation to the Article 15(c) risk, Judge Landes concluded that
    the country guidance case does not indicate that the conditions in the
    appellant's home province were so severe that the appellant was in need
    of humanitarian protection.  Therefore both Judge Landes and judge Aziz
    did not believe the narrative of the appellant and both found that he
    could be returned to his home area.  The issue before both judges was
    whether the appellant can be returned to his home area of Nangahar.
    There was no issue as to whether the appellant is able to relocate to
    Kabul.

 7. However, at paragraph 81 the judge sets out the country guidance case
    of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 and this is
    where the confusion arises.  Having considered that the appellant can
    return to his home area of Nandahar, which is a safe haven and that
    there is no 15(c) risk to him the judge went on to consider AS.  (which
    has been overturned by the Court of Appeal).

 8. The appellant's Counsel argued before me that the very fact that AS has
    been overturned means that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz,
    materially erred in law and the decision is not safe.

 9. I disagree with the submissions made by Counsel and see no force in
    them because it was clear from both decisions that it was found that
    the appellant was to return to Nandahar, where his parents and mother
    live and not relocate to Kabul.  Judge Landes stated that the appellant
    has not only his parents but uncles in his home area, who would come to
    Kabul to meet the appellant on his return. Therefore, having found that
    the appellant can return to his home area, Nandahar where his parents
    and other family members live, there was no need to consider whether
    Kabul is safe or not for the appellant to relocate.

10. I also do not accept that argument because AK (Afghanistan) makes it
    clear that there is no 15(c) risk in the whole of Afghanistan and that
    also includes Nandahar.  The issue before both First-tier Tribunal
    Judges was whether the appellant can return to his home area to re-join
    his family and not whether he can relocate to Kabul.

11. It was further submitted to me that even the time taken in transit
    through Kabul to Nandahar would put the appellant at risk. I do not
    accept this argument because it was found by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge that the appellant would be met by his family in Kabul who would
    take the appellant to his home area.this

12. I refer to the case of AS, EWCA 2019 Civ 873, where paragraph 6 sets
    out the background law and the EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC, the
    Qualification Directive, which states that Article 8 of the Directive
    excludes from the ambit of international protection cases where the
    person at risk has the opportunity of moving to a location within his
    or her country of origin where the relevant risk does not apply, often
    referred to as a safe haven.  Therefore, the judge's decision that the
    appellant can relocate to Nandahar, where there is no 15(c) risk is
    without material error. There was no evidence put before Judge Aziz and
    neither did the skeleton argument argue that the documents provided to
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge should persuade him to depart from the
    country guidance case of AK, which is not affected by AS.

13. The court of appeal in AS while remitting the appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal stated in conclusion that the remittal to the Upper Tribunal
    should be on the basis that Upper Tribunal need reconsider its
    conclusion only on the question of the extent of the risk to returned
    asylum seekers from security incidents of the kind considered at
    paragraph 19 of its reasons.  The Court of Appeal stated that the
    relevance of that risk to the overall issue of whether it is reasonable
    for asylum seekers to be expected to relocate to Kabul, is in practice
    a self-contained element within that assessment.

14. Therefore, even if there was an error to refer to a country guidance
    decision which has been overturned, it is not material for the purposes
    of this decision.  It is clear from the decisions of both the First-
    tier Tribunals, Landes and Judge Aziz that the appellant was found not
    to be credible, his narrative not to be credible, found that his father
    did not work for the Americans and that the appellant came to the
    United Kingdom as an economic migrant and he can safely return to
    Nandahar where there is no 15 C risk. I therefore uphold the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 29th day of July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date29th day of July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
