
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14263/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 21 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr V. Sharma, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Ms S. Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Kenya, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT")  against  a  decision  dated  13  December  2018  to  refuse  a
    protection and human rights claim. The FtT  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 2. At the hearing before me on 17 May  2019  it  was  agreed  between  the
    parties that the FtT erred in law by:

    (i)   proceeding  to   determine   the   asylum/protection   claim   in
         circumstances where the appellant had purported  to  withdraw  that
         claim at the hearing;

    (ii)     by apparently failing to consider  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
         Rules 2014 in terms of the reasons for the purported withdrawal  of
         that aspect of claim and thus the validity of the withdrawal;

    (iii)    in rejecting the protection claim  without  apparently  taking
         into account the appellant's claim that her  daughter  in  the  UK,
         born in November 2017, would be at risk of FGM on return  to  Kenya
         as asserted in an email dated 23 February 2019 in response  to  the
         decision letter, and to be found in the  respondent's  bundle  that
         was before the FtT.

 3. It was also agreed between the parties that the errors of law are  such
    as to require the decision of the FtT to  be  set  aside  and  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision of the FtT for error  of
    law and remit the appeal to the FtT for  a  hearing  de  novo,  on  all
    grounds including Article 8 of the ECHR as well  as  in  terms  of  the
    protection claim, before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony, with no findings of fact preserved.

 5. In remitting the appeal I have had  regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 17/5/19


