
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14177/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 March 2018                       |On 10 April 2018                    |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                mr P B W D M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Ahmad, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Sinhalese citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed  against
    the decision of the Respondent refusing him  international  protection.
    His appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson
    who, in a decision promulgated on 12 October 2017, dismissed it.


 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth in a decision  dated  15  December
    2017. The reasons for that decision were: -


         "At paragraph 50 of the decision the Judge states  that  the  Judge
         was satisfied that Dr Halari's report constituted  strong  evidence
         in support of the Appellant's credibility. The  Judge  went  on  to
         state that the Judge had taken  it  fully  into  account  alongside
         other relevant evidence when assessing  that  credibility.  It  was
         clear that Dr Halari  had  based  her  opinion  not  only  upon  an
         acceptance to the Appellant's account but also her  observation  of
         him and her applying certain clinical criteria. At paragraph 47  of
         the decision the Judge referred to the relevant medical evidence of
         Dr Halari whose expertise was not the  subject  of  challenge.  The
         Judge accepted that  Dr  Halari's  report  constituted  independent
         expert medical evidence in relation to  the  Appellant's  condition
         but the scope of her report did not include any examination of  any
         physical scarring if indeed the Appellant had any. At paragraph  56
         of the decision the Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  an
         individual whose core or material account lacked  all  credibility,
         even taking into account the strong  medical  evidence  in  support
         thereof.  Given  the  approach  described  by  the  Judge  to   the
         independent medical evidence of Dr Halari the conclusion reached at
         paragraph 56 of the decision in relation to the  total  absence  of
         credibility creates doubt as to the weight attached by the Judge to
         the independent medical evidence as part of an  overall  assessment
         of the credibility of the Appellant. It is arguable that the  Judge
         should have set out a fuller analysis of the effects of that  which
         is described in the independent medical  report  in  assessing  the
         credibility of the Appellant given the description of the nature of
         that report provided by the Judge."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.


 4. Ms Ahmad expanded on the grounds upon which permission was  sought.  In
    short that the  Judge  has  disregarded  the  probative  value  of  the
    "objective medical  evidence"  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,  their
    contents and how they lend credibility to the central contention of the
    Appellant's case  that  he  still  suffers  as  a  result  of  enduring
    indescribable torture at the hands of his Sri Lankan  persecutors.  The
    Judge has  attached  insufficient  "importance"  to  one  of  the  most
    important aspects of the Appellant's case. The report  prepared  by  Dr
    Rozmin Halari, Charted Consultant Clinical  (Neuro)  Psychologist,  has
    been largely dismissed by the Judge  which  reflects  the  insufficient
    attention that has been paid to it. That report indicated that  in  the
    view of its writer the Appellant suffers  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress
    Syndrome  and  also  corroborated  the  Appellant's  account  of  being
    tortured whilst in detention. It was not open to the  Judge  to  reject
    the Appellant's claim given the weight that ought to have been attached
    to this medical evidence. My attention was drawn to the authority of SA
    Somalia v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302  and  JL  (Medical  reports  -
    credibility) China  [2013]  UKUT  00145  (IAC).  In  particular  I  was
    referred to paragraphs 32 and 33 of SA which state: -


         "32. It will be apparent from what we have just said that we reject
         Counsel's contention that given  the  lower  standard  of  proof  a
         finding that scars which are found  "highly  consistent"  with  the
         claimed cause should be regarded as probative "unless there is good
         reason to reject them". If the  result  of  a  finding  of  "highly
         consistent with" is that there are few other possible causes,  that
         in itself says nothing about which of these few is more or the most
         likely. There is no basis, without more, for saying one  is  to  be
         preferred. There is no basis, without more, for saying that the one
         cause found "highly consistent with" is  to  be  accepted,  "unless
         there is a good  reason  to  reject..."  it.  It  would  have  been
         different if Mr A Martin's report  had  gone  on  to  evaluate  the
         relative likelihood of (the few)  other  possible  causes  and  had
         concluded the appellant's attribution was the most likely. But,  as
         already noted, it failed to do this.


         33.  This shortcoming of the report was  accentuated  by  the  fact
         that the scarring concerned was to the appellant's  right  forearm,
         which was a part of the body which a person would use in an  active
         way in many everyday work and home situations; and, on the  account
         given by  the  appellant,  there  were  at  least  two  alternative
         explanations for the scarring which merited consideration: one  was
         his claim that he had trained with the LTTE for two  months,  using
         weapons (an AK 47) and the other was that he had worked in a  shop.
         The doctor had been made aware of the former, but  not,  it  seems,
         the latter. Whilst the appellant  did  not  assist  the  doctor  by
         failing to volunteer as part of his "history" his  work  experience
         in a shop, in our view a  medical  report  seeking  to  assess  the
         causation of scarring should always seek to establish, as  part  of
         an appellant's history, whether there are any home, social or work-
         related activities which may cast light on other possible causes of
         the injury/scarring."


    Ms Ahmad further asserted that the  overwhelming  positive  credibility
    findings within the  decision  outweighed  significantly  the  negative
    findings. The Judge has failed to state what weight he did put on  this
    medical report. Any discrepant evidence therein arises out of the  more
    relaxed and professional environment that the Appellant  found  himself
    in when being examined by the report writer in contrast to when he  was
    being interviewed and or providing a witness statement. The  Judge  has
    not adequately  reasoned  the  rejection  of  this  evidence  which  is
    Istanbul Protocol compliant.


 5. Further at paragraph 57 of his decision there is an erroneous reference
    to a "Dr Watson" which is a further material error absent any  evidence
    from such a person being brought in this appeal.


 6. As to ground 2,  which  Ms  Ahmad  pursued  far  less  vigorously,  she
    asserted that the Judge had failed to set the  Appellant's  claim  into
    the risk factors identified in the Country  Guidance  case  of  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).


 7. Mr Wilding emphasised that the Appellant's difficulty lay in  the  fact
    that what he told Dr Halari was  quite  different  to  the  information
    given to the Secretary of State and that it is  simply  wrong  for  the
    Appellant's Counsel to say that not enough  weight  was  given  to  the
    medical evidence. The Judge has fully  analysed  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before concluding that was open to be made. He  also  asserted
    that the Judge had not dealt with this appeal in the fashion of a "one-
    way street" and throughout  the  carefully  crafted  decision  had  not
    accepted the totality of the Respondent's case. The decision is Mibanga
    compliant and the reference to a "Dr Watson" is clearly not a  material
    error as it is obvious that the Judge  was  referring  to  the  medical
    report writer. As to  the  second  ground  given  the  Judge's  adverse
    credibility findings it was inevitable that  the  Appellant  could  not
    fall into the risk factors identified in GJ.


 8. I note that at paragraph 50 of his decision the Judge  stated  that  he
    was "satisfied that Dr Halari's report constitutes strong  evidence  in
    support of the Appellant's credibility and I have taken it  fully  into
    account, alongside other evidence, when assessing that credibility.  On
    reading that report it is plain that Dr Halari based  her  opinion  not
    just upon the Appellant's account as given  to  her  but  also  on  her
    clinical observation of him and her applying  clinical  criteria".  Her
    expertise (it is noted at paragraph 47 of the  decision)  was  not  the
    subject of challenge and the Judge found that  the  report  constituted
    independent expert medical evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    condition.  He  then  noted  that  the  report  was  deficient  of  any
    examination of any physical scarring. However, I was  referred  to  the
    report during today's hearing, and I accept, that at paragraph  6  such
    an examination was not within the ambit of the instructions given to Dr
    Halari. She was asked to give opinion on whether the Appellant suffered
    from symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and the impact, if any,
    on his removal to Sri Lanka. At paragraph 56 of the Judge's decision it
    is recorded that the Appellant "is an individual whose core or material
    account lacks all credibility, even  taking  into  account  the  strong
    medical evidence in support thereof". This constitutes the nub  of  the
    Appellant's application before me. I find that the reference to a total
    absence of credibility creates doubt as to precisely  what  weight  the
    Judge attached to the report of Dr Halari in the context of the overall
    assessment of the credibility of the  Appellant.  The  decision  is  in
    consequence devoid of adequate reasoning as to how the Judge could come
    to the conclusions that he did considering this medical evidence.


 9. For all these reasons I find that the Judge has  materially  erred  for
    the reasons put forward in ground one of the application.  Ground  two,
    considering this finding, becomes redundant. However, I  do  find  that
    had the Appellant been found lacking credibility, as he was,  then  the
    ground is not made out.


10. Consequently, I accept the submission of Ms Ahmad that the way  forward
    is for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  the
    Appellant has not had the benefit of a fair hearing.


Decision


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Hodgkinson.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 4 April 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard









