
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14067/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 13th November 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AAS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. Rutherford of Counsel, instructed by Migrant
Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.   AAS  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.    This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision by FtT Judge Graham promulgated
       on 9th March 2017, in which she  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
       against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department of 2nd December 2016, to refuse the claim for asylum made
       by AAS.


    3. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran.  At paragraph  [5]  of
       her decision the Judge records  that  the  appellant  gave  evidence
       before the FtT with the assistance of an interpreter in the  Kurdish
       Sorani language.  At paragraph [7], the Judge  notes  that  she  had
       before her, a Psychiatric Report prepared by  Dr  Alison  Battersby.
       The Judge states:


             "As  the  Psychiatric  Report  from  Doctor  Alison  Battersby
             diagnoses  the  Appellant  as  suffering  from  PTSD   and   a
             depressive disorder, I am satisfied that as the Appellant  has
             a  mental  health  problem,  he  meets  the  definition  of  a
             vulnerable witness. Therefore I have  referred  to  the  Joint
             Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010."


    4. The immigration history of the appellant is  set  out  at  paragraph
       [12] of the decision of the FtT.  At paragraphs [13] to [18] of  her
       decision, the Judge summarises the appellant's  case.   The  Judge's
       findings are to be found at paragraphs [28] to [50] of her decision.
        At paragraph [28] of her decision, the Judge states:


             "..I have considered  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  by
             looking at the matter in the round. I have borne in  mind  the
             conclusions of the Expert, Doctor Alison Battersby (at 7) that
             the Appellant "has capacity to conduct legal proceedings.  The
             cogency of his evidence is likely to be affected by his  PTSD"
             when  considering  the  inconsistencies  in  the   Appellant's
             account."


    5. The Judge found that the appellant has not discharged the burden  of
       proof that is upon him, to establish that  he  is  entitled  to  the
       grant of asylum.  At paragraphs [52] to [61]  of  her  decision  the
       Judge sets out her reasons for dismissing the appeal on humanitarian
       protection, and human rights grounds.


    6. In the Grounds of Appeal, the appellant claims that in rejecting the
       appellant's account of events, the Judge has made a  material  error
       of law.  The appellant claims that although the Judge  records  that
       she has borne in mind the conclusions of Dr Battersby, at  paragraph
       [39] of her decision, the Judge has  rejected  that  evidence.   The
       appellant  accepts  that  the  Judge  is  not  bound  to  accept  Dr
       Battersby's conclusion  as  to  the  appellant's  evidence,  but  in
       concluding, at paragraph [39], that she can attach little weight  to
       the psychiatric report, the Judge has failed to give proper reasons,
       and her assessment is based upon a misunderstanding of  the  content
       of the report.


    7. The appellant claims that Dr Battersby had addressed her mind to the
       possibility that the appellant may be feigning  his  symptoms.   The
       appellant claims that in rejecting the appellant's claim that he  is
       from Iran, the Judge has failed to take into account the evidence of
       Dr Battersby regarding his ability to provide cogent  evidence.   It
       is  claimed  that  the  Judge  does  not  provide  reasons  for  her
       conclusion,  at  paragraph  [37],  that  the  discrepancies  in  his
       evidence, cannot be attributed to the appellant's mental health.


    8. The appellant also claims in the grounds of appeal  that  the  Judge
       was wrong to place significant weight upon the  appellant's  failure
       to mention certain issues in his screening interview. The errors  in
       the screening interview  were  corrected  in  a  letter  dated  25th
       November 2016 sent by the appellant's solicitors, but the  appellant
       claims, the Judge did not refer to this in her decision.


    9. The appellant also claims that the Judge erred in her assessment  of
       whether the appellant's suicide risk is such that his  removal  from
       the UK would be in breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR.   It  is
       said that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
       concluding that the appellant's removal will not  be  in  breach  of
       Articles 2 and 3.  Dr Battersby did  not,  as  the  Judge  suggests,
       simply take the account of the appellant at face value,  but  looked
       for clinical signs to support her conclusions.


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Gillespie on 4th April 2017.
       The matter comes before me to consider whether or not  the  decision
       of FtT Judge Graham involved the making of a material error of  law.




   11. Before me, Miss Rutherford relies upon the grounds of appeal.  It is
       not suggested by the appellant that having been satisfied  that  the
       appellant has a mental health problem and meets the definition of  a
       vulnerable witness, the Judge did not conduct the hearing  properly,
       or make reasonable adjustments to accommodate the  appellant  during
       the hearing.   Miss  Rutherford  submits  that  in  her  report,  Dr
       Battersby had considered  whether  the  appellant  has  feigned  the
       presentation of PTSD, and the Judge  should  have  attached  greater
       weight to the opinion of the expert, when assessing the  appellant's
       evidence.


   12. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 25th  April  2017.
       Mr Richards submits that the decision of  the  FtT  Judge  does  not
       disclose a material  error  of  law.   He  submits  that  the  Judge
       carefully considered all of the evidence before her, and  gave  full
       reasons for her findings and conclusions, taking  into  account  all
       relevant matters.  He submits that the Judge of the FtT was  mindful
       throughout, of the appellant's mental health, and the report  of  Dr
       Battersby.  He submits that the Judge properly considered the report
       of Dr Battersby, and gave full and cogent reasons why she  was  able
       to  place  little  weight  upon  the  report.    He   submits   that
       notwithstanding the report of Dr Battersby, it was open to the Judge
       to find that the appellant's claim to be an Iranian national was not
       credible.  The appellant had himself at an  earlier  stage,  as  the
       Judge notes at paragraph [31] of  her  decision,  used  a  different
       identity and claimed that he was from Iraq.  It was for the Judge to
       resolve whether the account given by the applicant is credible,  and
       the Judge did so, taking into account of the matters set out in  the
       report of Dr Battersby.


 Discussion


   13. I deal first with the Judge's assessment of  the  substantive  asylum
       claim.  As I have already set out, at paragraph [28] of her decision,
       the Judge records that she has "considered  the  credibility  of  the
       Appellant by looking at the matter in the round" and "borne  in  mind
       the conclusions of the Expert, Doctor Alison Battersby  (at  7)  that
       the Appellant has capacity to conduct legal proceedings. The  cogency
       of his evidence is likely to be affected by his PTSD".


   14. At paragraph [30] of her decision, the Judge notes that the applicant
       has provided an inconsistent account of when he left Iran.  The Judge
       refers to the opinion of Dr Battersby  that  the  appellant's  mental
       health condition may affect his ability to recall  an  accurate  time
       line, but the Judge notes that in addition,  the  appellant  is  also
       inconsistent as to his account of his journey to the UK.   The  Judge
       states at paragraph [30] that she is satisfied  "the  inconsistencies
       in his accounts cannot be explained by his mental health  condition."
       and undermine the credibility of his account.


   15. At paragraphs [31] to [38] of her determination, the Judge  addresses
       the appellant's nationality.  He claims to be  an  Iranian  national.
       The Judge finds at  paragraph  [38],  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
       paragraphs [31] to [38], that the appellant is more likely to  be  an
       Iraqi national, than an Iranian national.  In  my  judgement,  it  is
       clear from a careful reading  of  those  paragraphs  that  the  Judge
       carefully considered the discrepancies in the appellant's account  of
       events, and the  evidence  before  her.  In  her  assessment  of  the
       appellant's evidence, the Judge notes  at  paragraph  [37]  that  the
       appellant's inability to state with accuracy how many days there  are
       in the months of the Iranian calendar, cannot be  attributed  to  the
       appellant's mental health  condition.   The  Judge  plainly  had  the
       opinion of Dr Battersby at the forefront of her mind when considering
       each thread of the appellant's claim.


   16.  At  paragraphs  [39]  to  [46]  of  her  decision,  the  FtT   Judge
       nevertheless considers the appellant's account that  he  is  at  risk
       upon return to Iran.  Again, the Judge notes that there are a  number
       of inconsistencies and discrepancies in the appellant's account.   At
       paragraph [39] the Judge states:


             "...Again I have considered the findings of  Doctor  Battersby
             that due to the diagnosis of severe PTSD the Appellant  cannot
             be expected to give a cogent account. I  have  considered  the
             Psychiatric report which diagnoses the Appellant as  suffering
             from severe  PTSD  and  concludes  that  the  traumatic  event
             triggering this condition could only be his  treatment  during
             his  second  detention  which  the  Appellant   describes   as
             including physical  mistreatment  and  sexual  assaults  by  a
             prison official. I  note  [sic]  the  report  states  that  "A
             psychiatric report cannot establish that the events  described
             occurred.  A  psychiatrist  is  also  not  in  a  position  to
             establish the credibility of a claimant". At A28 of the Report
             Doctor Battersby states  "[AAS]  told  me  that  he  was  very
             naughty when young. He thinks this is because he went to  work
             very early and worked with a lot of older people. He  said  he
             would get lots of nice things and laughed and  smiled  talking
             about this. He would make the other men like  him  by  getting
             close to them and hugging them to make  them  think  he  loved
             them more and would "get them by that. I told [AAS] that  this
             sounded manipulative." However, despite identifying  that  the
             Appellant  is  capable  of  manipulative   behaviour,   Doctor
             Battersby appears to accept his account of physical and sexual
             abuse by a prison officer even though it  is  evident  in  her
             report that the Appellant  refuses  to  give  details  of  the
             sexual assaults. The report states (at A35) that "a survivor's
             story may include an inability to recall specific  details  of
             the trauma. Rather than discounting the story,  this  supports
             it...avoidant behaviours also support a  diagnosis  of  PTSD".
             The report fails to consider that the lack of  detail  in  the
             Appellant's account might be because the  incident  complained
             of did not occur. In addition Doctor Battersby appears not  to
             have  considered  the  Appellant's  manipulative  nature  when
             considering whether he suffers  from  severe  PTSD.  Similarly
             when considering the Appellant's failure to mention key points
             of his account in  the  initial  interview.  Doctor  Battersby
             states that the Appellant can become "significantly  irritable
             when asked further questions about events" but considers  that
             this is "highly consistent with someone who  has  severe  PTSD
             and/or has experienced  sexual  assault  or  attempted  sexual
             assault" without considering the omission could be the  result
             of  a  later  embellishment  and  the  lack   of   detail   or
             inconsistency could be indicative of a false account.   Doctor
             Battersby's failure to consider that the discrepancies in  the
             Appellant's account might be  due  to  him  manufacturing  his
             account and embellishing his account in order to  enhance  the
             chances of a successful appeal, undermines the conclusions she
             makes  regarding  the  Appellant's  mental  health  condition.
             Accordingly, I have attached little weight to the  Psychiatric
             Report."


   17. It is clear from that  extract  of  paragraph  [39]  of  the  Judge's
       decision, that the Judge does not reject the evidence of Dr Battersby
       as set out at paragraph 2 of the appellant's grounds of  appeal.   In
       my judgment, the  Judge  carefully  considered  the  opinions  of  Dr
       Battersby, but concluded that in the end,  she  could  attach  little
       weight to the report for the reasons that are  amply  set  out.  Miss
       Rutherford accepts that in BN  (psychiatric  evidence  discrepancies)
       Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC) the Tribunal confirmed that the more  a
       diagnosis is dependent on assuming that  the  account  given  by  the
       appellant was to be believed, the less likely it is that  significant
       weight will be attached to it.


   18. In her assessment of  the  appellant's  account  of  events  and  his
       evidence, the Judge, at paragraph [40],  again refers to  the  report
       of Dr Battersby and concludes that the omission to previously mention
       his sexual relationship with Hawnaz, which forms part of the core  of
       the claim for asylum, cannot be explained by the  appellant's  mental
       health condition.


   19. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
       "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure  to  give  adequate
       reasons are all too frequent.  The obligation on  a  Tribunal  is  to
       give reasons in sufficient detail to show the principles on which the
       Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have  led  to  the  decision.
       Such reasons need not be elaborate, and do not need to address  every
       argument or every  factor  which  weighed  in  the  decision.   If  a
       Tribunal has not expressly addressed an argument, but  if  there  are
       grounds on which the argument could properly have been  rejected,  it
       should be assumed that the Tribunal acted on  such  grounds.   It  is
       sufficient that the critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


   20. The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is  "perverse"  embraces
       findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
       and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
       appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a  judgment  at  first
       instance, unless it really could not understand the original  judge's
       thought process when she was making material findings.


   21. I reject the claim made by the appellant that the Judge has failed to
       take into account the evidence of Dr Battersby regarding his  ability
       to provide cogent evidence.  The submission that the judge failed  to
       engage with the medical report is, in my judgement unfounded.  It  is
       clear from a careful reading  of  paragraphs  [28]  to  [46]  of  the
       decision of the FtT that the Judge considered the appellant's account
       of events and noted the inconsistencies in his  account.   The  Judge
       carried out a careful analysis of that evidence referring  repeatedly
       to the report of Dr Battersby.  She concluded a number of times  that
       the discrepancies in  his  evidence,  cannot  be  attributed  to  the
       appellant's mental health.


   22. I reject the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
       Judge failed to give any,  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  attaching
       little weight to the report of Dr Battersby.  In my judgement, it was
       it was open to the Judge to  find  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
       inconsistent,  contradictory,  and  not   credible   and   that   the
       discrepancies cannot be attributed to the appellant's mental health.


   23. I also reject the claim that the Judge was wrong to place significant
       weight upon the appellant's failure to mention certain issues in  his
       screening interview because  the Judge failed to have regard  to  the
       corrections to the screening interview set out in a letter dated 25th
       November 2016 sent by the appellant's  solicitors.   Miss  Rutherford
       rightly accepted that at paragraph [41] of her  decision,  the  Judge
       expressly  refers   to   the   explanation   put   forward   by   his
       representatives in their  letter  dated  25th  November  2016.   That
       explanation was plainly  considered  by  the  Judge  in  her  overall
       assessment of the appellant's account of events.


   24. The Judge made findings that were adverse to the appellant having had
       the opportunity to see and hear the  appellant  give  evidence.   She
       properly noted at paragraph [7] that the appellant  is  a  vulnerable
       witness.  Miss Rutherford accepts before me that the Judge  conducted
       the hearing properly, and made reasonable adjustments to  accommodate
       the appellant during the hearing.


   25. Similarly,  in  my  judgement,  the  appellant  disagrees  with  the
       findings and conclusions reached by the Judge as to the  appellant's
       claim for humanitarian protection and under the  immigration  rules,
       but  the  findings  are  not  irrational  or  unreasonable  in   the
       Wednesbury sense, or findings that are  wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence.  The Judge did not consider irrelevant  factors,  and  the
       weight that she attached to  the  evidence  either  individually  or
       cumulatively, was a matter for her.


   26. It follows that in my judgment, the decision  of  the  FtT  does  not
       contain a material error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal before me is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date     25th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     25th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

