
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14247/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th October 2019                          |On 21st November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     S A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Solicitor at JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury promulgated on 6 August 2019, in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 19 November 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  10  November  1985,
    who first arrived in the United Kingdom in 2008 on a family visit visa.
     He made an application for leave to remain on the basis of  Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human rights which was  refused  in  2009
    and a further application on private and family life grounds  was  made
    and refused in 2013.  The Appellant claimed asylum in 2018 on the basis
    that he would be at real risk of persecution on return to Bangladesh as
    a gay man.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant  was  gay  because  his  claim  was  vague,
    incoherent and implausible.  The Respondent also found as damaging  the
    Appellant's credibility, the delay in his claim for asylum pursuant  to
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)
    Act 2004.  For essentially the same  reasons  the  Respondent  did  not
    accept that there was a valid claim for  humanitarian  protection,  nor
    any breach of Articles 2 or 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Separate consideration was given to the Appellant's  right  to
    respect for private and family life, but he was not found to  have  any
    partner or child in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules on the basis
    that there were no very significant obstacles to his reintegration into
    Bangladesh.  There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant
    of leave to remain.

 4. Judge Hanbury dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    August 2019 on all grounds, with the appeal  only  substantively  being
    pursued on the asylum grounds.  The asylum claim was dismissed  on  the
    basis that the Appellant's claim was found to be completely incredible,
    in  particular  that  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  have  been   in
    relationship in Bangladesh with strong homosexual  tendencies  but  did
    not make any claim for asylum until April 2018.  The Appellant appeared
    to be an intelligent individual and has  been  legally  represented  in
    earlier claims for leave to remain, in which he did not rely  on  being
    gay.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's gay  life  had
    been manufactured late in the day as a means of  avoiding  removal  and
    had surrounded himself with gay men in  recent  times  solely  for  the
    purpose of bolstering  his  claim.   In  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    claimed relationship  in  Bangladesh,  the  account  was  found  to  be
    inconsistent and implausible given the cultural context.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found the evidence given by Mr H and others  to
    be totally unreliable with no weight attached to  the  evidence,  which
    was characterised by a lack of detail.  The First-tier Tribunal was not
    satisfied  that  the  witnesses  had  any  detailed  knowledge  of  the
    Appellant and it was noted that the witnesses regularly  gave  evidence
    on behalf of the appellants before the Tribunal, in one case in  15  or
    so appeals and in another  in  50  or  more  appeals.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the Appellant's witnesses gave  the  impression  of
    being paid advocates on his behalf rather  than  independent  witnesses
    who kept gave factual evidence in a straightforward way.  Finally,  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that  the  evidence  of  Mr  R  did  not  add
    anything to  the  Appellant's  claim  and  shed  little  light  on  his
    sexuality.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on essentially three grounds as follows.   First,
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed when assessing  the  delay  in  the
    Appellant's asylum claim, to consider the context and in particular the
    complexity of the journey for a person 'coming out' from a  Bangladeshi
    Muslim background and this Appellant's limited education and consequent
    lack of understanding and perception.  The  latter  is  said  to  be  a
    plausible explanation for the Appellant's lack of clear expression  and
    apparent inconsistencies in his claim.  Secondly, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in  assessing  the  witness  evidence,
    rejecting the evidence of multiple witnesses solely on the  basis  that
    they had attended multiple appeal hearings before the Tribunal this was
    an irrelevant consideration, particularly given the small size  of  the
    Bangladeshi gay community where everyone  knew  each  other.   Thirdly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in finding that Mr
    R's evidence added little to the claim, given that he  stated  he  took
    the Appellant to play clubs as early as 2016, which could not have been
    for the purposes of bolstering his claim made later in 2018.

 7. At the oral hearing, on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Reza submitted that
    the grounds of appeal amounted to far more than mere disagreement  with
    the outcome and that the First-tier Tribunal had failed in its duty  to
    give adequate reasons for the decision, the ones  appearing  within  it
    not being sufficient.  In particular, there was no express reference to
    or consideration in the decision of the Appellant's  written  statement
    or the skeleton argument on his behalf, in particular  in  relation  to
    the issue of delay.  In cases concerning a  person's  sexuality,  delay
    does not necessarily adversely affect their  credibility,  particularly
    for this Appellant who had limited  education  and  came  from  a  very
    conservative background.  To the  contrary  the  Judge  was  under  the
    impression that the Appellant  was  well  educated,  but  he  had  only
    completed primary school.  The combination of these  factors  may  have
    impeded the Appellant from coming forward with his asylum claim.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal did not reject the  evidence  of  Mr  R,  which
    included evidence of the Appellant attending gay clubs two years  prior
    to his asylum claim did not therefore support any view that  the  claim
    was manufactured.  The evidence was also corroborative of the existence
    of the Appellants ex-partner.

 9. In relation to the other witnesses, this should not have been  rejected
    solely because they had given evidence in other  appeals,  particularly
    as one of the witnesses came in her capacity  as  chair  of  an  LGBTQ+
    organisation and where there is a small  and  close-knit  community  of
    Bangladeshi gays numbering only hundred and 50 to 200 and people.

10. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  appeal  was
    essentially a reasons challenge and that in summary,  adequate  reasons
    have been given as to why the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.  It was
    submitted that the Tribunal were entitled to put into the mix the  fact
    that the Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  2008,  had  made
    unsuccessful applications for leave to remain  and  only  at  the  last
    minute, 10 years later,  did  he  claim  asylum.   There  were  lengthy
    periods where the Appellant does not claim to have expressed any sexual
    preference towards men and there were relevant plausibility findings on
    his account.  The First-tier Tribunal did not refer to the Appellant as
    being well educated, but that  he  appeared  intelligent,  which  is  a
    different point.  It has to be remembered that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had the benefit of oral evidence from a number of  witnesses,  together
    with the written evidence available  on  the  file.   Overall,  it  was
    submitted that it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  reject  the
    Appellant's claim on the basis of lack of detail  and  inconsistencies,
    with findings made that were open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    Appellant's credibility and plausibility of his claim.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the delay in  claiming  asylum,  there  was  no  written
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  from  the  Appellant  directly
    giving any reasons as to why he only claimed asylum in 2018,  10  years
    after he entered the United  Kingdom  and  after  a  number  of  failed
    applications for leave to remain  on  other  grounds.   In  his  asylum
    interview, the Appellant states that he did not claim  earlier  because
    he did not know that such a claim could be made and  he  did  not  know
    that he was allowed to be gay in the United Kingdom until around  2016,
    albeit he claims to have been attending  gay  clubs  since  2015.   The
    matter was however covered in the skeleton argument  submitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on his behalf, in which it was  asserted  that  the
    delay in claiming asylum should not affect the credibility of the claim
    given the Appellant's cultural and religious background, not making  it
    easy for him to come out  openly  and  by  reference  to  his  lack  of
    knowledge that a gay man could claim asylum will be  assisted  on  that
    basis.  Even once the Appellant new about the process, he was  hesitant
    to come forward.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not expressly rely on section 8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 to
    find the Appellant's credibility as  damaged  by  his  late  claim  for
    asylum, however the timing of the claim was referred to.  In  paragraph
    34 of the decision, the Judge states that "this was a very  late  claim
    advanced many years  after  his  last  application  to  regularise  his
    immigration status had failed in 2013.  All other avenues  were  closed
    to the appellant by  that  time."   This  paragraph  contained  nothing
    further in relation to credibility  or  delay.   There  was  however  a
    finding earlier in paragraph 30 that although it was  appreciated  that
    matters of sexuality are personal and that the Appellant  came  from  a
    culture significantly less tolerant of homosexuality, that in any event
    it must been obvious to the Appellant from  his  involvement  with  the
    "gay scene" in the United Kingdom that he  could  openly  exercise  his
    rights as a homosexual here.  In  paragraph  31  it  was  found  to  be
    incredible that the Appellant would not advance his claim  until  April
    2018 by not  relying  on  this  most  important  detail  in  his  life,
    particularly when legally represented.

 3. Although there is no express reference in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to the  decision  in  A,  B,  C  v  Staatssecretaris  van
    Veiligheid en Justitie (Cases C-148/13 - C-150/13), I find  that  there
    has in substance, been a consideration and rejection of the Appellant's
    reasons for delay in claiming asylum,  which  expressly  refer  to  his
    cultural background, the personal nature of a  person's  sexuality  and
    note his claimed involvement with other gay  people  and  visiting  gay
    bars 2 to 3 years prior to his asylum claim, as well  as  this  claimed
    relationship in Bangladesh  before  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    These are all relevant factors and sufficient  reasons  are  given  for
    rejecting the explanation for delay, even in this particular context.

 4. As to the Appellant's level of education, although his evidence is that
    he only completed primary education up until  year  six,  that  is  not
    necessarily inconsistent with the First-tier Tribunal's finding that he
    appears to be an  intelligent  individual.   The  lack  of  any  formal
    education is not determinative of intelligence and in any  event,  this
    was a relatively minor part of the reasoning  in  the  context  of  the
    other findings.

 5. For these reasons I find no error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and findings made on the delay in the asylum  claim.   In  any
    event, the decision contains much wider  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the Appellant (including about the plausibility of  his  claim,
    inconsistencies in it and the lack of detail about  a  claimed  lengthy
    relationship in the United Kingdom) which go far beyond the  timing  of
    the claim and it  is  therefore  difficult  to  see  how  any  detailed
    consideration of the context or case law could have made  any  material
    difference to the overall adverse credibility findings.

 6.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of two particular witnesses and the lack of weight  attached
    to their evidence.  The primary reasons for the lack of weight attached
    given in paragraph  35  of  the  decision  is  that  the  evidence  was
    "characterised by lack of detail"  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not
    being satisfied that the witnesses had any detailed  knowledge  of  the
    Appellant.  One witness was inconsistent about how long  he  had  known
    the Appellant for and in both cases, the timing of the  involvement  of
    the witnesses came only after the Appellant's asylum claim was  refused
    by the Respondent.

 7.  In addition,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  questioned  how  a  court  or
    tribunal could attach significant weight to the evidence  of  a  person
    who gives evidence regularly on behalf  of  behalf  of  appellants  and
    whether the individuals were actually known to them or  not.   However,
    the First-tier Tribunal does not refer to any other decisions  nor  any
    concerns about the evidence given in other cases, adverse  comments  on
    their credibility or the like.  Whilst this shows a lack  of  reasoning
    as to why numerous attendances  before  an  appeal  tribunal  could  or
    should affect the weight to be given to evidence, in this case  it  was
    one of a number of reasons why little or no weight  was  given  to  the
    evidence of these two witnesses in particular.   I  find  that  in  any
    event it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to attach little weight to
    the evidence on the basis that it lacked detail  and  did  not  contain
    detailed knowledge of this Appellant in  particular,  or  any  detailed
    evidence as to his involvement with the organisations which they belong
    to.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did have the benefit of hearing that
    oral evidence, together with the written  statements,  which  on  their
    face do lack detail.  For these reasons alone, it was open to the First-
    tier Tribunal to attach little  or  no  weight  to  this  part  of  the
    evidence, which is a matter for the Judge who heard the oral  evidence.
    I therefore I find no material error of law on  the  second  ground  of
    appeal.

 8. Finally, the  Appellant  appeals  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's treatment of the evidence of Mr Rajon  was  also  flawed  as
    this could not have been sought to bolster a late asylum claim in 2018,
    because it related to events as early as 2016.  However,  I  find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was rationally entitled to conclude  that  this
    evidence added nothing of substance to the Appellant's claim given  the
    finding that the Appellant's claim  had  been  manufactured  relatively
    late in the day, surrounding himself with gay  men  and  attending  gay
    events to  bolster  his  claim  rather  than  because  of  his  genuine
    sexuality.  At its highest, Mr R's evidence is that  he  believes  what
    the Appellant has told him about his sexuality and that he has  dropped
    him to gay venues in the past.  It was open to the First-tier Tribunal,
    in the context of the findings made and when all of  the  evidence  was
    considered in the round, to find that this witness' evidence  does  not
    substantively advance the Appellant's claim, nor did it have a material
    bearing on the outcome of it.  For these reasons I find no error of law
    in the final ground of appeal either.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]         Date         11th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

