
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14142/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5 August 2019                     |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Taner [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is  a  national  of  Turkey.   On  7  December  2018  the
    respondent refused his protection claim.  His appeal came before  Judge
    Brookfield of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).  In a decision sent  on  9
    April 2019 the judge dismissed  his  appeal.   At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing the appellant's  representatives  applied  for  an  adjournment
    because the appellant's partner had given birth to a child a  week  ago
    and she was on antibiotics and was unable to walk or hold her child and
    he was required to remain at home in order to  look  after  the  child.
    The judge addressed this application as follows:

         "9.  Pursuant to Rule  4  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
             Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  a
             Tribunal can adjourn  a  hearing.   I  considered  whether  an
             adjournment was necessary in this case in order to deal fairly
             and justly with the appellant's  appeal.   I  noted  that  the
             appellant and his partner claimed that  they  lived  with  the
             appellant's father and the appellant's younger brother who was
             two years old at the date  of  the  appellant's  interview  in
             August 2017.  I  note  that  the  mother  of  the  appellant's
             brother does not live in the UK  but  lives  in  Turkey.   The
             appellant's father  has  therefore  been  able  to  raise  his
             younger son without the presence of his son's  mother  in  the
             UK.  I found that the evidence before me strongly suggested he
             would have been able to look after the  appellant's  partner's
             baby whilst she and the appellant attended the  hearing.   The
             appellant's  representative  advised  that   the   appellant's
             partner was released from hospital on the 29th March  and  was
             on antibiotics and was unable to walk or to hold her baby.   I
             noted that there was no medical evidence before me  to  advise
             the appellant's partner was unable to walk or to travel to the
             hearing to provide oral evidence.  I found it to be incredible
             that a maternity unit would discharge a first time mother from
             the hospital if she were unable to walk or to hold  her  baby.
             I also noted that the appellant's partner has never  lived  in
             Turkey and that any information she could provide in  relation
             to his asylum appeal would be  information  she  had  received
             from the appellant.  I noted  that  an  interpreter  had  been
             arranged for this hearing and that there had been  a  previous
             adjournment of the appeal at the request of the appellant.  It
             is for the party applying for the  adjournment  to  show  good
             cause why an adjournment is necessary and produce evidence  of
             any fact or matter relied upon in support of the  application.
             I found the appellant, by failing to provide medical  evidence
             that his partner is unable to walk or look after her own child
             has failed to show good cause why an adjournment is necessary.
              I refused the application for an adjournment."


2.   The appellant's first ground contends  that  the  judge's  reasons  for
    refusing to adjourn were vitiated by unfair procedure.

3.   Mr Mills addressed me  at  the  start  of  the  hearing,  stating  that
    despite the contents of the respondent's Rule 24 notice, the respondent
    now accepted that the  judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  was  procedurally
    unfair.  I concur with Mr Mills.  There was before the judge  a  letter
    from the maternity unit manager  at  Royal  Stoke  University  Hospital
    which made clear that the appellant's  partner  had  experienced  post-
    delivery complications following a Caesarean section  (it  also  stated
    that the appellant was present at the birth of his partner's child).

4.   From the wording of paragraph 9, it is first of all not clear that  the
    judge had taken account of this letter from  the  maternity  unit  ward
    manager.  The judge simply notes that the  appellant's  representatives
    "advised that the appellant's partner was released from hospital on  29
    March and was on antibiotics and was unable to  walk  or  to  hold  the
    baby".   To state immediately following  that  "there  was  no  medical
    evidence before me to advise that the appellant's partner was unable to
    walk or to travel to the hearing to provide  oral  evidence"  does  not
    indicate that the 27 March letter from the ward manager was considered.
     If not medical evidence stricto sensu, this  letter  from  a  hospital
    ward confirmed that the appellant's wife (who had had a Caesarean)  had
    had post-delivery complications.  By proceeding to state that "I  found
    it to be incredible that a maternity unit would discharge a  first-time
    mother from hospital if she was unable to walk or to hold her baby, the
    judge appears not to have taken stock of the actual situation.  If  the
    judge intended to cast doubt on the reliability of the  ward  manager's
    letter, that should have been made clear, and reasons  given.   If  the
    judge was rather (as seems more likely) intending to  state  that  this
    letter from the ward letter did  not  establish  that  the  appellant's
    partner was unfit to attend the hearing, then  the  judge  should  have
    explained why this letter was insufficient to  establish  this.  Either
    way there was a lack of reasons and an incorrect reliance therefore  on
    there being "no medical evidence".

5.   In deciding whether to adjourn, the judge was obliged to  consider  how
    essential it was to the issues  to  be  "justly  determined"  that  the
    appellant and his partner were  able  to  give  evidence:  see  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  The judge was clearly
    right to identify that an adjournment was inconvenient  (because  there
    had been a previous adjournment) but should have noted  that  this  was
    related to the same maternity that had been the subject of the previous
    grant of adjournment and that the ward manager  letter  indicated  that
    the appellant's partner was still experiencing difficulties.

6.   Plainly the judge refusal to adjourn had an impact  on  his  assessment
    of the substantive issues in the appeal and the error was  therefore  a
    material one.

7.   Once I indicated to the parties that  I  considered  that  the  judge's
    refusal to adjourn was procedurally unfair, Mr Khan  sought  to  submit
    that I should proceed to re-make the decision by allowing  the  appeal.
    I explained that I was not prepared to do so.  From the  terms  of  the
    respondent's refusal decision, it is clear that  there  are  issues  of
    fact that will require to be determined afresh  relating  to  both  the
    extent and quality of the appellant's relationship  with  his  partner,
    with his partner's child;  and,  even  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
    accepted  as  having  established  both  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his partner and parental responsibility of the  child
    (who is a British citizen born on 23 March 2019)), there is  still  the
    issue of whether in light of the appellant's poor immigration  history,
    (which KO (Nigeria) [2018] 53 treats as an indirectly relevant factor),
    it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's child to leave the UK.

8.   For the above reasons the case is to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for it to make necessary findings of fact and law.

9.   To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Brookfield).



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 August 2019

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


