
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14066/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2017                                 |On 25 July 2017            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PK
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Mr J Gajjar, instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Steer  promulgated  10.2.17,  allowing  on  asylum
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State, dated 12.12.16, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 19.1.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted permission to appeal on 25.5.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 17.7.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge Steer to be set aside and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade afresh.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed  in  that  the  judge
    appears to have concluded that as a Bihari the claimant  would  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution on return to Bangladesh. However,  the
    evidence and submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State  were  to
    the effect that whilst there  may  be  discrimination,  this  does  not
    amount to persecution.

 7. At [38] the judge found that there would be discrimination, but  failed
    to clearly explain why that discrimination amounted to persecution. The
    decision of devoid of cogent reasoning on this issue, the judge turning
    from discrimination to an HJ (Iran) consideration  as  to  whether  the
    claimant would live discretely on return. Merely stating that he  would
    do so out of fear of persecution, is insufficient to  demonstrate  that
    there was a well-founded fear of persecution.

 8. It was conceded at the First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  that  the
    country guidance of GA (Risk - Bihari) Bangladesh [2002]  UKAIT  05810,
    to the effect that there is no risk to Biharis  was  out  of  date,  it
    having been taken off  the  CG  list.  However,  there  remained  scant
    evidence that Biharis are at risk in Bangladesh, one incident  in  2014
    notwithstanding, that which is referred to at [39] of the decision.  As
    the Secretary of State has submitted, if Biharis are at  general  risk,
    one would expect to see more than one isolated incident.  The  Tribunal
    failed to properly  grapple  with  the  issue  and  to  provide  cogent
    reasoning.

 9. I also find that the HJ (Iran) issue was  inadequately  dealt  with  at
    [41] of the decision. In the absence of a general risk to Biharis,  how
    the claimant would live in Bangladesh cannot be  determinative  of  the
    Convention claim.  In  other  words,  that  he  would  choose  to  live
    discretely does not provide evidence that there is persecution.

10. In the circumstances, the decision is  flawed  for  error  of  law  and
    cannot stand.

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        8 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

                 1. The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                    sitting at Hatton Cross;

                 2. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no  findings  of
                    fact preserved;

                 3. The ELH is 3 hours;

                 4.  The  appellant  will  require   a   Bengali   (Sylheti)
                    interpreter.

                 5. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal
                    Judge, with the exception of Steer.



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an anonymity direction. Given the  circumstances,  I  continue
the anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        8 September 2017

