
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/14200/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28th September 2017                   |  On 16th October 20147             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                 miss p u h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born  on  26th  October  1990.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum based on a purported fear that if she were  to
    return to Iraq she would be killed by her brothers because she  refused
    to marry her cousin and because of her relationship with her boyfriend.
     That application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 13th  December
    2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge the  First-tier
    Tribunal McCall sitting at Manchester  on  30th  January  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 13th February 2017 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 27th February 2017 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On  8th  June  2017  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy granted permission to appeal.  Judge McCarthy noted  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal argued that the judge had erred in his assessment  of
    the  Appellant's  credibility  by  failing  to  have  regard   to   the
    consistency of her evidence and by failing to  have  proper  regard  to
    other sources of evidence.  He considered that there was merit  in  the
    grounds and that the judge  had  made  findings  that  the  Appellant's
    account did not appear to be plausible but had failed  to  provide  the
    evidential basis upon which he made that assessment.   In  addition  he
    noted that the judge appeared to expect the  Appellant  to  corroborate
    her account by obtaining other evidence whilst not considering all  the
    evidence provided.  Overall he found the findings  appeared  disjointed
    and one sided and did not reflect the assessment that is required under
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.  This apparent failure by  the
    judge to give cogent reasons  for  his  negative  credibility  findings
    meant that he considered there was an arguable error  of  law  and  for
    that reason permission to appeal was granted.

 4. On 27th June 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The Rule 24 response is not a  matter  for  due  consideration
    bearing in mind it acknowledges that because there are no papers before
    the author of the Rule 24 response she is not in a position to make any
    conclusions one way or the other.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    solicitor  Mr  Sadiq.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.  I note that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge granted an anonymity direction in this matter.  No application is
    made to vary that order and consequently none is made and the anonymity
    direction will remain in place.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. I am considerably assisted in this matter by  the  intervention  of  Mr
    Harrison who concedes that there are elements within the  determination
    which make the grant of permission  understandable  in  particular  the
    apparent requirement/weight to be given to the Appellant not  obtaining
    documents by the judge and the failure for the judge  to  give  reasons
    for this.  He further indicates that there are material errors of  fact
    and gives as an example a finding at paragraph 24 of the decision where
    the judge has stated that the Appellant would be returned back  to  the
    IKR.  He emphasises that that is not the position and  that  whilst  in
    fact there are no returns at all being made at present return would not
    be to the IKR but would be to Baghdad.  He indicates on  the  Secretary
    of State's behalf that he is prepared to accept that there are material
    errors of law in the decision and that the correct approach is to remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing afresh.

 7. In such circumstances Mr Sadiq acknowledges that all he wishes to do is
    to rely on the Grounds of Appeal and to endorse the view  expressed  by
    Mr Harrison.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. I too have had the opportunity to give due and proper consideration  to
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  is  an  extremely
    experienced Tribunal Judge.  However I do agree  in  this  matter  that
    there are flaws in the judge's approach to  credibility  and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to take into account the credit in
    terms of a balanced approach towards the evidence as  to  factors  that
    are positive in respect of the  Appellant's  credibility.   That  would
    include the failure of  the  Appellant  to  obtain  documents  and  the
    failure of the judge to give reasons for his decision to weigh  in  the
    balance consistent and cogent evidence.

11. A  proper  approach  to  credibility  requires  an  assessment  of  the
    evidencing of the general claim.  In asylum  claims,  relevant  factors
    are firstly  the  internal  consistency  of  the  claim,  secondly  the
    inherent implausibility of the claim and thirdly the consistency of the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  It is I accept theoretically correct that a Claimant need do
    no more than state his claim but that claim still needs to be  examined
    for  consistent  and  inherent  plausibility.   In  nearly  every  case
    external information against which the claim could be checked  will  be
    available.  That seems to be the fact in this matter but  unfortunately
    the judge fails to have applied this approach in making his  assessment
    on credibility.  In all the circumstances I therefore find  that  there
    are material errors of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  Directions are set out below.



Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  discloses  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.

 2) None of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester to be reheard before  any
    First-tier Immigration Judge other than Immigration Judge McCall on the
    first available date 42 days hence with an ELH of 3 hours.

 3) There be  leave  to  either  party  to  serve  and  file  such  further
    additional subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek to
    rely within 28 days of the date of this decision.

 4) The Appellant do personally attend the restored hearing.

 5) That a Kurdish Sorani interpreter do attend the remitted hearing.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and the anonymity  direction  remains
in place.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
