
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14025/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2019                      |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                   Mr D B
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Latimer, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Miss S Rushforth, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iraq, date of birth 23 October 1985,
appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 29 November 2019, to
refuse a protection and human rights based claim.  The Appellant was
subject to deportation process.
2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson
(the Judge), who on 22 March 2019 dismissed the appeal.  Permission to
appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 23 April 2019.  In
granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Martin said:

"While the majority of the Judge's reasoning is impeccable, it is arguable
that she erred in failing to take into account, when considering
Humanitarian Protection, that the Appellant is from Kirkuk, a contested
area.  The Judge does not appear to have the country guidance cases in
mind."

There remains a factual dispute as to whether the Appellant has family
and/or comes from the area of Mosul or Kirkuk and issues relating to the
safety of the Appellant being able to return to whichever is the home area
and being able to obtain the necessary identity document (CSID) or some
other form of documentation to establish an entitlement to be in that
particular area.  There has been a wealth of cases dealing with safety on
return to Iraq and what has been to a degree a varying picture.

3.   The criticism that was confidently made of the Judge's decision was
the somewhat bare acceptance that the Appellant, whose credibility in
relation to his claims has been serially and severally damaged, could
return to Iraq.  Whether there was an uncle in Iraq who may provide the
necessary documentation and, assuming it was obtainable, were all issues
which the Judge really did not get hold of.  To say, as she did, "I find no
reason why the Appellant cannot back and live in Kirkuk or Mosul and seek
the help and support of his family", was perhaps rather missing the purpose
and point of the case law.  It seemed to me that there was virtually no
merit whatsoever in the Appellant's claim other than in relation to the
issue of safety of return to whatever was the home area.  The conclusions
of the Judge do not provide confidence that there was a material finding of
fact from which I could start from to conclude that there was no real risk
on return to the home area in Iraq.  In the absence of evidence as to the
availability of a functioning governorate or other system to enable
documentation as required to be produced or supplied within a reasonable
period of time were the Appellant to be in Baghdad.

4.   For these reasons, although I would agree with Miss Rushforth that the
Appellant's credibility was generally very badly damaged by the events that
have transpired and the claims he had made, let alone his criminality and
willingness to dissemble: The position remained that the Judge's analysis
of it was not properly done and much though it might be argued in general
terms that any other Tribunal properly addressing the facts would  have
reached a similar conclusion simply was not good enough in this case, given
the clear country guidance and case law. The assessment, which will have to
be done again in the First-tier Tribunal.  There was a further ground of
appeal which related to broader issues which Miss Latimer  confirmed
related to the children and their best interests were not being pursued.
The  Original Tribunal's decision can not stand

DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is to be remade in the
First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  If possible, list before a Designated Immigration Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal or alternatively the Resident Judge Newport.  Do not list
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson.

(2)  Any further documentation relating to safety on return to the areas of
either Kirkuk or Mosul or Baghdad to be served by the parties upon each
other and the IAC not later than ten working days before the further
hearing of the appeal.

(3)  The findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's criminality and
conduct to stand but no further facts relating to the issue of safety of
return to Iraq.

(4)  Any further directions to be given by the First-tier Tribunal on
application in writing with reasons.

(5)  Please list with reference to Miss Latimer's availability [contact
number provided].

(6)  Anonymity order continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 15 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

 P.S. I  regret  this  file  was  lost  at  Field  House  causing  delay  in
    promulgation


