
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14194/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2019                            |On 10th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Harris, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal from the decision of Judge Herlihy who, in a decision
promulgated on 14th February 2019, dismissed the Appellant's appeal against
refusal of his protection claim.  All references in this decision are,
unless the contrary is stated, to the paragraph numbers of Judge Herlihy's
decision.

The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who claimed to be at risk of
persecution from state and non-state actors in his home country by reason
of his homosexual orientation.  He relied at the hearing in the First-tier
Tribunal upon his own oral testimony, that of one MH and JH, together with
evidence contained in letters from six other individuals.  Each of the
supporting witnesses, and I include those who wrote letters, stated that
they believed the Appellant to be genuinely homosexual.

In assessing the Appellant's credibility, the judge took as her starting
point the decision of Judge Housego, who had dismissed an appeal by the
Appellant against a previous refusal of his asylum claim that had been made
upon essentially the same grounds.  Judge Housego had not found the
Appellant credible: see paragraphs 37 and 38.  Whilst noting that there was
evidence of the Appellant's subsequent attendance at LGBT groups and
events, the judge attached little weight to this given that he had not
attended such events during the six years or so that he had been residing
in the UK prior to make his first failed asylum claim in August 2017: see
paragraphs 39, 45, 49 and 50.

The judge was also struck by the Appellant's failure to mention his
supposed sexual orientation during the course of the various human rights
appeals and judicial review applications he had made between 2015 (when his
final grant of leave to remain expired) and his first asylum claim (made in
August 2017) for which the judge considered he had failed to provide a
satisfactory explanation: see paragraph 49.  Finally, the judge concluded
that there was no satisfactory evidence of the Appellant having been
involved in any kind of gay relationship: see paragraph 50.

The judge attached very little weight to the letters written by the
individuals in support of the appeal.  She gave five reasons for this. Some
of these were of general application whilst others were specific to the
letters in question. They may conveniently be summarised as follows:

None of those who had written letters had attended the hearing and their
evidence had thus not been tested in cross-examination.

Given that the authors of the letters claimed to have known the Appellant
from dates spanning between 2015 and 2017, it was reasonable to expect them
to explain why they had not supported his original asylum claim or the
subsequent appeal from its refusal in 2017.  They had nevertheless failed
to provide such an explanation: see paragraph 45.

The contents of many of the letters lacked cogency and relevant detail
(see, for example, the analysis of the respective letters of Mr McD, and
that from "the London friend" at paragraph 40).

There was an anomaly between a letter from IH and the testimony of JH
concerning the period over which the Appellant had been attending a support
group for gay men: see paragraph 43.

There was also an anomaly between the letter from Mr A and the testimony of
the Appellant concerning whether they had had intimate sexual relations
with one another.

The judge took a very different view as between the two witnesses who gave
oral testimony in support of the appeal.

In the case of JH, she described him as an, "obviously well-meaning man",
whom she had, "no reason to doubt", was other than genuine in his belief
that the Appellant is gay.  She did however note that JH was unable to
proffer an explanation for why the Appellant had not availed himself of the
opportunity between 2010 and 2018 to join any of the gay organisations to
which he currently belonged: see paragraph 46.

The judge did not however find MH to be a credible witness given that (a)
he had himself tried and failed to achieve refugee status on the basis of
his claimed homosexual orientation (see paragraphs 47 and 48), and (b)
could not give the name of the LGBT organisation to which he claimed to
belong (see paragraph 48).  The judge nevertheless took a balanced view of
his credibility inasmuch as she rejected a suggestion by the Presenting
Officer that MH's credibility was further undermined by an anomaly in his
evidence concerning whether he had exhausted his rights of appeal against
refusal of his own asylum claim: see paragraph 47.

I turn now to the Grounds of Appeal.  Those grounds may conveniently be
summarised as follows (all references in this paragraph are to the
paragraphs of the Application unless the contrary is stated) -

The judge failed to attach appropriate weight to the letters of supporting
witnesses who had not given oral testimony at the hearing: paragraphs 4 and
5.

The judge further erred in -

failing to give reasons for, "rejecting JH's evidence" (paragraph 11);

finding that -

             i. there was an anomaly as to where MH first met the Appellant;

            ii. it was incredible that MH did not know the name of the LGBT
                organisation to which he belonged.

The judge was wrong not accept the evidence of MH that he attended LGBT
house parties with the Appellant. The judge was also wrong to dismiss the
evidence of those who had written letters, "for a variety of reasons",
without addressing her mind to the question of whether their evidence was,
"reasonably likely to be true or probative" (paragraph 18).

The judge erred in "entering into the arena" in a manner that would appear
unfair to an informed observer by (i) asking MH if he did not think it odd
that someone who had been in the UK since 2010 was not a member of any gay
organisation until 2018, and (ii) challenging the witness over the
assertion in his statement that he "usually" attended LGBT events with the
Appellant whilst also stating in his oral testimony that he had only
attended one such event with him (an event in Hackney).

Turning to the first ground, there are said to be two discrete errors.

Firstly, it is said that the judge did not explain why very little weight
should be placed on the written evidence of the seven individuals who wrote
letters (one of whom also gave oral testimony) notwithstanding that she
appeared to accept that they genuinely believed the Appellant to be gay.  I
reject this ground for these reasons. Firstly, it is contradicted by the
arguments put forward in the third ground, wherein it is said that the
detailed reasoning given by the judge for attaching little weight to the
letters is flawed (see paragraph 5, above).  It is obviously inconsistent
to argue on the one hand that the judge failed to give any reasons for why
she attached little weight to the letters whilst attacking those very
reasons in a discrete ground of appeal.  I will therefore consider the
criticism of the reasons given by the judge for attaching little weight to
the letters when I turn to consider Ground 3.

Secondly, it is said that the judge misinterpreted the reasons given by the
authors of the letters for concluding that the Appellant was gay. However,
it seems to me to be implicit in her analysis (as the grounds themselves
appear to acknowledge) that the judge accepted those witnesses were genuine
and sincere in their belief that the Appellant was gay. This did not
however mean that the judge was required to attach significant weight to
those beliefs, however sincerely held they may have been. It is right to
observe that Mr A gave a further reason in his letter for believing the
Appellant to be gay; namely, that he claimed to have had sexual relations
with him, "a couple of times" (see paragraph 6 of the Application).
However, that evidence was itself problematic, for the reasons that I shall
consider when I turn to the third ground: see paragraph 22, below.

There are several aspects to the second ground of appeal.

Firstly, it is said that the judge failed to give reasons for rejecting
JH's evidence. However, the premise on which this ground is founded is
simply wrong. The judge did not at any stage reject JH's evidence.  On the
contrary, as I noted at paragraph 7 above, she accepted JH's evidence as
that of a genuine and honest witness.  It nevertheless did not follow from
this that the judge was required to accept JH's view of the Appellant's
sexuality, however sincerely held that view may have been.  An honest and
genuine witnesses may be mistaken, and several genuine and honest witnesses
may all be mistaken about the same issue.  This ground thus appears to
confuse the discrete concepts of the credibility and reliability of the
witness.

Secondly, it is complained that the judge failed to give reasons for
finding that there was an anomaly as to where MH first met the Appellant.
In my judgment, this criticism is again based on a false premise; namely,
that the judge found that there was such an anomaly.  What the judge said
was as follows:

"48. He [MH] clearly stated in his letter of support, which he adopted,
that he met the Appellant in February 2018 at an LGBT event in Hackney
Health Centre and it was the Appellant's evidence that this was organised
by the NHS" (emphasis added).

My reading of this is that whilst the accounts of the two witnesses were
expressed differently, they were nevertheless mutually consistent.  Had the
judge been making the point that the witnesses had given inconsistent
accounts, then she would have used the word, "whereas", rather than the
emphasised word, "and" in the sentence quoted above.

Thirdly, it is said that the judge failed to explain why it was incredible
that MH did not know the name of the LGBT organisation to which he
belonged.  However, there comes a point when it is simply not possible
further to explain something that is in any event self-evident. In my view,
this is a case-in-point.  One must of course be cautious about applying a
subjective view of plausibility. Nevertheless, as a matter of common sense,
it does not seem to me to be unreasonable for a judge to find it difficult
to accept that a person who is supposedly a genuine member of an
organisation should be unable to provide its name.  In short this was a
finding that was in my view reasonably open to the judge on the evidence.

The first part of the third ground is that the judge failed to give reasons
for not accepting the evidence of MH that he and the Appellant had attended
LGBT house parties together.  However, this criticism is inconsistent with
what is said in the fourth ground, namely, that the judge entered into the
arena when seeking to clarify an apparent anomaly between the evidence he
gave in relation to this issue and that of the appellant.  It is hardly
open to a party to complain that a judge failed to give reasons for not
accepting the evidence of a witness, whilst simultaneously complaining that
the reasons given for not doing so were based upon replies that resulted
from improper questioning of that witness.  I will therefore consider the
latter criticism when I turn the fourth ground.

The second part of the third ground is that the judge dismissed the
evidence of those who had written letters without addressing her mind to
the question of whether their evidence was "reasonably likely to be true or
probative".  I have two related points to make about this Ground of Appeal.


Firstly, it is not the case that the judge "dismissed" the evidence of the
authors of the letters.  What the judge in fact did was to attach "little
weight" to their opinion (and it was no more than this) that the Appellant
was gay.  As I noted at paragraph 11 above, this ground appears to
contradict the first ground (that the judge failed to give any reasons at
all) in now accepting that the judge gave "a variety of reasons" for
attaching little weight to the opinions expressed in those letters.

Secondly, judges are often criticised for treating individual aspects of
the evidence as determinative of an appellant's credibility rather than
considering them in the round within the context of the evidence as a
whole.  This frequently occurs where medical evidence is considered as an
'after-thought' following a series of adverse credibility findings that are
based solely upon the Appellant's narrative of events. However, and for
similar reasons, a judge is also well-advised not to make positive
credibility findings based on individual aspects of the evidence as opposed
to considering the weight attaching to them within the context of the
evidence as a whole. Moreover, as with the criticism made of the judge's
approach to the evidence of JH (see paragraph 15, above) this ground
appears to confuse the discrete concepts of a credibility finding relating
to the primary facts and the weight attaching to an honest but possibly
mistaken belief.

The final point to make in relation to the third ground, is that the judge
gave an entirely sustainable reason for attaching little weight to the
testimony of Mr A given that he had claimed in his letter to have had
sexual relations with the Appellant whilst the Appellant did not claim to
have been involved in such a relationship: see paragraph 44 of the
Decision.

I turn, finally, to the fourth ground, which suggests that the judge
'entered into the arena' in a manner that would have appeared unfair to an
informed observer.  There are two aspects to this ground.

The first is that the judge asked MH if he did not think it odd that
someone had been in the UK since 2010 without being a member of any gay
organisation until 2018. Miss Harris, who appeared at the hearing but did
not settle the Grounds of Appeal, argued forcefully that there may be many
reasons why a gay man would be discreet about his sexuality for many years
prior to leading an openly gay life. She supported her argument by
extensive reference to background material on the subject.  However, none
of this appears in the Application upon which permission to appeal was
granted and it is not therefore relevant to the appropriateness or
otherwise of the judge asking MH the question in the first place. So far as
that issue is concerned, whilst the question could no doubt have been
expressed in a less tendentious manner, it would not in my judgement have
appeared to an informed observer to be unfair for the judge to afford MH an
opportunity to comment upon the Appellant's journey from a discrete to an
openly gay lifestyle.

The second aspect of this ground of appeal is concerned with what the judge
herself characterised as her "challenge" as to what she considered to be a
previous inconsistent statement by MH.  Leaving aside that characterisation
for the moment, the exchange between the judge and MH is detailed at the
end of paragraph 34 of the judge's decision:

"I asked the witness [MH] how he meets these mutual friends and he said
that when a friend holds a house party they will go there and meet each
other and he said that his partner used to attend there.  I asked the
witness what LGBT events he had attended with the Appellant and he said he
had only attended one event in Hackney.  I asked the witness why in his
letter he said that he usually attends LGBT events with the Appellant which
suggests that they attended more than one.  He said that they attend house
parties and gatherings together.  I asked the witness if LGBT events are
house parties and he said they were and were attended by gay and bisexual
people."

It is obvious from the above that the judge's characterisation of her
questioning of MH as, "a challenge", was inappropriate. What she really did
was no more than to afford the witness an opportunity of explaining what
appeared to her to be an apparent inconsistency between the evidence he had
given in his oral testimony and what he had previously said in his written
statement.  Judges are frequently criticised for failing to afford a
witness an opportunity to explain anomalies in their evidence before
drawing adverse conclusions from them. However, it seems to me that in this
instance the judge is being criticised precisely because she did provide
the witness with such an opportunity. In my judgment, the judge acted
impeccably.  She asked her questions at the conclusion of re-examination.
She asked them in a non-aggressive, non-leading and open way.  She did no
more than was suggested as appropriate by Mr Justice Ouseley in the case of
JK (Conduct of Hearing) Ivory Coast [2004] UKIAT 61:

         "It is perfectly proper for the Adjudicator to ask ... why a
         witness has said x when earlier that or another witness has said y
         ...".  That was all that the judge did in this case.  Indeed, the
         witness provided an explanation which, as it happens, the judge did
         not find satisfactory."

Miss Harris argued that the judge failed to explain why MH's explanation
was not satisfactory.  However, that is not a matter that was raised in the
written grounds.  Rather, the point made in the written grounds is that the
judge should not have asked the question(s) in the first place. For the
reasons given above, I wholly reject that argument.

I am thus satisfied that the judge attached the weight that she thought was
appropriate to the various aspects of the evidence and gave adequate
reasons for doing so. I am also satisfied that she made findings on all
relevant issues, approached the evidence in a holistic manner, and asked
questions of the witnesses that were entirely appropriate with a view to
affording them an opportunity to clarify and explain apparent anomalies in
their testimony. I accordingly find that none of the Grounds of Appeal are
made out and this appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 5th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

