
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/14380/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 January 2018                       |On 24 January 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     AN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. D. Bazani of counsel, instructed by
Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:                    Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born on [ ] 1981, is a  national  of  Iran.  He  fled
    from Iran on or around 25 October 2015 and made an illegal entry to the
    United Kingdom on 6 June 2015. He applied for asylum on 20  June  2015.
    His application was refused on 15  December  2016  and  his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  4  August  2017  by
    First-tier Tribunal Blake. He appealed against this decision and First-
    tier Tribunal Judge granted him permission  to  appeal  on  1  November
    2017. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Response on 24 December 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

2.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

3.    When  considering  the  credibility  of  the  account  given  by   the
    Appellant, First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake failed to adopt the approach
    recommended by the Court of Appeal in Karanakaran v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11, where it was held that:

         "The task of the decision-maker was  to  assess,  to  a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood, whether the applicant's fear  of  persecution
         for a Convention reason was well-founded. It might  be  that  there
         were parts of the  evidence  which  on  any  standard  were  to  be
         believed or not to be believed. Of other parts, the best that might
         be said to them was that they were more likely than not.  Of  other
         parts it might be said that there was a doubt. The need to reach  a
         decision on whether the appellant had made his case to a reasonable
         degree of likelihood, arose only on the ultimate .evaluation of the
         case, when all the evidence and the varying degrees  of  belief  or
         disbelief were being assessed".

4.   In paragraph 95 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake  began
    by simply stating that "having had the benefit of  hearing  and  seeing
    the Appellant give his evidence I did not find him to be a reliable  or
    credible witness". When reaching this decision  he  did  not  give  any
    weight to the fact that the Appellant had provided a significant amount
    of evidence to confirm that he had been a journalist  working  for  two
    different newspapers in Iran shortly before he left  that  country.  He
    merely noted that he had been no more than  a  photographic  journalist
    there.

5.   In paragraph 98 of his decision he also stated that  there  was  little
    or no evidence in respect of the Appellant's blog.   This  ignored  the
    fact that at pages 108  to  131  of  his  Appellant's  Bundle,  he  had
    included copies of his social  media  pages,  including  his  blog  and
    Facebook  page,  which  were  largely  political  in  nature.  He  also
    erroneously stated in paragraph 105 of his decision that the  Appellant
    had provided no articles, no Facebook and  no  email  evidence  and  in
    paragraph 106 he stated that  the  articles  which  the  Appellant  had
    provided were artistic [as opposed to political], which again  was  not
    correct.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge had recorded the medical evidence  relied
    upon by the Appellant in paragraphs 11 to  18  of  his  decision.  This
    confirmed that he was experiencing significant depression, anxiety  and
    post traumatic stress symptoms, as well as  agoraphobia  and  that  his
    symptoms were serious enough to cause his GP to seek  urgent  treatment
    for him. However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  consider
    whether they may have had an adverse effect on his ability  to  prepare
    for his appeal when considering the totality of the evidence. At  most,
    he stated in paragraph 19 that he had informed the  Appellant  that  he
    had taken all of this evidence into account.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any findings as  to  whether
    he accepted the medical evidence or remind himself that  the  Appellant
    appeared to be a vulnerable witness and that he should be  taking  into
    account the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  2  of  2010  on  Child,
    vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.

8.   There was also a lack of reasoning in some of the  conclusions  reached
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility. For example, in paragraph 98 of his decision  he  did  not
    particularise the inconsistencies which he said ran through  the  whole
    of the Appellant's account or  explain  in  paragraph  99  which  dates
    simply did not add up in respect of the calculation and timetable as to
    when the Appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.   Neither  did  he
    explain which dates did not match the  dates  on  the  Appellant's  own
    documents in paragraph 100 of his decision.

9.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  failed  to  take  into  account
    paragraph 40 of the Appellant's witness statement,  which  referred  to
    his family receiving a court summons in his name on 14 May 2016 or  the
    fact that there was  a  copy  of  this  summons  at  page  161  of  the
    Appellant's  Bundle.  This  was   evidence   which   was   capable   of
    corroborating the Appellant's account.

10.  At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer  accepted  that  the
    failure of refer to the copy of the summons and take into  account  the
    medical evidence did amount to errors of law.

11.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake  did  err
    in law in his decision.
DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blake for a de novo hearing.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 22 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


