
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14131/2018

                                                 PA/14132/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                |                                 |
|On 2 September 2019                   |On 4 September 2019              |
|                                      |                                 |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 DANIAR [M]
                                 ZHIWAN [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants: Ms L Mair counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild and Dyer

For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge O Williams promulgated on 6 March  2019,  which  dismissed
   the Appellants appeals against a refusal of their  protection  claims  on
   all grounds.

The Judge's Decision

3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply
   anxious scrutiny; conflated credibility with plausibility and  there  was
   procedural unfairness in making credibility findings in respect of issues
   that the Appellants were not given the opportunity to address.

4. On 24 July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith gave permission to appeal.

5. At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  Ms  Mair  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) There  was  a  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny.  The  Judge  accepted  the
      Appellants nationality and ethnicity on the basis that their knowledge
      of the exitance of blood feuds was consistent with the  relevant  CPIN
      on Blood Feuds. The Appellants claim was not based on a blood feud but
      an honour crime and was consistent with that CPIN.

   b) The Judge  conflated  credibility  with  plausibility  thereby  making
      speculative assumptions  about  the  behaviour  of  Kurdish  teenagers
      behaviour. She relied on the guidance given in HK v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA
      Civ 1037. She identified in her skeleton argument at paragraph 9  (a)-
      (d) instances where the Judge made speculative assumptions.

   c) The background evidence relating to honour crimes set out at 18 of the
      Judge's decision and reflects the fact that  the  system  of  marriage
      arrangements is very complex and there is likelihood of  falling  foul
      of the code of conduct.

   d) The Judge did not accept the circumstances in which  the  relationship
      was formed and did not accept that the Appellants would take the risks
      described and yet such behaviour was not inherently  implausible.  How
      they met was the only way they  could  meet  in  the  guise  of  their
      acceptable roles in society. There was nothing inherently  implausible
      in trying to formalise their relationship by asking for  her  hand  in
      marriage rather than immediately fleeing.

   e) At paragraph 26 the Judge refers to  it  being  'a  matter  of  common
      sense'  that  A1  would  be  concerned  about  the  risks   of   their
      relationship when the background material confirmed this happened.

   f) The Judge failed to refer to the accounts consistently with  the  CPIN
      on Honour Crimes.

   g) There was procedural unfairness. It is apparent that after the hearing
      the Judge has referred back to  the  evidence  and  taken  issue  with
      evidence given about specific matters that  the  Appellants  were  not
      challenged about in the refusal letter or in  cross  examination.  She
      referred specifically to the matters raised in paragraphs 21,22 ad 23.
      Given the opportunity to address these issues their answers could have
      shown that the evidence was not as fanciful as suggested.

6. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that:

   a)  Consistency  alone  is  not  enough  it  is  only  one  hallmark   of
      credibility.

   b) Teenagers throughout the world are not all  the  same.  Their  account
      must be looked at in the context of her claim that they  were  in  the
      IKR and she claimed to be the daughter of a high ranking PUK member.

   c) The Judge was entitled to find the account internally inconsistent: A2
      case was that she could  not  go  out  without  a  chaperone  but  the
      chaperone apparently did nothing.

   d) The Judge could not apply British standards to Iraqi teenagers and  he
      was entitled to find that they would not have behaved in the way  they
      did. The Appellants case was that  A2  was  the  daughter  of  a  high
      ranking PUK member: had her father been  a  less  powerful  and  high-
      ranking person the account may have been more credible.

   e) In relation to the points raised in paragraphs 24.29 and 30 these were
      all issues raised in the refusal letter

7. In reply Ms Mair on behalf of the Appellant submitted

   a) In relation to Ground 2 none of the matters referred to were raised in
      the refusal letter or put to the Appellants in cross  examination.  If
      these issues were the crux of  the  case  why  not  put  them  to  the
      Appellants

   b) The objective evidence  states  that  Kurdish  young  people  do  form
      illicit relationships  and  honour  crimes  do  occur.  Is  it  wholly
      incredible  therefore  that  their  relationship  was  established  as
      claimed, it was not inherently implausible.

   c) A2s case was that her father was strict not that  she  was  locked  at
      home. Her movements were prescribed  and  therefore  her  account  was
      plausible.

Finding on Material Error

8. Having heard those submissions  I/we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

9. Whilst the Judge is  entitled  to  use  common  sense  in  assessing  the
   evidence, as Neuberger LJ noted in HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037  at  28
   to  29,  inherent  improbability  can  be  a  dangerous  even  a   wholly
   inappropriate factor to rely on in asylum cases. As Keene LJ noted in Y v
   SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [27] care must be  taken  in  concluding  an
   account is incredible without looking at the issue through  the  evidence
   of the country information.  Background evidence could  assist  with  the
   assessment, revealing the likelihood of what was  said  having  occurred.
   Background evidence could  reveal  that  adverse  inferences  which  were
   apparently reasonable when based on an  understanding  of  life  in  this
   country, were less reasonable when  the  circumstances  of  life  in  the
   country of origin were exposed. I am not satisfied  that  the  Judge  has
   engaged with this guidance in reaching his credibility findings.

10. Ms Mair acknowledges that her challenge in relation to anxious  scrutiny
   was not her strongest point nevertheless it is correct  that  the  Judges
   unnecessarily assessed the Appellants claimed nationality  and  ethnicity
   given it was not challenged and accepted it because they had knowledge of
   blood feuds: given that their case related to honour crimes and not blood
   feuds this is clearly an error . However I do not accept that it reflects
   that the Judge was unaware of the nature of the  case  as  he  summarised
   their claim quite fairly at paragraph 12 and while referring to the  CPIN
   relating to Blood Feuds at paragraph 18 this is clearly  a  typographical
   error as all of the sections he reproduces  come  from  the  August  2017
   Honour Crimes CPIN.

11. The Judge makes a fairly limited number of adverse credibility  findings
   (7) against the Appellants and I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  therefore
   important to ensure that the Appellants had  an  opportunity  to  address
   those issues and that the factual matrix the case  was  assessed  against
   was accurate. The background material, some of which is set  out  by  the
   Judge at paragraph 18, is clear that in spite of the  strict  moral  code
   and restrictions placed on woman in the Kurdish  community  relationships
   outside of the norm do occur and therefore I am satisfied that the  Judge
   was required to give very clear reasons based on an accurate  summary  of
   her case why he rejected their case that such  a  relationship  developed
   between childhood friends.

12. I am satisfied that Ms Mair has correctly identified at paragraph  9  of
   her  grounds  a  number  of  findings  that  conflate   credibility   and
   plausibility. Given the clear evidence of the  background  material  that
   such relationships occur these  findings  fail  to  acknowledge  or  give
   adequate reasons why  in  the  Appellants  case  the  behaviour  that  is
   acknowledged in the background material to occur was incredible in  their
   case. Contrary to the assertion made by the Judge A2 did  not  state  she
   was not allowed out but rather she was not allowed out  on  her  own  and
   therefore the Judge was required to assess  whether  the  development  of
   this relationship , as Ms Mair suggests in the only place that they could
   meet in the guise of their acceptable roles  in  society,  was  credible.
   Therefore the findings made at paragraphs  21,  22,  23  about  how  that
   relationship developed most clearly fail to assess  their  claim  in  the
   light of the background material.

13. I am  satisfied  that  there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  the  same
   paragraphs as it does not appear that A2 was specifically asked about why
   she was permitted to go to the market, or was able  to  use  her  friends
   mobile phone or go to the orchard when she was not allowed out without  a
   chaperone . If these were points taken against the Appellants they should
   have an opportunity to address this. Similarly the Judge speculates  that
   other stall holders would have been able to overhear their  conversations
   and again this was speculation and the  Appellants  were  not  given  the
   opportunity to address the challenge.

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law. The overall findings  are  arguably
   tainted by the improper approach to the assessment of the core claim of a
   relationship developing outside societal norms.

15. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

Signed                                                              Date 3
September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

















