
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14082/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 29 July 2019                               |On 7 August 2019             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                Mr Amjad [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sinker, Counsel, instructed by Just Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to challenge the
decision of Judge Obhi of the First-tier Tribunal on 6 March 2019
dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his
protection claim.  His grounds do not challenge the judge's findings that
he had not given a credible claim to face risk on return from the Taliban,
whom he said had kidnapped and ill-treated him.  Nor do the grounds
challenge the judge's finding that he could not succeed on the basis of his
right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 ECHR.  Their
sole challenge is to the judge's failure to address the Article 3 claim he
had made based on his medical circumstances.

2.   I heard brief submissions from Ms Aboni and Mr Sinker.  Ms Aboni said
she would have to concede that the judge entirely failed to address the
appellant's Article 3 circumstances connected with his medical condition.
Mr Sinker confirmed that he sought a re-hearing, confined solely to issue
of whether the appellant's medical circumstances were such that return to
Pakistan would constitute a violation of Article 3 ECHR.

3.   I concur with the parties that the judge's decision must be set aside
for material error of law. The appellant had raised his medical condition
in his asylum application.  Whilst not specifying anything about his
medical condition in his grounds of appeal, the appellant did invoke
Article 3 and at the hearing Mr Sinker (before the FtT judge as well),
expressly raised the issue of the appellant's Article 3 claim based on his
medical circumstances.  The judge noted this submission at paragraph 37 as
follows: "In relation to his medical condition the appellant claimed that
there would be a breach under Article 3 if he were returned and he claimed
family life with his family, he did not have a partner."  The judge had
earlier noted at paragraph 25 the respondent's opposition to this aspect of
his claim:

"In respect of the appellant's claim that he suffered from migraine and
depression it is note that his medical complaints do not reach the high
threshold set out in the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and that treatment
is available in Pakistan for those with mental health problems and that he
will be able to access it as he has family support."

4.   Yet having addressed the appellant's asylum and humanitarian
protection claim and then his Article 8 claim based on his family and
private life, the judge simply forgot to address the Article 3 issue or the
submissions she had received regarding it.

5.   I am bound to say that the appellant's Article 3 claim based on his
medical condition does not strike me as at all strong, but the appellant
had produced a psychiatric report by Dr Chaudhry which found him to be
suffering from PTSD and expressed the opinion that "[h]is mental health
that includes PTSD would deteriorate further with increased suicidal
throughs and tendencies to commit suicide will get worse if he is sent back
to Pakistan".  By a narrow margin, I conclude that the appellant is
entitled to present the evidence relating to his medical circumstances in
the context of a fresh hearing before an FtT judge.  However, as already
stated, the scope of this hearing will be strictly confined to his medical
circumstances and whether or not returning him to Pakistan would give rise
to a breach of Article 3.  Strictly speaking, if the appellant has
permission to argue his medical circumstances, his claim cannot be confined
to Article 3 since one aspect of Article 8 is the right to physical and
moral integrity, which was not considered by Judge Obhi.  In view of the
fact that established case law sets a high threshold for both Article 3 and
8 medical cases, this technical point may not make a difference, but the
matter of whether the appellant's medical circumstances entitle him to
succeed on human rights grounds is best left open so as to include both
Article 3 and 8.

6.   To conclude:

The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Obhi), confined to the
issue of whether the appellant's medical circumstances prevent his return
on human rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 2 August 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
