
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14139/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29th August 2017                       |On 3rd October 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, 2 years old as at the  date  of
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15th  February  2017.   His
    mother  had  previously  claimed  asylum  with  the  Appellant  as  her
    dependent.  That claim had  been  refused  and  her  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed in February 2016.  Permission to appeal was  pursued  to  the
    Court of Appeal,  with  permission  refused  at  every  stage.  Shortly
    thereafter, on 15 June 2016 the Appellant, through his mother, made his
    own claim for international protection. It was asserted that  requiring
    him to leave would breach his human rights.  The argument  put  forward
    was, in summary, that as an illegitimate child he would be at risk from
    persecution as a member of a particular social group, at risk of  death
    or Article 3 thresholds  of  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment,  namely
    destitution, inability to access education, healthcare  or  employment,
    and would be subject to ostracism and discrimination.

 3. In support of this claim the Appellant produced to the First  -Tier  an
    article from Al Jazirah dated 2012 to the  point  that  infanticide  of
    illegitimate newborns was on the increase in Pakistan, medical evidence
    that the Appellant's mother's anxiety regarding her immigration  status
    was  adversely  impacting  on  the  Appellant's  emotional  and  social
    development as she found it hard to understand and manage his behaviour
    showed that it was in the child's best interests to be allowed to  stay
    here.

 4. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim pointing to  the  earlier
    judicial decision dismissing the credibility of the  mother's  account,
    and finding that her claimed subjective fears were, in any  event,  not
    borne out objectively. The respondent concluded he was not at any  real
    risk of persecution or harm because of his being  illegitimate,  or  of
    being unable to access  education.   Appropriate  healthcare  would  be
    available in Pakistan.

The First-tier Tribunal

 5. For the Appellant, it was argued that the earlier  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision in  respect  of  the  mother  had  no  bearing  on  his  case.
    Devaseelan did not apply because the Appellant was a  different  party.
    In AS and AA (Effect of Previous Linked Determination)  Somalia  [2006]
    UKAIT 00052 the fact that someone was a family member was held  not  to
    be a proper basis upon which  to  take  a  decision  in  respect  of  a
    different family member as a starting point in  respect  of  their  own
    appeal. In any event the  previous  judge  was  approaching  the  early
    appeal from the angle of the risk to the Appellant's mother, not to him
    his perspective must be separately examined.

 6. Judge O'Rourke found that contrary to the case of AS and  AA  involving
    the case of a brother whose sibling had succeeded  before  a  judge  on
    similar grounds of tribal background, the Appellant in this case was in
    fact a dependent in the earlier case. Further, contrary to the case  of
    AS and AA where the factual dispute between the  parties  had  differed
    from each other, the disputed factual matrix in this  Appellant's  case
    had to a significant extent been substantially considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal in the Appellant's mother's case in a  comprehensive  25-
    page determination upon which permission to appeal  had  been  refused.
    The judge self-directed that the previous determination in the mother's
    case should be his  starting  point  but  that  subsequent  events  and
    evidence could result in a different  outcome.   Judge  O'Rourke  noted
    there was a new argument in respect of the Appellant's discrete  mental
    health issues, and different evidence had been produced in  respect  of
    the treatment of illegitimate children.

 7. Judge O'Rourke noted that there was no new evidence before  him  as  to
    the risk to the mother, to the point  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision that she was not entitled to international protection  whether
    on asylum/ECHR Articles 2, 3 or 8 grounds remained.

 8. In assessing the risk to the Appellant based on illegitimacy the  judge
    noted that the country information evidence put  before  him  was  from
    2014 and 2015 and therefore could have been brought before the previous
    judge but was not.  However, explaining that because he was considering
    the position of a child, he decided to take account  of  it.  He  found
    that the evidence, going to the killing of newborn children in Pakistan
    did not, in the context of the Appellant having been born in the UK and
    now being 2 years old, have any application to the Appellant.

 9. In terms of the claimed fear of discriminatory or persecutory treatment
    Judge O' Rourke noted the evidence:

      a)  an  extract  from  the  High  Commission  for  Pakistan's  website
         concerning "frequently asked questions" in  respect  of  passports,
         which  stated  that  both  parents'  national  identity  cards  are
         required to obtain a passport.

      b) the Appellant's reliance on the Respondent's country information of
         February  2016  which  referenced  a   consultant's   report   that
         illegitimate children do not have rights of inheritance and  cannot
         be registered  on  the  national  database  without  providing  the
         father's name and that an ID card is required to  access  education
         and state healthcare.

      c) the Respondent's reliance on country information in the reasons for
         refusal decision to the point that many children are  unregistered,
         and public services were available without a birth certificate, and
         that education is compulsory.

      d) The judge noted the previous judge's conclusion that as a child  of
         a divorced woman the appellant would not necessarily be regarded as
         illegitimate and that the Appellant would not necessarily  need  to
         declare his status., and the earlier judge's conclusions  that  the
         mother had not shown more than a mere hardship or a mere difficulty
         or mere obstacle if she had to return to Pakistan,  with  her  son,
         but otherwise alone.

10. Judge O'Rourke was satisfied that the earlier judge had been  aware  of
    the various contentions as to the position of illegitimate children and
    their registration and  that  the  evidence  before  him  did  not  add
    anything significantly different, to render that conclusion unsafe.

11. In respect of the Appellant's health problems the judge noted that  his
    mother had been depressed since his birth, that  difficulties  reported
    in March 2016 relating to feeding and eyesight,  and  a  concern  about
    whether  he  had  a  tumour,  had  fallen  away.   What  remained  were
    behavioural difficulties, which the evidence pointed to resulting  from
    the Appellant's mother's anxiety being transmitted  to  the  Appellant.
    The judge notes that a health worker, had  identified  the  behavioural
    difficulties  and  who  had  provided  a  report  of  her   preliminary
    assessment of cause, Miss Sterling, had not set out her qualifications,
    but that her conclusion:  that the family should be helped so that  the
    Appellant has the opportunity to learn to regulate his feelings and  to
    be separated from his mother, are unexceptional.  So far as the  health
    worker's conclusion as to the mother's situation in Pakistan, he  notes
    that that is based entirely on what the Appellant's  mother  has  said,
    and accordingly Judge O'Rourke found that her  conclusions  that  there
    would be "serious implications for Murad's infant mental health  status
    should he and his mother return to Pakistan  were  undermined,  and  he
    rejected them and he rejected that conclusion.

12. Judge O'Rourke looked at the rest of the evidence,  but  found  nothing
    there indicated that the Appellant's health would be in serious  danger
    in Pakistan, or that, if  needed,  he  would  not  be  able  to  obtain
    appropriate treatment, so that his circumstances, including his medical
    condition, was not a factor that operated to prevent removal in respect
    of ECHR Article 3 or 8.

13. Ms Alban, who had not  drafted  the  grounds  of  the  application  for
    permission or represented the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal,
    appeared for the Appellant at the hearing before me.   She  re-iterated
    the ground that Judge O'Rourke had taken  the  wrong  approach  to  the
    earlier judicial decision, relying on the case of AS and  AA  to  argue
    that Devaseelan was not applicable, and the earlier  decision  was  not
    the right starting point.  In  addition,  she  relied  on  the  various
    criticisms raised in the grounds including the judge's treatment of the
    country information on infanticide, and the  medical  evidence  of  the
    report of Amanda Sterling. The structure of the article 8 consideration
    was inadequate because there should have been a separate assessment  of
    the best interests of the child in the event that the  mother  returned
    to Pakistan without him.

14. The Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison who relied on the rule 24
    response to the point that the judge was right to take  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision as his starting point and  has  adequately  explained
    why the principal of Devaseelan applies dealing  with  the  Appellant's
    points in respect of AS and AA extensively, having set them  out  fully
    at paragraph [21] and reached his conclusions at  [23]  to  [28].   The
    judge has taken account of the matters described as discretely applying
    to the Appellant in the context of the new evidence submitted  when  he
    goes on at [29] onwards to deal with the risk to illegitimate  children
    and the Appellant's medical  condition.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude as he does that as at the date of hearing  the  Appellant  has
    not shown a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  if
    returned and that return  to Pakistan did not breach article 8.

My Consideration

15. The Appellant's argument that Judge O'Rourke should  not  have  started
    with the findings of Judge Woolley of February  2016  is  misconceived.
    As Judge O'Rourke properly  identified,  unlike  the  position  of  the
    siblings in AS and AA  the  factual  matrix  of  risk  based  on  being
    returned to Pakistan as  the  illegitimate  child  of  a  single  woman
    without the support of family is significantly the factual matrix  that
    Judge Woolley was considering.  That is reflected in the fact that  the
    Appellant was a dependent on the mother's claim in  the  appeal  before
    Judge Woolley.  The Appellant's mother's claim was described as "a risk
    to her and her son's life" as a result of the fact that he was not  her
    husband's child, described as his having been "born  out  of  wedlock".
    The Appellant's  mother  not  only  claimed  honour  killing  but  also
    asserted that the Appellant himself would be subject to persecution  as
    a result of being illegitimate, unable to get  ID,  and  being  without
    legal rights, thereby exposing him to persecution. As Judge Woolley  in
    February 2016 pointed out the country  guidance  case  deals  with  the
    position of "single" mothers  i.e.  including  unmarried  mothers  with
    illegitimate children and divorced  women.   Judge  Wooley  noted  that
    although a single mother's specific circumstances might amount to  such
    that they require protection, those of the Appellant's mother, which on
    the facts included those of her son, for reasons which were  fully  set
    out  in  Judge  Woolley's  25-page  decision  did  not.  Although   the
    Appellant's mother made strenuous  efforts  to  assert  error  in  that
    conclusion, renewing her claim directly to the  Court  of  Appeal.  The
    original grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Wooley's
    decision are included in the Appellant's bundle. They criticise him for
    failing to properly deal with the position  of  the  child,  i.e.  this
    Appellant, in light of the country information about  the  difficulties
    for  illegitimate  children.  The  Appellant  has  not   put   in   the
    corresponding refusal of permission at all three levels, but the import
    of the refusals  is  clear:  the  criticisms  were  not  arguable.  The
    Appellant's mother does not accept that position. As reflected  in  her
    witness statement although she acknowledges that she  put  forward  the
    problems that she foresaw would face  her  son  to  Judge  Wooley,  she
    believes he failed to appreciate their difficulty, namely that her son,
    being  illegitimate,  would  not  have  a  father  figure,  or  a  male
    protector. So far as those points arose  in  the  appeal  before  Judge
    O'Rourke he was entitled to take the judicial findings already made  as
    his starting point. The criticism in these grounds is without merit.

16. The  remaining  points  reveal  a  forensic  approach  to  the  judge's
    determination, with a cherry picking of the evidence.

17. With regard to the Appellant's medical evidence the grounds take  issue
    with Judge O'Rourke's  statement that the primary infant mental  health
    specialist member of the East Central Child  Adolescent  Mental  Health
    Service, Ms Sterling, cannot be regarded as an expert, because she does
    not explain her relevant qualifications.  This is a  nit-picking  point
    brought forward on the ground that the Respondent did not  assert  that
    she was not an expert.  The ground elevates form over substance because
    Judge O'Rourke explains that he finds Ms Sterling's assessment that the
    Appellant suffers from behavioural  issues  because  of  parenting,  is
    unexceptional on the evidence. It is  quite  clear  therefore  that  he
    takes no issue with that assessment, and  he  goes  forward  with  that
    position as established. The ground that he disregarded the  assessment
    in its entirety is unfounded. The point of contention is what weight to
    give to her opinion of what the position would be in Pakistan.  It must
    be remembered that the report is an initial assessment and the findings
    are tentative "it appeared", "it appears" are phrases used  throughout,
    and the recommendation is for a continued detailed  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's  infant  mental  health,  within   the   context   of   his
    relationship with his mother. The health-worker is clear  that  in  her
    view that should begin when the Appellant's mother is  feeling  settled
    and safe i.e. at some point in  the  future,  and  predicated,  as  her
    conclusion describes, on the basis that he is successful in his appeal,
    and consequently his mother with him. Ms  Sterling  had  not  seen  the
    adverse credibility findings of the  previous  judgement  or  the  Home
    Office correspondence, she does not describe independent  knowledge  of
    the availability of therapeutic help in Pakistan, or of having made any
    enquires about it. Judge O'Rourke's conclusion that  on  this  question
    she was not an  expert,  and  that  her  report  added  little  to  the
    Appellant's case was well founded on the evidence.

18. Contrary to the ground's assertion that Judge O'Rourke found  that  the
    Appellant would be able to lie about  her  son's  illegitimate  status,
    characterised as his requiring her to lie to avoid persecution, he  did
    no such thing. What the decision actually says is that Judge Wooley had
    found that it had not been established that she would  be  required  to
    reveal  the  Appellant's  illegitimate  status,  or   that   he   would
    necessarily be viewed as illegitimate, which is not the same  thing  at
    all.  The requirement to provide the father's name  and  identity  card
    number is not the same as requiring a revelation as to whether  or  not
    the parents were or are married. The point  isolates  and  nit-picks  a
    formulation of words, a distraction of  form  over  substance,  because
    what really mattered here is that Judge Rourke found, as  Judge  Wooley
    had before him, that even allowing that  his  illegitimate  status  was
    known,  it  would  not  lead  to  treatment   requiring   international
    protection. The decision must be read as a whole.

19. The grounds take issue with the judge's reference  to  the  Appellant's
    mother considering obtaining a divorce from her husband and reading the
    reference to infer that Judge O'Rourke does  not  appreciate  that  the
    appellant is not her husband's child but is from a second relationship.
     There is nothing in this. The full context makes plain Judge  O'Rourke
    is merely referring to the evidence as it was before Judge Woolley  and
    reading the decision in the round it is quite clear that he  understood
    the paternity of the child.

20. The grounds assertion that Judge O'Rourke failed to take account of the
    evidence of the Appellant's birth certificate, and in  particular  that
    it does not a father mischaracterises the evidence and the  issue.  The
    assertions of a fear of persecution  were  based  on  an  inability  to
    access healthcare and education because of an inability to register the
    minor Appellant for an ID card absent the name of  the  father  on  the
    birth certificate.   There was no real  dispute  that  the  Appellant's
    claim, that health care and education would not be provided because the
    father was not named on the birth certificate, did not  stand  scrutiny
    in the light of the Respondent's evidence that such formal requirements
    were not strictly applied. The mother accepted as much in  her  witness
    statement when she re-focusses the claim to the point that providing  a
    certificate without the name of a father will mark  the  Appellant  out
    for  scrutiny,  and  make  him  vulnerable  as  being  without  a  male
    protector.

21. When I raised with Ms Alban that I found the reliance  on  the  claimed
    inability to name the father perplexing in  light  of  the  Appellant's
    mother's knowledge of the father's name she responded  saying  that  in
    fact the evidence showed that giving  the  name  itself  would  not  be
    sufficient, the mother would also have to know  the  father's  national
    identity number.  That ignores the evidence of the willingness  of  the
    father, now removed to Pakistan, to be  in  contact,  and  attempts  to
    distract from the findings of Judge  Wooley  and  reaffirmed  by  Judge
    O'Rourke on the current evidence, that even if he were not there is  no
    danger from the family.

22. These shifting sands distract from Judge O'Rourke's  finding  that  the
    evidence before him, including the health position, did  not  any  more
    than it did before Judge Wooley, establish that an  illegitimate  child
    would face a level of discrimination that would amount  to  persecution
    or result in ill-treatment so as to establish any real likelihood of  a
    breach of his human rights.

23. Whilst the grounds highlight Judge O'Rourke infelicitous comments about
    the practise of infanticide in Pakistan, comparing the practicality  of
    the murder of new-borns of mother's living  within  their  family  with
    the murder of older children living outside  the  extended  family,  he
    correctly identified that the objective evidence of  the  practise  did
    not speak to the risk of family or societal murder of the Appellant  in
    the context of Judge Woolley's finding that there was no risk from  the
    family in light of the finding that the evidence simply showed that the
    family  simply do not want to have anything to do with the Appellant or
    his mother.  Whilst  the  comments  are  extraneous  to  the  necessary
    reasoning they do not reveal an error of law. Judge  O'Rourke  was  not
    taken to any country background information such as to show that  there
    was any risk that the Appellant would be at risk from rogue elements of
    society who would set out to  murder  him  simply  on  account  of  his
    illegitimacy, and indeed that case was never made.

24. Ms Alban's final point was that the judge should have made a finding as
    to whether or not it was in the child's best interest  for  him  to  be
    left behind and adopted.  This arises because  the  Appellant's  mother
    mentions in the preliminary health assessment that if she  were  to  be
    removed she would like to place him for adoption.

25. Miss Sterling finds that if the Appellant returns to  Pakistan  in  the
    presence of  his  mother  he  could  experience  increased  trauma  and
    emotional separation from her in response to her  heightened  emotions.
    There is no evidence to suggest that health workers  are  contemplating
    that his best interests might require  him  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom to receive treatment to deal with the  difficulties  they  have
    identified arise from her passing on  her  stress  to  him,  so  as  to
    separate him from her. The evidence is that when the mother returns  to
    Pakistan the health professionals view is that it is in the Appellant's
    best interests to be with her. Miss Sterling comments that "if  he  was
    to remain in the United Kingdom and be  placed  for  adoption  and  his
    mother to return to Pakistan, it would mean breaking his attachment  to
    his mother who has been his  only  and  sole  parent  and  carer  since
    birth." The "if he was to remain" is a reflection of  a  position  that
    would arise, not at the behest of the services here, but as a result of
    the mother's choice.

26.  In  terms  of  the  submission  about   the   inadequate   Article   8
    consideration, whilst it is right  that  the  reasoning  could  have  a
    clearer structure, the ground fails to recognise that on  the  findings
    made nothing more was required. There is no evidence that in the  event
    of the Appellant's mother returning to Pakistan there is any likelihood
    the Appellant would be taken into care and  placed  for  adoption.  The
    Appellant's mother did not give oral evidence.  Her  witness  statement
    does not particularise plans  to  abandon  the  Appellant.  The  mother
    mentioning to the health worker that that is what she would like to  do
    is not sufficient to assert that it is  a  factual  scenario  that  the
    judge should have provided reasoning for. The  submission  exceeds  the
    evidence, but even if it did not it could not establish any legal error
    because any interference with the Appellant's family life and his  best
    interests would not be as a result of any immigration decision  of  the
    Respondent, but as a result of a choice of the mothers.

27. The judge's conclusion that it is  in  the  child's  best  interest  to
    remain with his mother, and his finding that she will be able to return
    to Pakistan as the public  interest  requires,  given  her  immigration
    history, and take this very young Appellant with her, without his being
    exposed to risk  and  without  any  breach  of  his  human  rights,  is
    unassailable.

Decision

28. The decision  of  Judge  O'Rourke  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    reveals no material error of law and stands.


Signed                              Date 28 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


