
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14141/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre| Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th April 2019                      | On 8th May 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              Mr PAYAM KHALEDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Ashraf
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  25th  April  1990.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in  the  UK  on  15th  June  2018  and
    claimed asylum on 16th June.  The  Appellant's  basis  for  his  asylum
    claim is that he contends he has a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    Iran due to his political opinion.  His application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal dated 3rd December 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Austin sitting at Manchester on 23rd January 2019.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 24th January 2019  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  on  7th  February
    2019.  On 27th February 2019 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bird
    granted permission to appeal.   The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge had failed to
    give reasons for some of the findings made and further, had  failed  to
    take into  account  the  totality  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.   He
    considered that it was arguable that in  arriving  at  the  conclusions
    that he did the judge had failed to properly consider  the  information
    contained in the Appellant's statements of 12th October 2018  and  14th
    January 2019.  In particular, he makes reference to paragraph 9 of  the
    October 2018 statement and paragraph 6 of the January  2019  statement.
    In failing to deal adequately with the totality of the evidence, and in
    failing to give adequate reasons for the findings, he  considered  that
    the judge had made an arguable error of law.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor, Mrs Ashraf.  Mrs Ashraf is familiar with this matter  having
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  She is also the author of the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by his  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Tan.

 5. This matter is greatly assisted by the approach adopted by Mr Tan  who,
    prior to any submission, concedes the submissions made in  the  Grounds
    of Appeal as recited by Judge Bird.  He asked me to find on that  basis
    that there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I have given due consideration to the  grounds  cross-
    referencing them back to Judge Austin's decision and I agree  with  the
    view expressed by Mr Tan.  On that basis I find that there are material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  I
    support the representations of both advocates that the correct approach
    is for the matter to be remitted for rehearing.  Directions  are  given
    hereinafter.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses material  errors  of
law and the decision is consequently set  aside  and  directions  are  given
hereinafter for the rehearing of this matter.

 1) On finding that there are material errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Manchester on the  first  available  date  28  days
    hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

 3) That the appeal is to be before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge Austin.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of such subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That a Farsi Iranian interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 29th April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date 29th April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

