
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/14196/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 November 2018                     |On 20 December 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                   H T T H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson of Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 18  February  1995.   She
    arrived in this country on 5 February 2010 with a false passport.   She
    applied for asylum on 16 July 2010.  That application was refused on 11
    January 2011.  Her appeal against that decision was heard and dismissed
    by Immigration Judge K F Walters on 27 June 2011.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been trafficked but on 7 August 2012  the
    competent authority reached a negative decision.

3.   The appellant's appeal  rights  were  exhausted  on  1  November  2011.
    After judicial review proceedings, however,  further  submissions  were
    considered in respect of a decision dated 16  December  2016  when  the
    respondent refused the appellant's application on asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.  Since the previous  decision  and
    appeal it was noted that the appellant  had  had  a  child  born  on  9
    September 2016 who did not meet the requirements  of  Rule  276ADE(iv).
    It  was  considered  there  were  no  exceptional   circumstances   for
    considering the appellant's case outside the Rules.

4.   The appellant appealed and her appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 3 September 2018.  At the hearing various matters were  agreed.   It
    was agreed that the appellant had been born in 1995 and not  1991.   It
    was noted that the female that the appellant had been  found  with  had
    been convicted of facilitation of illegal entry - a trafficking offence
    - and Ms Morris said "she was unable to argue that  the  appellant  had
    not been trafficked" as a result of becoming aware of the conviction of
    the woman who had accompanied the appellant to the United Kingdom of  a
    trafficking offence.  The judge initially took this as a concession but
    following a discussion between  him  and  Miss  Robinson  (who  appears
    before me) it was clear "this was not a  concession"  but  "a  lack  of
    argument of the issue" by the Home Office.  In  the  circumstances  the
    judge decided to determine the claim on both bases -  i.e.  as  if  the
    appellant was either trafficked or not trafficked.

5.   It was further agreed between the parties  that  the  decision  of  the
    competent  authority  was  binding  on  the  Tribunal  unless  it   was
    irrational or perverse in the light of MS (Pakistan)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    954 and AUJ [2018] UKUT 200.

6.   The judge considered the previous decision  by  Judge  Walters  in  the
    light of Devaseelan (second appeals - ECHR -  extraterritorial  effect)
    Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702.

7.   In relation to the competent authority's decision it  was  argued  that
    the assessment had been made on the basis that the appellant  had  been
    born in 1991 and accordingly would have been an adult on arrival in the
    UK whereas it was now accepted that she had been born in 1995.  It  had
    also been accepted that the person accompanying the appellant had  been
    charged with a trafficking offence.  It  was  implied  that  those  two
    factors were unknown to the competent authority and hence the  decision
    was clearly irrational.  The judge noted that Judge  Walters  had  been
    aware of the prosecution and conviction of the woman  accompanying  the
    appellant and  the  competent  authority's  decision  post-dated  Judge
    Walters' decision by over a year and the judge was not  persuaded  that
    the evidence was not before the judge or the competent authority at the
    relevant times and concluded that no irrationality was demonstrated  in
    the decision of the competent authority on that point.  The judge  also
    considered the evidence in relation to the age assessment that had been
    before Judge Walters in some detail at  paragraphs  20  to  23  of  his
    decision and found that it was neither irrational or perverse  for  the
    competent authority to have relied upon the  evidence  then  available.
    In paragraph 24  the  judge  found  that  he  could  not  overturn  the
    conclusion of the  competent  authority  that  the  appellant  was  not
    trafficked.  He added:

         "I can though consider the revised age assessment in the rest of my
         decision.  As stated  above  I  will  make  my  findings  based  on
         alternatives of [the appellant] being and not being trafficked.  If
         I do not distinguish,  it  is  because  there  is  not  a  material
         difference in my findings and conclusions."

8.   While the judge took the findings of Immigration Judge Walters  as  his
    starting point he accepted that the decision  had  been  based  on  his
    treatment of the appellant  as  an  adult  which  had  been  materially
    incorrect and could be assumed to have affected  his  assessment.   The
    judge said he had taken that into  account  when  considering  all  his
    findings.

9.   Before the  judge  there  was  a  report  from  a  consultant  clinical
    psychologist, Dr Rachel Thomas.  The judge deals with her  evidence  in
    great detail between paragraphs 26 and 34 of his determination.  It was
    noted that Dr Thomas had had an interview with the appellant on 25 June
    2017 with a telephone interview on 29 August  2018.   The  judge  noted
    that Dr Thomas had said in her original report that  if  the  appellant
    were able to remain in the UK  to  continue  to  receive  her  existing
    levels of current social support and to  be  referred  for  appropriate
    professional help she anticipated the appellant could make a reasonably
    good psychiatric recovery within two years with an improved quality  of
    life  for  herself  and  her  daughter.   In  paragraph   33   of   the
    determination the judge noted that it was well over  a  year  since  Dr
    Thomas' initial report which had highlighted that it was expected  that
    the appellant would make a good psychiatric recovery within  two  years
    and was no longer taking a commonly prescribed treatment for depression
    and had not sought any further  treatment  or  medication  since.   She
    noted that Dr Thomas had changed her assessment of the  appellant  from
    post-natal depression to mixed anxiety and depressive disorder  without
    having the benefit of seeing the appellant or of access to her  medical
    records.  The judge  pointed  out  that  it  was  noteworthy  that  the
    appellant had not sought any medical assistance from either her  GP  or
    the hospital and was clearly capable of attending hospital appointments
    and caring for her child despite the  psychiatric  condition  that  had
    existed in 2017.  She concluded

         "The assessment of Dr  Thomas  about  the  risk  of  the  appellant
         committing  suicide  stands  in  isolation   to   all   the   other
         circumstances and evidence before the Tribunal and  cannot  be  the
         basis for this Tribunal  concluding  that  the  risk  breaches  the
         Article 3 ECHR threshold or realistically even gets close to it."

10.  The judge referred to AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64 where the  Court
    of Appeal had made it clear that Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867
    had relaxed the test for a violation of Article 3 ECHR but  only  to  a
    very modest extent.  In relation to  the  risk  of  suicide  the  judge
    referred to J v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA  Civ  629  and  did  not
    consider on the evidence presented that any of  the  six  questions  or
    tests set out in J had been met in the appellant's case and  there  was
    no real risk of suicide or any  violation  of  the  appellant's  rights
    under Article 3 if returned to Vietnam.

11.  The judge noted that since the previous appeal the appellant had had  a
    child who is a citizen of Vietnam.  In support of  her  case  that  she
    would be at risk not only as a single woman with a child  born  out  of
    wedlock but as a trafficked woman with a child reliance was  placed  on
    an expert report by Professor Christopher Bluth.  The judge  considered
    among  other  matters  the   decision   of   Nguyen   (anti-trafficking
    Convention: Respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC).  The judge also
    took into account a Home Office Country of Origin Report dated May 2016
    and a country expert report before the previous judge and in  paragraph
    50 of the determination found that he preferred the findings

         "other than Professor Bluth's as they are more recent and are based
         on what appears to be a wider range of appropriate sources and  his
         expertise in international relations and his undoubted knowledge of
         Vietnam albeit from a singular viewpoint.  His is  one  view  among
         several who reach different conclusions."

12.  The judge did accept  Professor  Bluth's  observations  about  societal
    discrimination against victims of trafficking  and  also  single  women
    with a child and the appellant who is unmarried with a child "will face
    discrimination in Vietnam" and  he  had  based  his  decision  "on  the
    appellant being  vulnerable  in  line  with  Dr  Thomas's  observations
    although I do not accept all her conclusions".

13.  The judge in  paragraph  54  found  in  the  light  of  Judge  Walters'
    decision that the appellant was not a victim of  trafficking,  stating:
    "That is my starting point and in the absence of any other evidence  it
    must be my conclusion."


14.   Judge  Walters  had  considered  that  the  appellant's  fear  of  her
    stepfather was not credible and the judge had no reason to change those
    findings and in reaching that assessment he had taken into account  the
    revised age assessment and potential vulnerability  but  neither  could
    explain the significant  inconsistencies  and  the  credibility  issues
    highlighted in the previous determination.  The judge did not find that
    the appellant would  abandon  her  child  or  that  she  would  be  re-
    trafficked or trafficked in the future and  the  discrimination  relied
    upon did not reach the level amounting to persecution  or  inhumane  or
    degrading treatment.  The judge did make a reference to  Section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act  2004  and
    considered that the appellant's credibility  must  still  be  adversely
    affected as she did not claim asylum at the port on  arrival  but  only
    after a few weeks.  The judge stated that he would  have  made  similar
    findings to Judge Walters while he appreciated that  the  evidence  and
    submissions presented to him were now different - the appellant's claim
    had changed from fear of her stepfather as she accepted that  he  would
    not find her and continued

         "she claims to  be  vulnerable  to  being  trafficked/re-trafficked
         herself and largely relies on the country expert  and  psychologist
         reports which emphasise on her mental health and vulnerability, but
         for the reasons set out above I  conclude  that  neither  of  those
         matters show that there is a real risk of her being persecuted  for
         any reason or even that she or her daughter would suffer  a  breach
         of Article 3 ECHR."


    He found that  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  persecution  was  not
    credible and she had a viable option of  seeking  protection  from  the
    authorities and internally relocating within Vietnam.  He observed that
    the appellant had shown herself to be a capable woman "able to  survive
    and make her way in a foreign country despite not speaking the language
    and to steadily improve her health and look after a young child."   The
    judge  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  on   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and Article 3 grounds.

15.  In relation to the Immigration Rules it had  not  been  submitted  that
    the appellant  could  meet  any  Rule.   Her  status  had  always  been
    precarious, there was nothing to show that the  appellant  could  speak
    English to  any  standard.   She  communicated  with  her  daughter  in
    Vietnamese and it was therefore credible that her daughter could  speak
    Vietnamese.  The daughter would be wholly reliant  upon  the  appellant
    and was not attending school and was fit and healthy.   He  added  "the
    appellant's physical and mental health seems to be improving,  although
    she is still clearly vulnerable".  The judge  referred  to  Hesham  Ali
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60  and
    other relevant authorities including Razgar v Secretary of State [2004]
    UKHL 27 and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  when  considering  Article  8
    outside  the  Rules.   He  noted  the  question  whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles was  a  relevant  factor  having  referred  to
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  The judge referred to Ms  Robinson's  skeleton
    argument and stated in paragraph 74 as follows:

         "74.  Her   arguments   are   that   the   appellant's   particular
             circumstances mean that she  should  be  granted  leave  under
             article 8 ECHR because of her fears of return to Vietnam,  the
             appellants  child  best  interests  taking  into  account  the
             assessment of Doctor Thomas and the concerns identified  by  a
             health visitor, and the appellant's vulnerable mental  health.
             I was asked to take into account the fact that  the  appellant
             was brought to the United Kingdom when she was a child."

16.  The judge  when  considering  the  appellant's  case  on  human  rights
    grounds noted, in the light of Agyarko,  that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown she would suffer anything more than mere hardship  or  difficulty
    or hurdles or inconvenience.  She had not shown the decision to  remove
    her from the United Kingdom would be unjustifiably harsh for her or her
    daughter.  He found there would be no insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    appellant moving to Vietnam  even  taking  into  account  the  need  to
    register under the Ho Khau.  In  relation  to  registration  the  judge
    stated that he noted that previous experts and Tribunal  decisions  had
    not  mentioned  the  registration  issue  as  a  factor  preventing  an
    appellant's  return.   He  acknowledged,  however,  that  the  lack  of
    registration "will cause some difficulty for both the appellant and her
    daughter".

17.  The decision concludes as follows:

         "86. The decision to remove the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
             would be in accordance with the laws of this country.  I  have
             taken the strength of the public policy in immigration control
             in this case and considered whether it is  outweighed  by  the
             strength of the article 8 claim, and decided that it  is  not.
             She has made a claim for asylum which is not credible.   There
             is no credible evidence that she would be at  real  risk  upon
             return to Vietnam.  The  appellant  may  be  a  failed  asylum
             seeker but there is nothing to  show  this  would  create  any
             problems for her upon return.  There is nothing  to  show  she
             would  suffer  very  significant  obstacles  if  returned   to
             Vietnam.  I have taken into account the  societal  stigma  and
             discrimination  referred   to   by   the   experts   and   her
             representatives.  The appellant may be a lone woman,  but  she
             is clearly capable as she has been  surviving  in  the  United
             Kingdom for some time.  She has not shown that there would  be
             any breach of her or her daughter's  rights  under  article  8
             ECHR if returned to Vietnam.  It may not be easy for them  but
             there  are  no  circumstances  let   alone   very   compelling
             circumstances that make the decision to remove  the  appellant
             to Vietnam disproportionate.


         87.  In reaching that conclusion I  have  taken  into  account  the
             cumulative effects of the appellant's  circumstances  and  the
             time she has been in the United Kingdom and the evidence  that
             has been provided in support of her from people in the  United
             Kingdom.


         88.  I have not referred to all the material that  appears  in  the
             documents placed before me as that would  make  this  decision
             lengthy and repetitious and harder to follow but I have  taken
             it into account."

18.  The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

19.  There was an application for permission to appeal  and  permission  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 9 October 2018 in  the  following
    terms:

         "2.  The grounds of appeal allege, variously, that the Judge failed
             to consider whether the Appellant was  a  vulnerable  witness,
             failed to make findings  on  the  psychological  evidence  and
             erred in the assessment of the Appellant's credibility.


         3.    There  was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal   regarding   the
             Appellant's mental health.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
             failed to make conclusive findings  on  this  evidence.   That
             precluded the Judge from weighing the  extent  of  any  mental
             health condition in the subsequent assessment of  credibility,
             of the viability of internal relocation and the application or
             otherwise of the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  on  Vulnerable
             Witnesses.


         4.   It is also arguable  that  the  Judge,  in  finding  that  the
             Appellant's delay in claiming asylum weighed against  her  (at
             [60]), failed to have regard to a previous finding (at [3]) as
             to the Appellant's age (she was 15 when she  entered  the  UK)
             and the prevailing circumstances (she was trafficked)."

20.  The case was listed as an error of law hearing. There was  no  response
    filed by the respondent.

21.  In relation to the first ground  of  appeal  Counsel  argued  that  the
    judge had not made it clear  that  the  guidance  note  in  respect  of
    vulnerable witnesses had been applied.  The approach to the appellant's
    credibility had been irrational.  It was acknowledged that the case had
    proceeded on submissions only.  The judge had not recorded in the light
    of the guidance whether the Tribunal had concluded that  the  appellant
    was a child, vulnerable or sensitive.  Counsel conceded that the  child
    was not a qualifying child and did not argue that the judge  had  erred
    in failing to refer to the issue of reasonableness which  had  featured
    in paragraph 13 of the grounds of appeal.  The grounds had  principally
    taken issue with the treatment of the evidence of Dr Thomas  and  while
    Counsel accepted there had been extensive  references  to  Dr  Thomas's
    evidence there had not been sufficient treatment  in  relation  to  the
    risk of suicide.  There was a material error of law in  the  assessment
    of the evidence of Dr Thomas.  In relation to the  judge's  alternative
    findings on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking Counsel relied on her grounds and submitted that the  judge
    had erred in failing to grapple with key evidence in Dr Thomas's report
    and  in  particular  the  question  of  the  appellant   being   highly
    vulnerable.  Although the determination looked  very  detailed  it  had
    flaws in it when unpicked.

22.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was vulnerable as was  clear  from  what  had  been  said  in
    paragraph 26 of the determination where, having referred to the  report
    of Dr Thomas he stated: "It is partly because of those observations and
    the conclusions drawn that the appellant was treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness by the Tribunal".  It was clearly demonstrated that the  report
    of Dr Thomas had been properly applied and considered.  The  judge  had
    found part of  the  report  rather  perplexing  as  he  had  stated  in
    paragraph 27 of the determination.  He had clearly said why he rejected
    part of the conclusions of Dr Thomas for example in paragraph 28 of the
    decision.  The judge had properly dealt with the risk  of  suicide  and
    had noted there had been no recent need to take medication.  The  judge
    had drawn a distinction between  the  earlier  report  which  had  been
    prepared after a face-to-face interview and the later report which  had
    followed a telephone conversation.  The high threshold set by Article 3
    had not been met.  She referred to M-W (a child) [2010] EWCA Civ 12  at
    paragraph  39  where  the  court  had  set  out  relevant  propositions
    establishing that a judge was fully entitled to accept or reject expert
    opinions.  The judge had taken Dr Thomas's evidence at its  highest  in
    paragraph 34 of the decision.  The judge was satisfied that none of the
    questions or tests had been met as he had stated in paragraph 36.   The
    judge had properly considered Professor Bluth's report  and  had  taken
    into account Nguyen [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC) - in that case the mother had
    three children.  The judge had given very detailed consideration to the
    expert evidence which was  consistent  with  the  guidance  in  M-W  (a
    child).  He was entitled to prefer the other evidence.  He did accept a
    measure of discrimination and assessed the claim in the  light  of  the
    appellant's circumstances.  The judge had adopted the correct  approach
    on a holistic reading of the determination which was not irrational  or
    perverse.  He had taken a belt and braces approach when considering the
    appellant's case as if she had or had  not  been  trafficked.   It  was
    clear that the reference to Section 8 formed a very minor part  of  the
    judge's approach and was not a determinative factor.  Numerous  reasons
    had been given for the judge's findings in every  other  respect.   The
    judge had made his credibility findings in great detail long before the
    reference in paragraph 62 section  8.   The  judge  was  aware  of  the
    appellant being a minor at the time of her arrival.

23.   The  judge  had  applied  the  correct  approach  when  referring   to
    significant obstacles as was made clear in  Agyarko.   It  was  a  very
    detailed determination and there was no material error of law.

24.  Ms Robinson in reply maintained her arguments and pointed out that  the
    case of  Nguyen  was  not  a  country  guidance  case  in  relation  to
    trafficking in Vietnam.

25.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's conclusions if they were  flawed
    in law.  In summarising the judge's decision above I am conscious  that
    I have not done justice to it.  The decision is twenty pages  long  and
    it is acknowledged that it  is  extremely  detailed.   The  judge  went
    exhaustively into the medical evidence.  It was by  no  means  an  easy
    determination to write since it had to  be  approached  on  alternative
    footings.

26.  A major part of the  argument  presented  related  to  the  appellant's
    vulnerability and the  claimed  failure  by  the  judge  to  apply  the
    guidance for vulnerable appellants.   As  was  noted  by  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe the judge indeed made it clear that the appellant  was  treated
    as  a  vulnerable  witness  in  paragraph  26.   There  are  references
    throughout the determination to the  appellant's  vulnerability  -  for
    example in paragraphs 58 and  66.   The  judge  had  in  mind  all  the
    relevant circumstances when considering the risks on  return  including
    the need to register under the Ho Khau.  I am satisfied that the  judge
    gave meticulous consideration to the appellant's case  having  properly
    assessed the expert material from both Dr Thomas and  Professor  Bluth.
    His analysis of the material is in no way flawed or irrational.  He was
    entitled to reject parts of the expert evidence as  is  made  clear  by
    Wall L.J. in the propositions set out in M-W and he gave proper reasons
    for doing so.  I am not satisfied that he arguably  left  any  material
    matter out of account and he considered the cumulative effects  of  the
    appellant's circumstances in the light of all the material before him -
    see the concluding paragraphs of his determination which I have set out
    above.  I do not find any error in his approach to the case  of  Nguyen
    which the respondent had cited in the decision under challenge. It  was
    a decision of a panel although not a country guidance  case.   I  agree
    with the submissions made by Ms Willocks-Briscoe that the reference  to
    Section 8 was not a material error of law in this case.  The judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusions he did on  a  holistic  view  of  the
    decision as she submits.

27.  For the reasons I have given this appeal is dismissed and the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

28.  The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order which  it  is  appropriate
    to continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.




Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

