
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14328/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 9 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      A
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 18 March 2019 (the date of its  written  reasons)  following  a
         hearing of 4 March 2019. The tribunal's decision  was  to  dismiss
         the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of
         18 December 2018 refusing to grant him international protection.

      2. By way of very  brief  background,  the  claimant  is  a  Sudanese
         national who was born on 2 January 1989. It was accepted  that  he
         is of Maselit ethnicity. It was  also  accepted  that,  given  his
         ethnicity, he would be at risk of persecution or serious  harm  if
         he was required to return to his original home area in Darfur. But
         the Secretary of State had disbelieved other aspects of his  claim
         and had concluded that he would be able to safely return to  Sudan
         and relocate to Khartoum.

3.    The tribunal agreed with the Secretary of State that,  notwithstanding
previous  country  guidance  decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal   and   its
predecessor which had suggested to the contrary, the claimant would be  able
to safely relocate to Khartoum.  The  relevant  country  guidance  decisions
which the claimant had relied upon for the proposition  that  he  could  not
safely relocate are AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris,  relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]
UKAIT 56 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC). The  tribunal,  in
its written reasons, said that it was "permissible to  depart  from  country
guidance if there is evidence that justifies such a course  of  action".  As
to the existence of what it found to be sufficient evidence, it referred  to
what it simply described as "the CPIN", which is a document which  was  said
to evidence discrimination directed towards Darfuris in Khartoum  but  which
would fall short of persecution. In light of the content  of  that  document
and in light of what was thought to have  been  a  "more  nuanced"  approach
than had been taken by the above country guidance cases, in another  country
guidance case that of IM and AI (risks -  membership  of  Beja  tribe,  Beja
congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 188 (IAC), the tribunal decided  that
the claimant could safely live in Khartoum and that it would  be  reasonable
to expect him to relocate there.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted  because  it  was  thought  that  the
tribunal had arguably erred in law through  failing  to  adequately  explain
why it was departing from the earlier two country  guidance  cases  referred
to above. Permission having  been  granted  the  matter  was  listed  for  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it  could  be  decided
whether there had been an error of law and, if so,  what  should  flow  from
that. Representation at that hearing was as stated above and I  am  grateful
to each representative.

5.    Mr Mills referred me to the recent decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
AAR and AA (non-Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019]  UKUT  00282  (IAC)  in
which it had been said that the situation in Sudan  remains  volatile  after
protests in that country in late 2018, that the  future  was  unpredictable,
and that there was currently insufficient evidence available  to  show  that
the guidance given in the cases of AA and MM referred  to  and  fully  cited
above required revision. Mr Mills stressed  that  it  was  nevertheless  the
Secretary of State's position that there  had  been  some  changes  for  the
better in Khartoum but he accepted in light of AAR and AA that the  tribunal
ought to have applied the guidance in the earlier cases  and  had  erred  in
not doing so. So, he very fairly, properly and correctly  acknowledged  that
the claimant's appeal ought to have succeeded. In those circumstances  there
was nothing further for Mr Howard to add.

6.    Accordingly, I have decided to allow  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal; to set aside the tribunal's  decision  and  to  re-make  the
decision by allowing the claimant's appeal from  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision of 18 December 2018 on asylum grounds and,  on  the  basis  of  the
same reasoning, on human rights grounds (Article 3 of the ECHR only).

7.    I would stress, though, that the tribunal cannot at all be  criticised
for not taking account of what had been said in AAR and  AA.  That  decision
had not been issued by the Upper Tribunal when  the  tribunal  decided  this
appeal.

Decision

The claimant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.  The  tribunal's
decision of 18 March 2019 is set aside. The  decision  is  remade  in  these
terms: the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of
18 December 2018 is allowed on asylum grounds and on  human  rights  grounds
under Article 3 of the ECHR.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant  anonymity.  Nothing  was  said
about that before me. However, I have decided to continue that grant.  I  do
so under rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the  claimant  or
any member of his family either directly or indirectly. This applies to  all
parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply by  any  person  may  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Dated: 8 January 2020

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

