

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14302/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Oral decision given following hearing    |                                   |
|On 10 October 2019                       |On 26 November 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    MR A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Howe &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of  Turkey  who  was  born  in
    March 1983.  He appeals against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hussain promulgated on 4 July 2019 following a hearing at  Hatton
    Cross on 7 June 2019  in  which  Judge  Hussain  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection.  The basis of his claim is that if returned to
    Turkey he would be at real risk of receiving ill-treatment  on  account
    of his political views and activity being a member of the HDP.

 2. It was accepted by the judge that the appellant was a member of the HDP
    and that he had been detained on  three  occasions  since  2000,  2012.
    However the judge rejected the assertion made by the appellant that  he
    had also been detained and tortured between 2012 and 2014  for  reasons
    which it is claimed in the grounds are unsustainable.

 3. For the reasons which follow it is not necessary to go into  any  great
    detail as to the grounds themselves, because it is accepted  on  behalf
    of the respondent very fairly by Mr Bramble before this  Tribunal  that
    the grounds are made out.  On behalf of  the  respondent,  before  this
    Tribunal, Mr Bramble stated as follows:

         "Basically, there is merit to all  the  grounds.   With  regard  to
         ground 1, the judge's approach to the medical report  for  example,
         where he cross-references to the  interview,  fails  to  take  into
         account that it had never been put to the appellant what the nature
         of the torture was for  which  his  medical  report  was  obtained.
         Accordingly, the judge does not engage properly  with  the  medical
         report.

         With regard to ground 2 this is in relation to the evidence of  the
         witness who was present, the appellant's nephew.  At  paragraph  38
         of his decision, the judge stated as follows:

             '38. In regards [to] the appellant's nephew, that  the  nephew
                  mentioned the appellant in his own interview, if something
                  deserves to be given some weight [sic], however it  is  in
                  my view, likely that the nephew mentioned  his  uncle,  in
                  the hope that his claim succeeds, then  his  reference  to
                  the appellant will provide  ready  corroboration  for  the
                  appellant's claim, if he came to this country.  It is not,
                  in my view, beyond  the  realms  of  reality  that  having
                  claimed asylum, in the United  Kingdom  for  himself,  the
                  nephew would have  been  looking  forward  to  encouraging
                  other members of his family, including the appellant to do
                  the same, given the history of successful asylum claims in
                  his family members of the community".

         This is an asylum matter, so lower standards apply,  so  the  judge
         needed to sort out his findings with regard to the  merits  of  the
         nephew's  claim  and  how  that  impacted  on  the  basis  of   the
         appellant's claim.

         With regard to the third ground, that is the failure to have regard
         to relevant matters, an  example  is  at  paragraph  29  where  the
         judge's explanation of why he believed that the appellant would not
         have been in attendance at HDP rallies was based on the fact  as  a
         sub-contractor of foreman he would not have had the time or wish to
         do so,  and  furthermore  he  stated  that  'if  he  [that  is  the
         appellant]  had  no  regard  for  his  own  liberty  and   physical
         integrity, then at least he would have had  regard  for  the  70-80
         people working on the project.  How were they  supposed  to  manage
         without their leader being around?'

         Coming to a conclusion on this premise  is  moving  away  from  the
         lower standard of proof.

         Likewise, part of the appellant's claim was  the  circumstances  of
         his brother and the family history of pro-HDP or Kurdish activities
         which the judge has ignored.

         Then, with regard to ground 4, which is the failure of the judge to
         have regard to relevant country guidance, the judge found  that  it
         did not make  sense  for  the  authorities  to  have  released  the
         appellant after so short a time,  but  that  takes  no  account  of
         country guidance on this point.

         With regard to ground 5, the judge has given  weight  to  the  fact
         that if he was not trying to make his presence known, why would  he
         access a government website?

         Although this is not a reasoned finding, and although on its own it
         might not be the strongest grounds, nonetheless it  does  add  some
         weight to the other grounds."

 4. I would add to what Mr Bramble stated that it is  unfortunate  that  at
    paragraph 35 of his decision when referring to the appellant's  failure
    (as found by the judge) earlier to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the
    specific torture said to have been  suffered  to  his  genitals,  (this
    ground is accepted by Mr Bramble with regard to ground  1),  the  judge
    suggested as a reason for why a more detailed account was  given  later
    that "these details emerge much later, when I  presume  he  would  have
    been briefed by those acting for him to put in the details".   He  goes
    on to refer to the appellant's evidence that he had been burnt with lit
    cigarettes on his back that "the infliction of such injury would be  so
    unusual that, in  my  opinion,  the  appellant  would  have  rushed  to
    volunteer it.  Yet, he did not do so until his  written  statement  and
    appearance before the  expert".   There  is  no  evidential  basis  for
    suggesting that his account was concocted with the assistance of  those
    professionally instructed by him and furthermore  this  allegation  was
    never put to him.  Although on its own this might be said  to  be  mere
    sarcasm (which preferably should not be contained within a decision  in
    any event) it does add to the general sense that this decision has  not
    been reached for sustainable reasons.

 5. I accept the criticism which have been effectively conceded  on  behalf
    of the respondent by Mr Bramble and accordingly this decision  must  be
    set aside and remade.

 6. In the circumstances because there will have to be a complete rehearing
    it is appropriate that  this  appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.  Regrettably that has happened once before  and
    so this will be the second remittal and for this reason I  will  direct
    that it should be reheard by a Designated Immigration Judge.

 7. Although the previous hearing was at Hatton Cross,  Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    asked if this appeal could be remitted now to Taylor House, because the
    appellant lives much closer to that hearing centre and also his  nephew
    had moved to Chelmsford and it would be logistically  much  easier  for
    him (and he will be giving evidence) to  attend  Taylor  House  instead
    rather than at Hatton Cross.  I  will  accordingly  so  direct  and  my
    decision is as follows:

Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  is  set  aside   as
containing material errors of law and  this  appeal  will  be  remitted  for
rehearing before a Designated Immigration Judge  sitting  at  Taylor  House,
with no findings retained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                Date: 20 November 2019

