

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14010/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons promulgated|
|On 15 October 2018                           |On 22 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms G Brown instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr T Lindsay Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at Manchester on 13  February  2018  the  Upper
        Tribunal found the First-Tier Tribunal had erred in law in a manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.  The  matter  comes
        before the Upper Tribunal today for the purposes of a hearing after
        which that Tribunal shall substituted decision to either  allow  or
        dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant is a Ugandan national born on 22  February  1992  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 October 2005,  claiming  asylum
        on 8 June 2016 on the basis of her fear of persecution  for  reason
        of her sexuality. The  protection  application  was  refused  in  a
        decision  dated  7  December  2016  against  which  the   appellant
        appealed.
     3. The only preserved findings from the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
        are in respect of the appellant's immigration history.
     4. The respondent accepts the appellant's nationality and identity are
        as claimed and that a person who is homosexual is capable of  being
        member of a particular social group for the purposes of the Refugee
        Convention.
     5. The key issue in the appeal is, and always has  been,  whether  the
        appellant's claim to be a lesbian is credible.



The law


     6. In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
        UKSC 31 (07 July 2010) Lord Rodgers said "When an applicant applies
        for asylum on the ground of  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        because he is gay, the tribunal must first ask itself whether it is
        satisfied on the evidence that he is  gay,  or  that  he  would  be
        treated  as  gay  by  potential  persecutors  in  his  country   of
        nationality. If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is
        satisfied on the available  evidence  that  gay  people  who  lived
        openly would be liable to persecution in the applicant's country of
        nationality. If so, the tribunal must go on to  consider  what  the
        individual applicant would do if he were returned to that  country.
        If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
        to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
        persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
        "discreetly". If, on the other hand, the  tribunal  concludes  that
        the  applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
        persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so. If the
        tribunal  concludes  that  the  applicant  would  choose  to   live
        discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
        live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
        his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
        be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
        persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
        them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
        persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
        that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is  gay.
        If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
        reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
        fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
        openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
        application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
        he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
        defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
        right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
        persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
        freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
        receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
        applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
        country of nationality should have afforded him".  Lord  Hope  said
        "It is necessary to proceed in stages.  (i)  The  first  stage,  of
        course, is to consider  whether  the  applicant  is    indeed  gay.
        Unless he can establish that he is  of  that  orientation  he  will
        not be entitled to be treated as a member of the particular  social
        group. But I would regard this part of  the  test  as  having  been
        satisfied if the  applicant's  case  is  that  he  is  at  risk  of
        persecution because he is suspected  of  being  gay,  if  his  past
        history shows that this is in fact the case. (ii) The next stage is
        to examine a group of questions which  are  directed  to  what  his
        situation will be on return. This part of the inquiry  is  directed
        to what will happen in the future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of
        Origin report will provide the background.  There  will  be  little
        difficulty in holding that in countries such as Iran  and  Cameroon
        gays or persons who are believed to be gay are persecuted and  that
        persecution  is  something  that  may  reasonably  be  feared.  The
        question is  how  each  applicant,  looked  at  individually,  will
        conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to  what  he
        does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will come  in
        contact, in private as well as  in  public.  The  way  he  conducts
        himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
        degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
        aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
        even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
        persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
        entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
        concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
        no part in this inquiry. (iii) On the other hand, the fact that the
        applicant will not be able to do in the country of his  nationality
        everything that he can do openly in the country whose protection he
        seeks is not the test.  As  I  said  earlier  (see  para  15),  the
        Convention was not directed to reforming the level of rights in the
        country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach  the  issue  on
        the basis that the purpose of the Convention is to guarantee to  an
        applicant who is gay that he can live as freely and as openly as  a
        gay person as he would be able to do if he were  not  returned.  It
        does not guarantee to everyone the human rights standards that  are
        applied by the receiving country  within  its  own  territory.  The
        focus throughout must be on what will  happen  in  the  country  of
        origin. (iv) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will
        in fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if  returned,  is
        to consider why he will do so. If this will simply be  in  response
        to social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of his own
        choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
        asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
        concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
        persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
        well founded. (v) This is the final and conclusive  question:  does
        he have a well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he  has,
        the causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in  Januzi  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, para  5
        will have been established.  The  applicant  will  be  entitled  to
        asylum.



Discussion



     7. The standard of proof applicable in  a  protection  case  is  often
        referred to as the lower  standard  which  requires  assessment  of
        whether there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  what  an
        appellant is saying is true.
     8. In A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie  (Cases
        C-148/13, C-149/13 and C-150/13) it was held that the inability  of
        an applicant to answer questions based on stereotyped notions could
        not constitute grounds for concluding  that  the  applicant  lacked
        credibility. It could not be concluded  that  an  applicant  lacked
        credibility simply because he did not declare his homosexuality  at
        the outset due to his reticence in revealing  intimate  aspects  of
        his life.
     9. This principle is applicable not only to the  time  period  between
        entering the United Kingdom and  claiming  asylum,  for  which  the
        appellant provides an explanation, but also the line of questioning
        adopted by Mr Lindsey which was suggestive  of  the  appellant  not
        being credible as she had not declared her  sexual  orientation  on
        her Facebook account.
    10. The obligation upon any Tribunal is to consider all  the  available
        evidence both for and against the appellant's  claim.  Although  it
        was submitted that  an  aspect  of  the  appellants  evidence  that
        undermined her credibility was that she could not  provide  a  date
        when in  November  she  and  her  partner  celebrated  their  first
        anniversary, this line of questioning was not put  to  the  partner
        despite the partner attending and giving oral evidence.  There  was
        therefore nothing to contradict the appellant's claim that they had
        not discussed the question of an anniversary or to show the same is
        not credible or undermined the appellants claim in relation to  her
        sexual orientation.
    11. In addition to the appellant's own evidence, which I  do  not  find
        was undermined to a material degree during the course of  questions
        put to her, the appellant has  provided  a  substantial  number  of
        documents corroborating her claim. The first of this  is  from  the
        appellant's partner Ms ER who I found to be a credible witness  and
        who  gave  clear  evidence  in  relation  to  the  nature  of   the
        relationship.  Further  evidence  from  a  close  friend   of   the
        appellant, FM, who intended to attend the hearing but was unable to
        do so, corroborated the claim. Evidence from a Mr Ssali  a  Refugee
        Project Coordinator of the Say It Loud Club gave  detailed  written
        evidence and attended to give oral evidence in which  he  confirmed
        his belief  that  the  appellant's  sexuality  is  as  she  claims.
        Although Mr Lindsay pursued a line of  questioning  indicating  the
        fact this individual had not ejected many from Say  It  Loud,  this
        did not undermine the evidence of the witness that those who he did
        not believe were genuinely seeking assistance or support  from  the
        group or who did not genuinely hold the sexual orientation claimed,
        would not be tolerated and  his  evidence  regarding  his  personal
        belief of the appellant and the fact she had not been ejected  from
        the group.
    12. There is also evidence from  four  named  female  friends  who  are
        themselves lesbians who believe the appellant to be a  lesbian  and
        evidence from a Volunteer and Service  Development  Coordinator  of
        London Friend, a support group for LGBT people who is in  no  doubt
        that the appellant is a lesbian. Love letters from the  appellant's
        former partner, her first serious  partner  in  Uganda,  have  been
        provided together with photographs of the appellant  at  Birmingham
        Pride and screenshots from the Say It Aloud Facebook  page  showing
        the appellant in attendance.
    13. It is part of the appellant's case that whilst in Uganda, after she
        was found kissing another woman, she was beaten and abused  by  her
        father, raped on two occasions by men brought to the  home  by  her
        father and threatened with death. The appellant's account  of  such
        ill-treatment is supported by the objective medical evidence of  Dr
        Juliet Cohen whose report concludes that (a) eight of  the  lesions
        on the Appellant's body are typical of burns caused by hot oil, (b)
        one of the  lesions  is  highly  consistent  with  the  appellant's
        account of having been beaten with  a  cane  and  (c)  two  of  the
        lesions are consistent with the appellant's account of having  been
        beaten with  a  blunt  object.  Dr  Cohen  also  reports  that  the
        appellant  is  suffering   from   Post-Dramatic   Stress   Disorder
        attributed to the appellant's experience  of  sexual  violence.  In
        relation to this matter Dr Cohen writes:


             ".. From her account, it appears that she was able to maintain
             a good level of function while at university and while working
             as a dancer, but since she has been unable to work her  mental
             health has deteriorated. The symptoms have persisted since the
             time of the rapes described but have been causing  significant
             impairment only since she has been unable to keep  active  and
             distract herself by being fully occupied, so while  she  might
             not have reached the diagnostic criteria in previous years, in
             my opinion she does now.  I  make  this  diagnosis  not  based
             solely  on  the  history  related  but  on   my   observations
             throughout the examination, the  responses  made  to  specific
             clinical questions and my objective findings on examination of
             her mental state.


             The later increase in severity of symptoms is not  an  unusual
             finding in the context of mental health  conditions,  where  a
             person is able to employ coping strategies for a  considerable
             period of time but when  these  are  no  longer  available  or
             further stressors impinge on them, then  they  can  no  longer
             cope and experience a significant  increase  in  severity  and
             frequency of symptoms."


    14. I find sufficient evidence has been provided by the appellant  upon
        which appropriate weight may be placed demonstrating  the  positive
        and negative experiences of the realisation of  her  sexuality  and
        experience of the same in reality. Relevant evidence  was  provided
        just prior to and just after the asylum interview  indicating  this
        is not a matter that has arisen or been developed by the  appellant
        since the refusal letter, as suggested by Mr Lindsay.
    15. It is of course difficult to see inside  an  individual's  head  or
        heart in terms of knowing what they truly feel or think. It is  for
        this reason that an assessment  has  to  be  made  based  upon  the
        available evidence.  Having  considered  such  evidence  I  make  a
        finding of fact that the appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of
        proof upon her to  prove  that  what  she  says  about  her  sexual
        identity and experiences with her female  partners,  including  her
        current partner in the United Kingdom, is credible.
    16. It is not disputed that gay people in Uganda who  live  openly  are
        liable to prosecution or persecution.  If the appellant returns  to
        Uganda but is unable to live openly as a lesbian this will clearly,
        on the basis of her evidence, be to avoid being the victim of  acts
        of persecutory violence. It  was  not  disputed  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal that a gay person who lives openly,  or  who  cannot  live
        openly as a result of a fear of harm, is entitled to  international
        protection in light of the situation  that  currently  prevails  in
        Uganda.
    17. Internal flight and sufficiency of protection were not  issues  the
        Upper Tribunal was  asked  to  consider.  The  country  information
        supports a contention there is no sufficiency of protection for the
        appellant if she was  returned  to  Uganda  or  place  within  that
        country where she could safely relocate.
    18. The weight of the evidence supports a finding this appeal  must  be
        allowed.


Decision

    19. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 October 2018












