
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14190/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th July 2017                             |On 20th July 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                   Mr Z B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Danji (instructed by AH Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the  Appellant  against  the
    Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie. Following a hearing  at
    Taylor  House  on  27th  January  2017,  in  a  Decision  and   Reasons
    promulgated on 14th February 2017 Judge Devittie dismissed  the  appeal
    on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim is on the basis that he is a gay man  from
    Pakistan. He had come to the UK aged 14  in  2003.  He  claimed  asylum
    based on his religion in 2003. That application  was  refused  and  his
    appeal against the decision dismissed in 2004.

 3. He next made  further  representations  in  November  2011  which  were
    rejected in March 2014. He  then  made  an  application  based  on  his
    sexuality in June 2016. It was the refusal of  that  application  which
    came before Judge Devittie.

 4. The Judge accepted at paragraph 6 of his Decision and Reasons that,  if
    he was to find the Appellant to be gay, there  would  be  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood he would face persecution if he  was  inclined  to
    openly express his sexuality in Pakistan.

 5. The Judge had before him the oral evidence of the Appellant  and  of  a
    witness, Farook and he had witness statements from two friends  of  the
    Appellant's, Naveed Ahmed and Malik.

 6. In his Decision and Reasons the Judge set out the  witness  statements.
    Naveed Ahmed said that he had known the Appellant since  2011  when  he
    shared an apartment with him in Brixton. The Appellant not disclose his
    sexuality to him until the end of 2015 when his relationship  with  his
    boyfriend ended and he was very distressed. He said that he  was  aware
    of the difficulties  the  Appellant  had  with  his  parents  who  were
    pressurising him to return to Pakistan and marry a cousin  and  it  was
    only because of that that he divulged his sexuality to them. Since then
    they have ostracised him and threatened him. He also said the Appellant
    had attended the gay parade in London in  July  2016  and  was  due  to
    attend the next one  in  2017.  He  also  said  that  he  had  acquired
    membership of gay bars and organisations.

 7. The Judge set out the evidence contained in the statement of Malik.  He
    had been granted refugee status as a dependent of his partner with whom
    he has been in a civil partnership  since  August  2014.  He  describes
    having met the appellant in August 2016  and  of  then  becoming  close
    friends with him.

 8. The Judge set out the oral evidence Farook who had known the  Appellant
    since  2003,  shortly  after  he  had  arrived  and  who  had   offered
    considerable support over the years to the Appellant. He said  that  he
    become aware of the Appellant's sexuality in October 2008. He described
    the Appellant's distress at the end of relationships and confirmed  the
    difficulties that he has had with  his  parents  as  a  result  of  his
    disclosure of his sexuality to them.

 9. The Judge commenced his credibility findings  at  paragraph  8  of  his
    Decision and Reasons. The first adverse finding  he  makes  is  on  the
    basis of the  very  significant  delay  in  claiming  asylum  based  on
    sexuality. The Judge was entitled, even required, to  make  an  adverse
    credibility findings based on delay in accordance with section 8 of the
    Immigration  and  Asylum  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.
    However, the Judge has noted that when the Appellant arrived in the  UK
    the age of 14 he had already had a gay  relationship  in  Pakistan  and
    would have known about his sexuality, if not immediately, shortly after
    arriving in the UK. That finding  is  speculative  and  does  not  take
    account of the Appellant's extreme youth and indeed his  extreme  youth
    when he had his gay relationship in Pakistan; he was then only 13.

10. The Judge also found against  the  Appellant  on  the  basis  that  his
    various gay friends who have been granted refugee status on the grounds
    of their sexuality would have been able to advise him that he could  do
    the same. The Judge made an error of fact in that finding  because  the
    evidence was that he had only met them after he claimed asylum.

11. The second adverse finding is based on  the  same  mistake  as  to  the
    facts.

12. The third adverse finding is not reasoned and based on  the  fact  that
    the Judge did not accept that his parents, would after several years of
    inactivity, suddenly exert pressure on him to return  to  Pakistan  and
    marry. That is speculative and it does offer an explanation as to  what
    prompted the Appellant to claim asylum when he did.

13. The fourth adverse finding is based on the fact that the Appellant  had
    not been particularly active in the gay scene prior to 2016.  That  was
    an adverse finding open to the Judge on the evidence.

14. The next adverse finding incorrectly identified as (iv)  was  based  on
    the Appellant's immigration history which  weighed  against  him.  This
    again relates to the delay in claiming.

15. It is apparent that what weighed most heavily with the  Judge  was  the
    Appellant's delay in claiming asylum based  on  his  sexuality.  Whilst
    delay has to be taken against an Appellant when  assessing  credibility
    the main issue in this case, as identified by the  Judge,  was  whether
    the Appellant was in truth gay and if so  whether  he  had  delayed  in
    claiming asylum or not, he was entitled to be recognised as a  refugee.
    The Judge has not assessed in any of  the  findings  described  so  far
    whether or not the Appellant is in truth a gay man.

16. At paragraph 9 the Judge rejected the evidence of all  three  witnesses
    without giving any reason why he has done so.

17. For all of the above reasons I find that the Judge has made a  material
    error  of  law;  he  has  not  given  an  adequate  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality and the Decision and Reasons must be set aside in
    its entirety.

18. The Appellant not having brought his witnesses to court  and  the  fact
    that the appeal needs to be heard de novo it was inappropriate  for  me
    to  redecide  the  appeal  and  both  representatives  agreed  it   was
    appropriate to remit it for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.









Notice of Decision


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and the appeal is  remitted
    for a full de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   Failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed                              Date 19th July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


