


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/14328/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 19 December 2017                   |              On 19 December 2017    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms A Patyna, Counsel instructed by Montague
                 Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Respondent  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Cassel promulgated on 29 June 2017 ("the Decision") dismissing
       the Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
       dated 3 October 2016 refusing his protection and human rights claim.




    2. The Appellant is a national of Iran.  He was encountered  by  police
       in the UK on 25 April 2016 whilst leaving the back of a  lorry.   He
       claimed asylum on 26 April 2016.


    3. The Appellant's protection claim is  based  on  his  sexuality.   He
       claims to be gay.  It is also at the core of his claim that he  says
       that the authorities in Iran raided a party he  was  attending  with
       his long-term partner and discovered video evidence of him  and  his
       partner engaging in sexual activity.  The Appellant claims that  the
       police have raided his home whilst he was  in  hiding  in  Iran  and
       asked about his whereabouts.


    4. The Appellant raises four grounds of appeal.  First,  he  says  that
       the Judge has unlawfully required corroboration for  the  protection
       claim.  Second, he submits that the Judge has unlawfully  failed  to
       consider photographic evidence produced in support of his case which
       show him attending a gay club in Basildon.  Third, he says that  the
       Judge unlawfully failed to identify the inconsistencies relied  upon
       to support the adverse credibility finding.  Fourth,  he  says  that
       the Judge has failed properly to apply HJ (Iran)  in  stating  that,
       even if the Appellant were gay, he would not be at risk  because  it
       is not accepted that he came to the attention of the authorities  in
       Iran.


    5. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Farrelly on 2 October  2017  in  the  following  terms  (so  far  as
       relevant):-


            "...4.     The fact that corroboration is not required does not
           mean that the judge is required to  leave  out  of  account  the
           absence of evidence which  might  reasonably  be  expected.   An
           appeal must be determined on the basis of the evidence  produced
           but the weight to be attached to oral evidence may  be  affected
           by  a  failure   to   produce   other   evidence   in   support.
           Consequently, I find no fault with the  judge's  comments  about
           the appellant's uncle.  It was a matter for the judge to  decide
           what weight to attach to the photographs.
            5.   The judge considered the alternative: that  the  appellant
           was gay.  The judge did not  accept  that  the  authorities  had
           expressed any interest in him.  The judge referred to para 33 of
           SSH and HR.  This  decision  is  concerned  with  the  risk  for
           someone who left Iran illegally who was  not  otherwise  wanted.
           On the basis the primary finding that is not Gay is  sustainable
           how the judge dealt with the alternative is not material."


    6. As will be immediately apparent  on  a  reading  of  the  above  and
       although the Respondent has failed to notice this  in  her  Rule  24
       response, the reasons given by FTTJ Farrelly appear as a refusal  of
       the application for permission to appeal and not a grant.  There  is
       no arguable error of law identified by Judge Farrelly's decision.


    7. I raised this issue with the parties' representatives at the  outset
       and it was agreed that the appropriate course is for me to disregard
       the substance of Judge Farrelly's decision and proceed on the  basis
       that he intended to grant permission as there are arguable errors of
       law.   Although this means that the Appellant has no opportunity  to
       renew the application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal,  he
       derives a benefit from being able to put  his  case  orally  and  to
       demonstrate that there are indeed errors of law in the Decision.   I
       put out of my mind the substance of Judge Farrelly's  decision  when
       determining the error of law issues.


    8.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision or remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


    9. As Judge Cassel pointed out, the  central  issue  in  this  case  is
       whether the Appellant is credible in his claim to be gay ([5] of the
       Decision).  The Judge  had  before  him  both  documentary  evidence
       relating to that claim (in the form of the photographs on which  the
       Appellant relies) and the oral evidence of the Appellant.


   10. Dealing first with the photographs, the Judge sets out  at  [29]  of
       the Decision what those show as follows:-


            "[29]      A number of photographs of  the  Appellant  standing
           beside a sign or signs showing  "Colours"  have  been  produced.
           All but one of them show him on his own in various  poses.   The
           majority appear to be taken outside of the club in the  entrance
           hall.  One of the photographs shows the Appellant  sitting  next
           to an unnamed person.  He does not refer to these photos in  his
           statement nor his oral evidence today.  He has  simply  produced
           them.  I place no evidential weight upon these 'photos."


   11. I have carefully considered the  photographs  on  their  face.   The
       description of what those show as set out by the  Judge  is  a  fair
       one.  Of course,  this  is  only  one  element  of  the  Appellant's
       evidence.  However, the Judge was entitled to  find  that  he  could
       place no weight on those photographs  in  terms  of  his  assessment
       whether the Appellant is indeed gay.  They simply do not add to  his
       case.


   12. I turn then to the oral evidence.  The first ground  challenges  the
       Judge's requirement for corroboration.  This was in large  part  the
       focus of  the  oral  submissions  before  me.  The  requirement  for
       corroboration is said to arise in two different contexts.  The first
       is evidence from the Appellant's uncle who  it  appears  remains  in
       Iran  and  with  whom  the  Appellant  has  retained  contact.   The
       Appellant says that his uncle  has  endeavoured  to  find  out  what
       happened to the Appellant's partner in Iran (with whom the Appellant
       says he was videoed having sex) and the others at the party when the
       police raided it.  There is an inconsistency identified at  [13]  of
       the Decision between what it is said that the Appellant's uncle told
       him about the fate of these persons.  On the one hand, the Appellant
       says that his uncle was told that  the  Appellant's  partner  is  in
       prison.  On the other, the Appellant's evidence is  that  his  uncle
       had no news of these persons. I will come back to that when  dealing
       with the Judge's findings about inconsistencies as appears elsewhere
       within the Decision.


   13.  The  Appellant  says  that  the  Judge  should  not  have  required
       corroboration.  There is no duty on  an  asylum  seeker  to  provide
       corroboration of a claim.  That  is  right.   However,  the  Judge's
       reference to the lack of evidence from the Appellant's uncle at [26]
       of the Decision is not in the context of requiring corroboration  of
       the claim but in deciding what weight to  give  to  the  Appellant's
       oral evidence in this regard.  The Appellant's oral evidence on this
       point is self-evidently  hearsay.   Clearly  the  Appellant's  uncle
       could not provide direct oral  evidence.   However,  the  Judge  was
       entitled to question why it was that  no  letter  or  other  written
       evidence was provided by the Appellant's uncle given the Appellant's
       case that he remains in  contact  with  his  uncle.   The  Judge  is
       entitled to take into account that  lack  of  direct  evidence  when
       deciding what weight to give to the Appellant's oral evidence.


   14. A similar point arises in  relation  to  the  other  aspect  of  the
       Appellant's case which the Appellant says he was being  required  to
       corroborate.  That relates to the Appellant's relationships  in  the
       UK.  As I have already observed, it is central  to  the  Appellant's
       case that he is a gay man.  He has provided oral  evidence  that  he
       has been in two relationships since he came to the  UK.   The  Judge
       had the Appellant's own oral evidence about that.  However, he found
       at [27] and [28] of the Decision that the lack of evidence from  his
       ex-partners was relevant to the credibility assessment.


   15. Ms Patyna made much of what is said at [27] and [28] of the Decision
       and submitted that the Judge was actually requiring the Appellant to
       provide evidence from these men.  She submitted that the  Judge  has
       failed to consider the  difficulties  in  obtaining  that  evidence.
       When I asked what those difficulties were, she  responded  that  the
       one relationship (with "R")  was  a  short-term  one  and  that  the
       Appellant was not in contact with him.  As Ms Everett  pointed  out,
       though,  there  was  no  evidence  that  this   relationship   ended
       acrimoniously or that the Appellant had no means of contact.


   16. The second relationship was with a Mr  A  with  whom  the  Appellant
       accepts he has retained contact.  Ms Patyna submitted that the Judge
       has failed to take into account that Mr A  does  not  live  locally,
       that the Appellant only has contact with him by telephone  and  that
       he is an asylum seeker.  Leaving aside  that  Mr  A  lives  only  in
       Bedford and that he is an asylum seeker does not obviously present a
       difficulty to him giving evidence, there is no reason given  why  he
       (and indeed R) could not have provided at the very least a letter in
       support of the Appellant's case  even  if  they  were  unwilling  to
       attend to give oral evidence.


   17. The Judge did not impose a requirement  on  the  Appellant  to  call
       evidence from these ex-partners.  As he finds in the  last  sentence
       of both [27] and [28] of the Decision,  he  has  merely  taken  into
       account the lack of any "credible reason" for this lack of evidence.
        He was entitled to ask himself why the Appellant had not called  at
       least one of those men to give supporting evidence given  that  both
       men remain in the UK and that  evidence  of  his  sexuality  was  so
       important, indeed fundamental, to the success or  otherwise  of  his
       case.  The Judge was entitled to give the Appellant's  own  evidence
       less weight in those circumstances.


   18. Turning then to the  third  ground,  the  Appellant  says  that  the
       findings  of  inconsistencies  are  non-existent,   unclear   and/or
       insufficiently reasoned. This is said to  arise  in  the  particular
       context of [23] to [25] of the Decision. I therefore set  out  those
       paragraphs below:-


           "[23] [The Appellant's] evidence in relation to E's  whereabouts
           and  his  knowledge  also  changed.   At  Paragraph  23  of  his
           statement he stated "I asked my uncle to find out about I  (sic)
           but he told me that he has not heard of him."  In evidence today
           he first said "I have been in contact with my uncle who  doesn't
           know what has happened to them" (the three present at the  party
           and including E).  When cross examined he  stated  "I  asked  my
           uncle 3 or 4 times to make enquiries but he said that he had  no
           news".  He added "Even if I find out where E is what can I  do?"
           I find that these inconsistencies damage his credibility.


            [24] The relationship was conducted, he said, with some  degree
           of secrecy.  At AIR Q126 he added "In Iran I  would  take  [E's]
           hand and walk in the street with him tjat o the  only  thing  we
           could do".  In his statement however at Paragraph 15 he  gave  a
           different account and stated "It is not  like  I  and  [E]  were
           comfortable and free to walk hand in hand in the street or parks
           or generally in public".  Today he said in evidence that he  had
           been afraid of being exposed  as  gay  although  could  give  no
           sensible explanation as to why on the night of the party he  had
           been warned on two occasions to turn down  the  music,  creating
           noise and bringing attention to himself.


            [25] He stated that his fear of discovery centred on the  video
           of him having sex with E.  At 4.1 of the SIR  he  stated  "On  9
           October me and my boyfriend were at a birthday party, he  filmed
           us having sex.  The authorities raided the house and  found  the
           evidence".  At AIR Q87 he stated "The others watched clips  they
           had recorded of us, M said he would delete it".  Today in giving
           evidence he referred to the video being on  his  mobile  'phone.
           These inconsistencies also damage his credibility."


   19. If the only  inconsistency  relied  upon  by  the  Judge  were  that
       appearing at  [23]  of  the  Decision,  I  would  have  considerable
       sympathy for the Appellant's case on  this  ground.   If  there  are
       discrepancies within those answers they are extremely nuanced (as Ms
       Everett accepted).  However, those answers have to be read  also  in
       the context of what was said in evidence  and  most  importantly  in
       light of the Appellant's evidence recorded at [13] of  the  Decision
       where the Appellant when dealing with this issue first said that his
       uncle had been told that E was  in  prison  which  contradicted  the
       Appellant's evidence  that  his  uncle  had  no  news  of  his  (the
       Appellant's) partner.  Read in the context of the Decision  overall,
       therefore, there is an inconsistency in this aspect of the case even
       though that is not spelt out at [23] of the Decision.


   20. Ms Patyna sought to persuade me in her submissions that there is  no
       discrepancy in what is said at [24] of the Decision.  I disagree. If
       the evidence given in interview was that all that the Appellant  and
       E could do is hold hands in public and in the  statement  that  they
       could not, as a couple, be comfortable and free to  behave  as  they
       wished in public  that  might  not  be  inconsistent.   However,  in
       circumstances where the Appellant very clearly says at [15]  of  his
       statement that he and E were not free to hold hands  in  public  and
       where he is recorded as stating in answer to [Q126]  of  his  asylum
       interview that this they could and did in fact do  so,  there  is  a
       very clear inconsistency.


   21. There is also the additional point made  at  [24]  of  the  Decision
       that, if the Appellant was seeking to  avoid  drawing  attention  to
       himself  and  his  sexuality  by  the  Iranian  authorities,  it  is
       difficult to see why he would fail to respond to requests to  reduce
       the volume of the music at the party which forms the other core part
       of his claim.  As Ms Everett pointed out, the core of the  claim  is
       two-fold.  On the one hand, it is the Appellant's sexuality per  se.
       On the other,  the  Appellant  says  that  his  sexuality  has  been
       discovered by the authorities by reason of their raid of the  party.
       As such, the Appellant's evidence about this event is  also  clearly
       central.


   22. That brings me on to what is said at  [25]  of  the  Decision  which
       deals with the Appellant's evidence about  why  he  fears  that  the
       authorities have come to know of his  sexuality  by  reason  of  the
       videoing of the Appellant involved in sexual activity with E, at the
       party.  The inconsistencies relied on by the  Judge  are  first,  in
       relation to who filmed the Appellant and  his  partner  having  sex,
       second whether that was a matter just between the Appellant and  his
       partner or extending also to the others at the party, third  whether
       the video was deleted or remained in existence and fourth where that
       video was stored.  If that were on the Appellant's mobile phone that
       does not sit easily with  the  Appellant's  case  that  the  Iranian
       police may have discovered it.


   23. Ms Patyna drew my attention to the answers given by the Appellant on
       the first of those issues and on  which  the  Judge  relies,  namely
       whether it was E who filmed the sexual activities.  In the screening
       interview, the Appellant said this ([4.1]):-


           "... On 9 October me and my boyfriend were at a birthday party,
           he filmed us having sex.  The authorities raided the house and
           found the evidence."


       She then directed my attention to what is said in response to  [Q87]
       of the asylum interview:-


            "Q87: Were you caught by anyone, did anyone see you?
           As I was the host I didn't cook anything.  Once we had  sex  [E]
           said he would have a shower, the others watched clips  they  had
           recorded of us.  [M] said he would delete it.  I put my  clothes
           on and [M] asked for chips."


   24. Ms Patyna first made the submission that answers in, in  particular,
       screening interviews are  not  recorded  verbatim.   I  assume  that
       submission is intended to infer that one of those answers might have
       been wrongly recorded.   However,  I  reject  that  inference.   The
       Appellant has clearly seen the interview records  as  he  refers  to
       them in his statement.  He has taken the opportunity to  respond  to
       some answers with which he disagrees or inferences drawn from  those
       answers.  Neither of the two answers which  I  have  recorded  above
       form part of that statement.


   25. Second, Ms Patyna said that it was not clear who  "he"  was  in  the
       screening interview answer.  Again, I reject that submission. It  is
       patently clear from the answer read in  context  that  "he"  in  the
       first answer is E and  that  "they"  in  the  second  answer  cannot
       conceivably be read as being E.  Indeed, in answer to  Q101  of  the
       interview, the Appellant says expressly that he "didn't remember the
       boys video recorded what we were doing".  The Judge was entitled  to
       rely on that as an inconsistency.


   26. Ms Patyna also submitted that the evidence  that  M  said  he  would
       delete the  video  and  that  this  may  have  been  seized  by  the
       authorities was  not  inconsistent  with  the  video  being  on  the
       Appellant's mobile phone.  There may be some way  of  squaring  this
       evidence.  However, it is difficult to see why on the  face  of  the
       Appellant's answers he would refer to  M  having  control  over  the
       deletion of the video evidence (and the Appellant's answer  at  Q101
       that he had forgotten about the video recording) and what  was  said
       in evidence as recorded at [12] of the Decision that this video was,
       all along, on his own mobile phone.  It also appears from what there
       follows that the mobile phone has remained in his  possession  since
       he refers to trying to contact E but being unable to do so because E
       changed his number; not because the Appellant  had  himself  changed
       his mobile phone.  If the video was stored on  the  Appellant's  own
       mobile phone it is difficult to see why  he  would  think  that  the
       video might have been seized by the authorities.


   27. Ms Patyna's other submission regarding the inconsistencies was  that
       the  Judge  had  failed   to   explain   exactly   what   were   the
       inconsistencies.  As the foregoing  demonstrates  though,  what  the
       Judge says at [23] to [25] of the Decision has to  be  read  in  the
       context of the evidence to which the Judge  there  refers  and  also
       other parts of  the  Decision  where  the  Judge  has  recorded  the
       evidence which he was given.


   28.  Taken  individually,   those   inconsistencies   may   not   appear
       particularly significant.  However, taken together and when  coupled
       with the lack of evidence from others who might reasonably have been
       expected to provide written evidence in support at  the  very  least
       and given the lack of evidential  weight  of  the  only  documentary
       evidence which the Appellant did produce (the photos), the Judge was
       entitled to reach the conclusion which he did as to the  credibility
       of the Appellant's central claim.


   29. The Judge's conclusions as to credibility  appear  at  [36]  of  the
       Decision as follows:-


            "[36]      Apart from the Appellant's oral evidence,  which  is
           inconsistent in a number of material  particulars  there  is  no
           supporting evidence to any aspect of his appeal.  He has been in
           the  UK  for  over  a  year  and  there  has  been  no  credible
           explanation as to why no effort has been  made  to  obtain  such
           evidence.  I do not find the Appellant a credible witness and do
           not believe his account that he is gay, that he was the  subject
           of interest by the authorities in Iran and would be at  risk  if
           he returned."


       Those are conclusions which the Judge was entitled to reach based on
       the earlier part of the Decision.

   30.  That  then  leads  me  on  to  the  fourth  ground  concerning  the
       alternative conclusion which appears at  [37]  of  the  Decision  as
       follows:-


            "[37]      If I am wrong and the Appellant  is  gay  I  do  not
           believe the Appellant's account that the authorities have  shown
           any interest in him while he was living in Iran.   There  is  no
           other  or  credible  evidence  to  suggest  this  is  the  case,
           irrespective of the lack of credibility shown by the  Appellant.
           I have considered  SSH  and  HR  and  note  the  conclusions  at
           Paragraph 33.  The conclusion I reach in these circumstances  is
           there is not a real risk of prosecution leading to imprisonment.
            I do not consider that the Appellant is at any risk on  return.
           In these circumstances I do not need to consider relocation."


   31. If the point which the Judge is there seeking to make  is  that  the
       Appellant would not be identified on return as a person of interest,
       questioned and prosecuted for illegal entry, there is no  difficulty
       with it.  However, if what is intended is to consider  the  risk  to
       the Appellant as a gay man  living  in  Iran,  the  conclusions  are
       clearly flawed.  First, such a conclusion  sits  uncomfortably  with
       what is said at [6]  of  the  Decision  where  both  representatives
       agreed that if the Appellant were gay he would be at risk on return.
        Second, the concession on the Respondent's part as  there  recorded
       is subject to the issue whether the Appellant would live  discreetly
       on return and if so his reasons for  so  doing.   That  issue  would
       engage the necessity to consider how HJ (Iran) applies to the  facts
       of this case, as the Appellant submits in his fourth ground.


   32. If this were  the  Judge's  primary  conclusion,  I  would  have  no
       hesitation in finding an error of law.  As it is, though, it is only
       a secondary conclusion to his primary conclusion that the  Appellant
       is not credible in his claim to be gay.  I have already  found  that
       the Judge's conclusion in this regard is unimpeachable.  It  follows
       that any error in the secondary conclusion can  be  of  no  material
       consequence because the Judge has found that the Appellant is not  a
       gay man.


   33. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
       contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.


      DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cassel
    promulgated on 29 June 2017 with the consequence that  the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed


          Signed                        Dated: 19 December 2017


[pic]

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
