
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14139/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2021 via Skype for       |On 8 June 2021                       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     FN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Wilson, BL, instructed by Bigger & Strahan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were primarily the  appellant's  bundle
from before the First-tier Tribunal, a supplementary bundle submitted on  29
April 2021, and the respondent's  bundle,  the  contents  of  which  I  have
recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content  the  proceedings
had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  7  August  1973.  He
    appeals against a decision of the respondent dated 18 December 2018  to
    refuse his human rights and protection claim, made on 14  January  2016
    in the context of a request to revoke a deportation order dated 24 July
    2013.  The appellant's appeal against the refusal of this human  rights
    and protection claim was originally heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie who, in a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  29  October
    2019, dismissed the appeal.  By a decision dated 20 August 2020,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan found  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Gillespie
    involved the making of an  error  of  law  and  set  it  aside  in  its
    entirety, with no findings of fact preserved.  Judge  Canavan  directed
    that  the  matter  be  reheard  in  this  tribunal.  It  was  in  those
    circumstances that the appeal came before me.  Judge Canavan's decision
    may be found in the Annex to this judgment.

 2. I should add that the delay between the  appellant's  protection  claim
    and the hearing before Judge Gillespie on 25 July 2019  appears  to  be
    attributable  to  the  Secretary  of  State  originally  refusing   the
    protection claim on 15 November 2017 in circumstances  which  initially
    did not attract a right of appeal.   The appellant brought  proceedings
    for judicial review challenging the certification of  the  claim  under
    section 96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the
    2002 Act').  Permission was granted by McCloskey J, as he then was,  on
    26 February 2018 sitting in the  High  Court  of  Justice  in  Northern
    Ireland.  The respondent issued a further decision  on  8  August  2018
    which still did  not  attract  a  right  of  appeal,  which  was  later
    withdrawn by the decision presently under challenge, which does attract
    a right of appeal.

Factual background

 3. There has been no challenge to the respondent's decision to refuse  the
    appellant's protection claim.  The focus of  the  appeal  before  Judge
    Gillespie, and the focus of the proceedings before me, related  to  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights ("the ECHR"), in particular as they related to his son,  SC,  an
    Irish citizen born in September 2003,  and  his  best  interests  as  a
    child.

 4. The appellant was admitted to the UK as a visitor in  2000.   He  later
    applied, unsuccessfully, for leave to  remain  as  a  student,  and  an
    appeal against a decision refusing  him  leave  in  that  capacity  was
    dismissed in 2001.  In  October  2007,  the  appellant  was  fined  for
    driving without insurance.  In January 2008, he was fined  for  driving
    without due care and attention.  In December 2012, he was sentenced  to
    four months' imprisonment, suspended for  two  years,  for  making  off
    without paying, the possession  of  articles  used  in  fraud  and  the
    possession of a class B drug. Further motoring convictions followed  in
    February 2013 for driving without insurance and without a  licence.  On
    18 May 2013 at  Laganside  Crown  Court,  Belfast,  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to 18  months'  imprisonment  for  three  offences  of  false
    representation, entering the UK lawfully but remaining  without  leave,
    using a false instrument, possession of a false identity document  with
    intent, and  two  counts  of  obtaining  property  by  deception.   The
    appellant had used false ID papers to assume the identity of another in
    order to  work  illegally.   Those  offences  triggered  the  automatic
    deportation regime in the UK Borders Act 2007 ('the 2007 Act')  leading
    to the Secretary of State making a deportation order against him on, as
    I have set out, 23 July 2013.

 5. The appellant originally appealed against the deportation order to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  10
    February 2014, a different  constitution  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal.

 6. It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  meets  the  criteria  for
    deportation: he has been sentenced to a single period  of  imprisonment
    greater than 12 months. The focus of the appellant's case is that he is
    the sole carer for  his  son,  SC.   He  has  a  Statement  of  Special
    Educational Needs  that  has  recently  been  updated.   The  appellant
    contends that it would be 'unduly harsh' for SC to remain in the United
    Kingdom without him, and that it would be unduly harsh  for  SC  to  be
    expected to accompany him to Zimbabwe.  SC  lives  with  the  appellant
    because SC's mother JJ, who lives in England, was unable  to  meet  his
    needs when he lived with her previously.   That  is  why  SC  moved  to
    Northern Ireland to live with the appellant.  SC has thrived under  the
    appellant's leadership and support since living with him  Belfast.   SC
    last lived with his mother until December 2015 when  he  went  to  live
    with the appellant.  SC's best  interests  are  for  the  appellant  to
    remain with him in the UK.

 7. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Tufan focussed his  submissions
    on whether it would be unduly harsh for SC to remain here  without  the
    appellant.  He is not far from his 18th birthday, submitted  Mr  Tufan.
    His mother can look after him for the remaining few months in which  he
    will need her support as a minor.  He will be able to relocate to  live
    with her in England, and access equivalent educational support to  that
    he enjoys in Belfast, as he did previously when living in with  her  in
    England.

Legal framework

 8. Section 32 of the 2007 Act defines those, such as this  appellant,  who
    have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12  months
    as a 'foreign criminal'. Pursuant to subsection (5), the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation  order  in  respect  of  such  a  foreign
    criminal. There are a number of exceptions contained in section 33,  of
    which the  only  relevant  exception  is  'Exception  1',  namely  that
    'removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance of the deportation  order
    would breach - (a) a person's [ECHR] rights...' (see section 33(2)(a)).

 9. The essential issue for my  consideration  is,  therefore,  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellant to be deported to Zimbabwe.  This issue is
    to  be  addressed  primarily  through  the  lens  of  public   interest
    considerations contained in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, in particular section 117C (additional  considerations
    in cases  involving  foreign  criminals):  see  section  117A(2).   The
    Immigration Rules also set out the Secretary of  State's  views  as  to
    where the public interest balance lies in relation to matters  relating
    to Article 8.

10. While, as is  her  practice,  the  Secretary  of  State  addressed  the
    appellant's human rights application as  an  application  to  revoke  a
    deportation pursuant to paragraphs 390 to 392 of the Immigration Rules,
    it was common ground at the hearing that my assessment must be pursuant
    to the considerations in Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.   When  deciding
    whether to revoke a deportation  order,  paragraph  390A  requires  the
    factors contained in paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules to be  considered.   Those  paragraphs  replicate  the  statutory
    framework contained in section 117C of the 2002 Act which, pursuant  to
    CI (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 2027 at [21]  meant  that  it  is,  'generally  unnecessary  for  a
    tribunal or court in a case in which a decision to  deport  a  "foreign
    criminal" is challenged on article 8 grounds to refer to paragraphs 398-
    399A of the Immigration Rules, as they have no additional part to  play
    in the analysis.'

11. It is for  the  appellant  to  establish  that  his  deportation  would
    interfere with his protected rights under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  It
    is for the Secretary of State to demonstrate that any interference with
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant or his family would be justified.

12. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether  the  removal  of  an  appellant
    under Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74
    at [10] per Lord Hodge.

The hearing

13. Due to the need to guard against the spread of  Covid-19,  the  parties
    appeared before me remotely.  I sat in public at Field House.   At  the
    conclusion of the hearing,  the  parties  confirmed  that  no  fairness
    concerns  had  arisen  from  the  proceedings  having  been   conducted
    remotely.  Despite the modalities of the hearing, this  appeal  was  at
    all times a Northern Ireland case, as stated by the  Vice-President  in
    his case management directions dated

14. On 29 April 2021, the appellant provided a supplementary bundle.   That
    was in breach of earlier directions  I  had  issued  following  a  case
    management hearing conducted on 8 March 2021 requiring him to  make  an
    application  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to rely on new evidence by 5 April  2021.   I  was
    told that the delay was attributable to seeking an updated Statement of
    Special Educational Needs.  There was no objection from Mr Tufan to the
    materials being admitted at that stage.

15. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 16 April 2021 and was
    cross-examined.  I will outline the salient aspects of his evidence  to
    the extent necessary to give reasons for my findings.

Discussion - Article 8 ECHR

16. Ms Wilson provided a skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant,  and
    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  had  previously
    submitted a skeleton argument on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   I
    agreed with the parties at the outset of the hearing that the focus  of
    the appeal would be Article 8 alone.

17. It is common ground  that  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  are
    engaged in relation to the appellant.  He can only  resist  deportation
    by demonstrating that his deportation would breach his ECHR rights (see
    section  33(2)(a)  of  the  2007  Act).    In   turn,   that   requires
    consideration of Part 5A to the 2002 Act.

18. The relevant exception to deportation may be found in section  117C  of
    the 2002 Act is Exception 2.  It provides:

         '(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.'

19. It is common ground that SC is a 'qualifying child' on the  basis  that
    he has lived in the UK for a continuous period of at least seven years.
     The essential question is whether it would be 'unduly harsh'  for  him
    to be expected to remain in the absence  of  SC.   While  not  formally
    conceding that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  accompany  the
    appellant to Zimbabwe, Mr Tufan did not argue  that  that  would  be  a
    realistic prospect. The focus of the proceedings was whether  it  would
    be 'unduly harsh'  for  SC  to  remain  in  this  country  without  the
    appellant.

20. There has been extensive judicial consideration of what is meant by the
    term 'unduly harsh'. Both parties took me to KO (Nigeria)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC  53,  and  HA  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  In KO
    Nigeria, the Supreme Court held that the notion of 'due'  harshness  is
    objectively set, by reference to the public interest in the deportation
    of foreign criminals.  It is not a moveable  quality,  such  that  some
    children are expected to tolerate greater levels of  harshness  from  a
    deported parent, depending on the severity of the underlying offending.
     In HA (Iraq), the Court of Appeal held that where Lord  Carnwath  held
    at [23] of (KO (Nigeria)) that  '[o]ne  is  looking  for  a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with the deportation of a  parent,'  he  was  not  purporting  to
    establish a baseline threshold  of  'ordinariness'  applicable  in  the
    lives of all children, by reference to which all assessments of 'unduly
    harsh' must be assessed.   Ms Wilson highlights the  following  passage
    from [55] of HA (Iraq):

         'There is no reason in principle why cases of "undue" harshness may
         not  occur  quite  commonly.  Secondly,  if  tribunals  treat   the
         essential question as being "is this level of harshness out of  the
         ordinary?" they may be tempted to find that Exception  2  does  not
         apply simply on  the  basis  that  the  situation  fits  into  some
         commonly-encountered pattern. That would be dangerous. How a  child
         will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend on an almost
         infinitely variable range of circumstances and it is  not  possible
         to identify a baseline of "ordinariness". Simply by way of example,
         the degree of harshness of  the  impact  may  be  affected  by  the
         child's age; by whether the parent  lives  with  them  (NB  that  a
         divorced  or  separated  father  may  still  have  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship with a child who lives with the mother); by
         the degree of the child's emotional dependence on  the  parent;  by
         the financial consequences of his deportation; by the  availability
         of emotional and financial support  from  a  remaining  parent  and
         other family  members;  by  the  practicability  of  maintaining  a
         relationship with the deported parent; and of  course  by  all  the
         individual characteristics of the child.'

21. In addition, I drew the attention of the  parties  to  TD  (Albania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ  619,  which
    had been handed down the  day  before  the  hearing.   At  [22],  Peter
    Jackson LJ summarised the import of HA (Iraq) in these terms:

         'The decision in HA (Iraq) does no more than explain that what is
         required is a case-specific approach in  which  the  decision-maker
         addresses the reality of the child's situation and fairly  balances
         the justification for deportation and its consequences. It warns of
         the danger of substituting for the  statutory  test  a  generalised
         comparison between the child's situation and a baseline of notional
         ordinariness. It affirms  that  this  is  not  what KO  (Nigeria),
         properly understood, requires.'

22. What is 'unduly harsh' for SC is, therefore,  a  highly  individualised
    assessment.  However, I must emphasise that a degree of harshness is to
    be regarded as 'acceptable or justifiable'.  My task is  to  determine,
    by reference to the evidence in this  case  and  SC's  best  interests,
    whether the inevitable harshness that would follow from the appellant's
    deportation would stray beyond that 'acceptable' (for want of a  better
    term) level.

23. By way of a preliminary observation, there can be no suggestion that it
    would be anything other than unduly harsh for SC, an  Irish  child,  to
    relocate to Zimbabwe.  I have not been taken to any evidence that would
    suggest otherwise. While Mr Tufan did not formally concede  the  point,
    equally he advanced no submissions that this would  be  an  appropriate
    course. The appellant's case that it would be unduly harsh  for  SC  to
    relocate to Zimbabwe was effectively unchallenged. For my own  part,  I
    see  no  basis  independently  of  the  appellant's  position  and  the
    respondent's acquiescence to conclude that it would be  anything  other
    than unduly harsh SC to  relocate  to  Zimbabwe.  The  focus  of  these
    proceedings is, therefore, whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for SC to
    remain here in the absence of the appellant.

24. Ms Wilson highlights how SC is wholly reliant for his  educational  and
    all other life needs on the appellant.  SC lives  with  the  appellant.
    SC is supported at school by the appellant,  who  attends  all  parent-
    teacher meetings, including  those  needed  pursuant  to  SC's  special
    educational needs.  The Statement indicates that SC's cognitive ability
    is in the broad average range, that his working memory is  in  the  low
    average range, and that his processing speed is  in  the  high  average
    ranged.  A previous assessment in his nursery year  indicated  that  SC
    had  moderate  learning  difficulties.   He   has   difficulties   with
    organisation and is forgetful regarding school  equipment.   An  autism
    referral has been made.  I have been provided with  the  Appendices  to
    the original version of the document in the original FTT trial bundle.

25. In his witness statement dated 16 April 2021,  the  appellant  outlines
    the depression, loneliness and low self-esteem experienced by  SC.   He
    has not coped well due to the pandemic, and  had  to  be  permitted  to
    attend school to use the internet there.  The family  has  very  little
    money.  The appellant writes at paragraph  10  that  JJ  would  not  be
    emotionally or mentally equipped to deal with SC's needs.  JJ's brother
    spent ten years in a secure psychiatric hospital, and JJ fears that  SC
    'might end up  like  her  brother'.   In  cross-examination,  Mr  Tufan
    challenged the appellant as to why there was no statement from  JJ;  he
    explained there had not been time to obtain one.  His  solicitors  were
    more concerned with the welfare of SC,  he  explained.  JJ  is  fragile
    mentally and had a breakdown when she cared for SC previously, when the
    appellant was in prison. He considers  that  she  is  not  in  a  state
    mentally. The family have had social workers involved previously.

26. The appellant said that he has a brother who also lives in Belfast.  He
    has three children; SC's cousins. There will be no room for SC to  stay
    with them; the family live in a two bedroomed house. His brother's wife
    does not work. The family would not be able to afford to look after SC.

27. There was a statement from SC dated 16 April 2021, which supplemented a
    statement he prepared for the proceedings before Judge Gillespie, dated
    18 July 2019.  SC did not attend the hearing because, I  was  told,  he
    was sitting an exam.  At the case management hearing on 8 March 2021, I
    canvassed the issue of whether SC would need to  attend  to  be  cross-
    examined, and explained that 'ground rules'  could  be  established  in
    order to ensure reasonable adjustments could be made to accommodate his
    vulnerabilities, in line with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.
    2 of 2010 and the Equal Treatment Bench Book.  Ms Wilson did not  apply
    for an adjournment for SC to attend in person.

SC's best interests

28. SC's best  interests  are  to  remain  in  Northern  Ireland  with  the
    appellant.  In Belfast he enjoys a supportive educational  environment.
    His Statement of Special Educational Needs has enabled him  to  receive
    additional support, including during  the  restrictions  occasioned  by
    Covid-19.  In his statement dated 18 July 2019,  SC  writes  about  his
    negative experience of living with his mother until December 2015.   JJ
    did not spend time with him.  Her younger children were a  distraction.
    He, SC, was rebellious and not productive.  He spent time  in  a  gang.
    He left the gang and they hurt his brothers.  He wants to finish school
    and go onto university.  The Statement  of  Special  Educational  Needs
    states that, 'when in Mum's care she was not always in  a  position  to
    see his needs' (see page 71, Supplementary Appeal Bundle).

29. By contrast,  time  spent  with  the  appellant  in  Belfast  has  been
    beneficial for SC.  Under the  appellant's  guidance,  he  lost  weight
    through exercising.  He has cousins and friends  in  Belfast.   He  has
    known stability since December 2015.  Through the Statement of  Special
    Educational Needs, he receives  the  additional  support  necessary  to
    complete his studies, including through repeating his current year.

30. I find that it is in SC's best interests for the  appellant  to  remain
    with him in Northern Ireland.  Although SC has cousins nearby, I accept
    the appellant's evidence that the  two  bedroomed  home  which  already
    houses  his  uncle's  family  of  five  would  be  unable  to   provide
    accommodation commensurate to that he currently enjoys with his father.

31. While SC's best interests are a primary consideration, they are not the
    sole consideration; the cumulative force of other factors may  outweigh
    his best interests.  There are certain  features  of  this  case  which
    contextualise the assessment of SC's best interests.

32. First, he is seventeen and a  half  years  old;  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, he was around five months from attaining the age of  majority.
    The difficulties he would have experienced as a twelve year old  living
    with his mother will necessarily not  present  in  the  same  way  now.
    There is no evidence  that  those  difficulties  will  continue  to  be
    present. At page 91 of the respondent's bundle  is  a  letter  from  JJ
    dated 13 January 2016  describing  how  she  previously  suffered  from
    alcoholism and struggled to  handle  SC.   The  letter  represents  the
    position over five  years  ago  when  SC  was  twelve  years  old.   No
    contemporary evidence has been provided in relation to JJ.

33. Secondly, there was no recent statement from JJ addressing the  matters
    which are said to characterise her care for SC.  There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that SC cannot live with his mother at this time.

34. Thirdly, there was no report from an independent social worker or other
    similar authority addressing the matters  asserted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in relation to SC.    Again, there is nothing to suggest that
    SC cannot live with his mother at the present time, with the benefit of
    the mentoring and support he has received  from  his  father  over  the
    course of the last five years.

35. Fourthly, aspects of the Statement of  Special  Educational  Needs  are
    plainly out of date, and have clearly been carried  over  from  earlier
    versions of the document.  For example, the current version, at page 71
    of the Supplementary Bundle, states:

         'Psychological advice (Appendix D) indicates that SC  has  recently
         returned to Northern Ireland from England where he held a statement
         of  special  educational  needs  of  the   speech,   language   and
         communication difficulties.' (Emphasis added)

    It plainly cannot be right to describe SC as having 'recently returned'
    to Northern Ireland from England.  The evidence before me suggests that
    that took place in December 2015 or  January  2016:  see  the  original
    Appendix D at page 41 of the FTT bundle.  It  appears  that  the  above
    narrative was lifted from the original Statement, at  page  21  of  the
    original FTT bundle.  In the absence of separate updating  evidence  of
    the sort outlined above, the weight to be attached to  this  document's
    impact  on  the  present  assessment  does  need   to   be   calibrated
    accordingly.

36. The references in the Statement of  Special  Educational  Needs  to  SC
    being referred for an autism assessment featured equally in the updated
    version as they do in the earlier version.  I  have  no  evidence  that
    such an assessment has actually taken place, still less that  there  is
    been an  autism  diagnosis.   As  Mr  Tufan  submits,  aspects  of  the
    Statement are of limited import.

37. It follows that, while I accept that the appellant's deportation  would
    entail a degree of harshness for SC, whether such harshness would enter
    the territory of undue harshness is a different question.  There  is  a
    paucity of evidence concerning the situation with SC's mother.  She has
    housed SC in the past.  There were difficulties in that she was  unable
    to 'see' his needs, it seems due to the pressures  of  being  a  single
    mother to three other small children, as  outlined  in  the  Statement.
    However, SC is much older now.  He had the benefit of  a  Statement  of
    Educational Needs when he lived with his mother previously,  issued  by
    the English education authorities, and there is no suggestion  that  he
    could not revert to the oversight of the relevant educational authority
    in England, upon his return.  The system has demonstrated a  degree  of
    flexibility, enabling SC's needs to be tracked from England to Northern
    Ireland.  I have not been  informed  that  SC's  current  school  is  a
    special school, or otherwise providing  educational  provision  of  the
    sort that would not be available to SC in England.  I find  that  there
    would be a sufficient degree of continuity of educational provision  in
    the event that SC returned to England to live with his mother.

38. I accept that it would be a significant blow to SC for his father to be
    deported and to have to move to  England  to  resume  living  with  his
    mother.  He is dependent upon his father.  But the evidence  concerning
    the full scope and breadth of the impact is limited.   SC is only a few
    months away from the age of majority; he will  be  old  enough  to  pay
    return visits to his father without being accompanied.   While  it  was
    stressful living with JJ when he was 12 years  old,  there  is  nothing
    before me to suggest  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  provide  the
    appellant with at least some assistance now.  SC's  cousins  and  uncle
    live in the UK.  He will not be without any family in  the  UK  in  the
    event of his father's deportation.  SC and his father would be able  to
    remain in contact on social media.

39. While there is not a baseline  notional  level  of  ordinary  harshness
    against which to measure what amounts to being 'unduly  harsh',  it  is
    nevertheless an  elevated  threshold.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    evidence in the present matter meets that threshold.  The hardship will
    not be undue.  I find that Exception 2 is not met out.

40. The remaining task is to determine whether there are  'very  compelling
    circumstances' over and above the exceptions in section 117C,  for  the
    purposes of section 117C(6).  That subsection  enables  account  to  be
    taken of other factors, not addressed by the exceptions,  in  order  to
    ensure an  overall  result  that  is  compliant  with  the  Convention.
    Pursuant to NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, although section 117C(6)  is  expressly  addressed
    only to offenders with sentences of at least  four  years,  those  with
    lower sentences are  still  entitled  to  benefit  from  the  potential
    protection of this subsection.  As  recently  held  by  the  Strasbourg
    Court in Unuane v The United Kingdom (Application no. 80343/17), it  is
    necessary to take into account all  factors  telling  for  and  against
    deportation (see, for example, [72]).  In Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  60,  the  Supreme  Court
    encouraged the use of a so-called 'balance sheet' approach in order  to
    perform this assessment, having noted the weight which the Secretary of
    State's view of the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals  attracts  (see  [53]).   I  will  conduct  a   balance-sheet
    assessment  to  determine  the  proportionality  of   the   appellant's
    prospective removal.

41. Factors in favour of the appellant's deportation are as follows:

      a. The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public  interest
         (section 117C(1) of the 2002 Act);

      b. The appellant is a foreign criminal, having offended  persistently,
         committing offences which exploited his unlawful residence  in  the
         country;

      c. The appellant does not meet either of the statutory  exceptions  to
         deportation, a factor to which weight should be attached;

      d. The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
         interest, and there is no basis under the rules or Part 5A  of  the
         2002  Act  (save  for   this   assessment   of   'very   compelling
         circumstances') for the appellant to remain in the UK;

      e. The appellant has been under an obligation to leave  the  UK  since
         the conclusion of his earlier appeal proceedings before the  First-
         tier Tribunal, in 2014, but did not.

42. Factors mitigating against the appellant's removal include:

      a. The strength and breadth of  his  relationship  with  SC,  and  the
         likely adverse  impact  upon  SC  of  the  appellant's  deportation
         (albeit that it would not be 'unduly harsh' within the  meaning  of
         section 117C(2)).  SC's interests are a primary consideration;

      b. The appellant has not  committed  any  offences  for  around  eight
         years, and the longest sentence of imprisonment he  served  was  18
         months which, while still serious, is  at  the  lower  end  of  the
         spectrum of severity;

      c. The appellant has lived  in  this  country,  albeit  mostly  as  an
         overstayer, for over 20 years.

43. Drawing these factors together, I consider that the public interest  in
    the deportation of foreign criminals outweighs the  factors  mitigating
    against his removal.  The cumulative weight of the factors in favour of
    the appellant's removal outweigh those in favour of permitting  him  to
    remain, even taking SC's best interests as a primary consideration.  SC
    will remain a child for only a few months.  He will be adequately cared
    for in this country, by his mother, and he  will  have  access  to  his
    remaining  family  members,  and  sufficient  specialised   educational
    provision wherever he lives in the UK.  SC's residence is secure  here,
    as an Irish citizen.  While the appellant has lived here  for  over  20
    years, save for  his  initial  visitor's  visa,  the  currency  of  his
    residence has been unlawful and he has had no basis to remain here.  On
    the basis of the evidence before me, the impact on SC  will  be  harsh,
    but not unduly so.  The appellant's deportation will be proportionate.

44. The  appellant  cannot  demonstrate  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the exceptions.  His deportation would  be
    proportionate.  This appeal is dismissed.

45. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Postscript (i) - Zambrano

46. There had been a suggestion that the appellant's deportation  would  be
    inconsistent with the principle enunciated in the Zambrano Case C-34/09
    line of authorities.  Ms Wilson confirmed that she did not pursue those
    arguments.  For completeness, I add that nothing in the  Zambrano  line
    of authorities would  have  led  to  a  different  conclusion.   On  my
    findings, the SC will not have to leave the UK,  and  his  relationship
    with the appellant does not demonstrate such dependency so as to compel
    him to leave the territory of the EU  in  the  event  of  his  father's
    deportation (assuming, which is by no means clear,  that  the  Zambrano
    doctrine applies in the same way now that the UK is no longer a  member
    State of the European Union).

Postscript (ii) - protection appeal

47. There has been no challenge to the Secretary of State's refusal of  the
    appellant's protection claim.   For  completeness,  I  record  formally
    that, to the extent his notice of appeal amounted to an appeal  against
    that aspect of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed on protection grounds also.

Anonymity

48. As SC is a child, I maintain the anonymity direction already in force.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 4 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14139/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision Promulgated                 |
|under rule 34 (P)                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     FN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  18  December
    2018 to refuse a protection and human rights claim in the context of  a
    decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge S.  Gillespie  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29  October  2019.  The  judge
    concluded that it would not be 'unduly harsh' on the appellant's son to
    relocate to Zimbabwe with his father or to remain in the  UK  with  his
    mother if the appellant is deported.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to apply  the  relevant  statutory  framework  and
         failed to make any findings relating to the weight to be  given  to
         public interest considerations.

     ii) The judge failed to consider  relevant  evidence  relating  to  the
         special needs of the child, failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the credibility of the witnesses'  evidence  relating  to
         the best interests  of  the  child  and  failed  to  give  adequate
         consideration to the child's evidence.

    iii) The judge failed to make any clear findings as to what was  in  the
         best interests of the child.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in an order sent on 07 January 2020 on the  ground  that
    it was arguable that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  his
    decision, failed to take into account relevant evidence or to structure
    the decision within the relevant legal framework.

5.   In the light of the need to take  precautions  against  the  spread  of
    Covid-19 the Upper Tribunal reviewed the file and  sent  directions  to
    the  parties  on  02  April  2020.  The  Vice-President  expressed  the
    preliminary view that the question of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law could be determined  on
    the papers.

6.   The appellant filed written  submissions  on  16  April  2020  and  the
    respondent  on  22  April  2020.  However,  it  was  clear   from   the
    respondent's response that she had not had  sight  of  the  appellant's
    written arguments. In an order sent on  28  May  2020,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Owens directed the appellant to serve another copy of his written
    arguments on the relevant Home Office Presenting  Officer  and  to  the
    usual Home Office address. She directed the respondent to respond  with
    any further submissions within 14 days of the date of the order.

7.   At the date this decision  is  prepared,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
    record of a further response from the respondent. I am informed by  the
    court administration that currently there is no  significant  delay  in
    processing emails filing  written  submissions.  Even  considering  the
    pressures of work arising from the Covid-19 pandemic,  I  am  satisfied
    that the respondent has had more than enough time to make  any  further
    submissions with sight of  the  appellant's  arguments.  Neither  party
    objected to the appeal being determined without a hearing.  Bearing  in
    mind the overriding objective of the Procedure  Rules  I  am  satisfied
    that I can proceed to determine the appeal without a hearing  based  on
    the written submissions filed by the parties.

Decision and reasons

8.   I have considered the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the written submissions made by both parties. I am satisfied
    that there is merit in the appellant's submissions and that the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of
    law.

9.   The appellant is a Zimbabwean national who has lived in  the  UK  since
    2000. He overstayed his initial visit visa and remained  without  leave
    thereafter. The index offence that gave rise to the  deportation  order
    was an offence of fraud, for which the appellant was  sentenced  to  18
    months' imprisonment  in  2013.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    original decision to make a deportation  order  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in 2014. At that stage the appellant's relationship
    with the mother of his children was found to be somewhat  unclear.  The
    panel also concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show  that
    he was the father of the children, who lived with their mother.

10.  The situation was quite different by  July  2019  when  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the most recent decision. Six years had passed with
    no further convictions recorded against the appellant,  the  respondent
    accepted that he was the father of the oldest child ("SC"), that SC was
    an Irish citizen, that SC had special educational needs, and  that  the
    child had lived with the appellant since 2015. The  appellant  did  not
    appear to rely on his relationship with his younger  son  (K).  Neither
    the respondent  nor  the  First-tier  Tribunal  consider  the  position
    relating to the appellant's other child.

11.  The judge  noted  that  the  2014  tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and the mother of his children but did not find  them  to  be
    credible witnesses. The judge found that he could place little reliance
    on the evidence given by the appellant at the hearing in  2019  because
    (i) of the "entire history of the appellant's deportation proceedings";
    (ii) because the appellant and his  former  partner  were  "simply  not
    credible witnesses"; and (iii) because "the  appellants'  behaviour  is
    characterised by persistent and flagrant dishonesty."[35].  Aside  from
    these generalisations, no specific reasons appear to  have  been  given
    for  rejecting  the  evidence  relating  to  the   appellant's   family
    circumstances given that most of the core  issues  about  his  parental
    relationship with the child were accepted by the respondent.

12.  The judge failed to make  any  clear  findings  relating  to  the  best
    interests of SC, which is an essential starting point before turning to
    consider whether deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on the child.  The
    judge failed to engage with the  evidence  relating  to  SC's  learning
    disabilities, which was  contained  in  a  comprehensive  Statement  of
    Special Educational Needs dated 13  June  2017  including  medical  and
    psychological assessments. The assessment outlined  behavioural  issues
    that supported the appellant's claim that SC  came  to  live  with  him
    after his mother found his behaviour too difficult to  deal  with.  The
    assessments stated that SC  was  "socially  vulnerable",  that  he  had
    "difficulty with transitions, new surroundings, new people  etc.",  and
    that Seth's mother was not always able to be "alert to and  mindful  of
    [SC's] basic needs". SC, who was 15  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, was old enough to give evidence and for his views to be  given
    weight. He described the difficulties he faced  when  living  with  his
    mother, who was distracted with younger children. He said that  he  was
    beginning to hang out with friends in a gang. His mother could not cope
    and took him to his paternal aunt in Coventry. After that  he  went  to
    live with his father in Belfast. He made new friends  since  moving  to
    Belfast. His paternal uncle and cousins live nearby. His father  helped
    him to exercise and to lose weight. SC said that he last spoke  to  his
    mother two months before the hearing and last saw her in  person  about
    five years ago. When he lived with his mum he was always moving  about.
    He said that having to move again "is really going to mess with me".

13.  The judge failed to consider this evidence  adequately  when  assessing
    the credibility of the appellant's account of his family  circumstances
    or the impact that deportation would have on the child. It was open  to
    the judge to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    convicted of dishonesty offences, but  it  does  not  follow  that  the
    appellant's evidence could be rejected  so  comprehensively  solely  on
    that ground. No attempt was made to consider whether  his  account  was
    consistent  with  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  No
    findings were made as to whether the judge accepted the evidence  given
    by SC, which was also relevant to a proper assessment of  the  evidence
    given by the appellant.

14.  The judge failed to conduct an evaluative assessment  of  the  evidence
    in assessing whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for SC to live with his
    father in Zimbabwe. No consideration was given, even in the context  of
    an Article 8 assessment, to  the  fact  that  the  child  is  an  Irish
    citizen: see Ruiz Zambrano v Office national de l'emploi  [2011]  EUECJ
    Case C-34/09. No consideration was given to the further disruption that
    would occur to a child who had already had a lot  of  upheaval  in  his
    life and who finds change difficult because of his learning disability.
    No consideration was given to the conditions the child  might  face  in
    Zimbabwe or whether relevant support would be  available  for  a  child
    with his needs.

15.  The judge failed to conduct an evaluative assessment  of  the  evidence
    in assessing whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for SC to be  separated
    from his father and would have to return to  his  mother.  The  was  no
    evaluation of SC's evidence. No consideration was given to the  child's
    history, the impact of further disruption to his life or whether  there
    might be welfare concerns relating to his mother's ability  to  provide
    adequate care.

16.  The judge failed to make any findings to explain why the  evidence  did
    not show that deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on the  child  or  to
    indicate that he was aware of the  nature  of  the  relevant  test.  He
    failed to go on to conduct an  overall  balancing  exercise  to  assess
    whether there were 'very compelling circumstances' that might  outweigh
    the  public  interest  in  deportation  taking  into  account  all  the
    circumstances including the appellant's length of residence,  the  best
    interests of the child and the fact that  there  had  been  no  further
    convictions since 2013.

17.  In short, the First-tier Tribunal failed to give  anxious  scrutiny  to
    the evidence given the importance of the human rights issues  involved.
    The reasoning was inadequate and failed to take into  account  relevant
    considerations. The findings were not linked clearly  to  the  relevant
    legal framework, if at all.

18.  For these reasons I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law and must be set aside. The Upper
    Tribunal will normally remake the decision even if further fact finding
    is necessary.

19.  Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the remaking of the decision can and should be held remotely  by  video
    conference on a date to be fixed. The Upper Tribunal currently  has  no
    capacity to hold face to face hearings in Belfast due to  the  need  to
    take precautions against the spread of Covid-19. The appellant and  his
    son do not need the assistance of an interpreter and  may  be  able  to
    give evidence by video conference with  the  assistance  of  his  legal
    representative.

Directions

20.  No later than 7 days after these  directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal (the date of sending is on the covering  letter  or  covering
      email). The parties shall file and serve by email any objection to the
      hearing being a remote hearing at all/by the proposed means; in either
      case giving reasons.

21.  If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  will
      consider  the  submissions  and  will  make  any  further   directions
      considered necessary.

22.  If there is no objection to a remote hearing, the following  directions
      supersede any previous case management directions and shall apply.

        i) The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note:
           No 1  2020:  Arrangements  During  the  Covid-19  Pandemic  when
           complying with these directions.

       ii) The appellant shall notify the Upper Tribunal and the respondent
           within 14 days of the date this order is sent:

              a) what witnesses, if any, will give evidence;

              b)  whether  any  witness  requires  the  assistance   of   an
                 interpreter, and if so, in what language.

      iii) The appellant shall be responsible for compiling and serving  an
           agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both  parties  can
           rely on at the hearing. Permission  is  given  for  up  to  date
           evidence to be filed, including any welfare assessments relating
           to the impact on the child if he were to go to Zimbabwe with his
           father or returned to live with his mother in the UK. The bundle
           should  be  compiled  and  served   in   accordance   with   the
           Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at least 14 days  before  the
           hearing.

23.  The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
      reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.



24.  Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
      sent by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
      reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the subject
      line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.

25.  Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
      original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by use
      of any address apparent from the service of these directions.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade at a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal


Signed   M.Canavan     Date 11 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

