
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14165/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    B. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;
Appellant:    Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
Respondent:   Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a Palestinian formerly resident in Lebanon, entered the UK
illegally and then made a protection claim which was refused on 5 December
2018. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard and dismissed
by First tier Tribunal Judge Turnock in a decision of 27 February 2019.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Keith on 5 April 2019. The Respondent replied to that
grant with a Rule 24 response on 1 May 2019, although neither party applied
pursuant to Rule 15(2A) to introduce further evidence.

Although this was a focus of the decision to grant permission to appeal, it
is conceded before me that there was no error of law in the Judge looking
up the evidence referred to by the Appellant's expert, and using the
reference to it that she had provided in her report [82].

The argument before me centred upon Grounds 1 and 2, and thus upon the
Judge's treatment of the expert evidence, and the reasons given for the
adverse credibility findings that he made. It is convenient to take those
complaints together not only since they overlap, but because Ms Pettersen
accepted on reflection that they were made out, with the result that the
Appellant had not enjoyed a fair hearing of his appeal.

It is common ground that at times the manner in which the Appellant's
expert expressed herself could give the impression that she had taken up
the mantle of advocate, but equally that this did not mean that no weight
could be given to any of the evidence she offered, part of which was
evidence of primary fact and not opinion. There was no issue over the
expert's expertise, and thus the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for
his conclusion that he could give only limited weight to the expert's
evidence. As such the Judge appears to have taken a broad brush approach to
the weight that could be given to the expert's evidence, when a more
nuanced approach was required. The Judge also identified in the answers
given by the Appellant at interview in Q85-9 what he described as an
inconsistency, which damaged his credibility [72]. It is common ground
before me that on a fair reading of the interview record no inconsistency
exists.

Whilst concerns were also raised in relation to some of the Judge's other
adverse findings [79 & 62], Ms Pettersen accepted on behalf of the
Respondent that the Appellant had for the reasons set out above established
that a fresh hearing is the only pragmatic course open, because it cannot
be said that the Appellant has yet had a fair hearing of his appeal. I
agree. In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the
relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier
Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties
of the opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First
Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November
2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is
such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate
that the appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph
7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than either First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock, at the North Shields
    Hearing Centre.

    An Arabic interpreter is required.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. The parties
    should expect the appeal to called on for hearing at short notice after
    7 August 2019.



Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 28 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
