
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14226/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 19 September 2019                |On: 23 September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Pickering, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

 1. I maintain the anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    respondent's international protection claim.


Background


 2. The respondent ('HA') is a citizen of Iraq, of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who
    originates from Kirkuk.


 3. In a decision dated  14  December  2018,  the  appellant  ('the  SSHD')
    refused HA's protection claim and refused  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order made against him.
    The SSHD has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ('FTT') (Judge Turner) dated 17 July 2019  in  which  HA's  appeal  was
    allowed on asylum grounds.  The FTT carefully considered HA's  evidence
    together with the country background evidence and country  guidance  in
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT  212  (IAC).   The
    FTT concluded that HA would not be able to obtain a  CSID  and  in  any
    event would be at risk in his home area, and; internal relocation would
    be unduly harsh.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The SSHD relied upon written grounds of  appeal  which  challenged  the
    FTT's findings on the (i) inability of HA to obtain a CSID; (ii) safety
    of return to Kirkuk and (iii) reasonableness of internal relocation  to
    the Iraqi Kurdish Region ('IKR').  The SSHD was granted  permission  to
    appeal by FTT Judge Pooler in a decision  dated  13  August  2019.   He
    observed it to be arguable that the FTT erred in law,  inter  alia,  in
    failing to take into account  the  SSHD's  assertion  in  the  decision
    letter that the Iraqi Embassy had approved a 'laissez-passer' for HA.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mrs Pettersen accepted that if she was unable
    to persuade me that the FTT made an error of law  in  relation  to  the
    CSID issue, it followed that the  other  two  grounds  of  appeal  were
    immaterial.  Mrs Pettersen therefore confined her submissions  entirely
    to one point: the FTT  failed  to  appreciate  that  the  SSHD  had  an
    approved 'laissez passez' for HA.   When I pointed out that the country
    guidance in AAH makes it clear that such a document is  not  sufficient
    to result in a CSID, Mrs Pettersen took the time to  check  AAH.   Upon
    doing so she indicated that she was obviously in difficulty and had  no
    further submissions to make.  In the circumstances, I did not  need  to
    hear from  Ms  Pickering  and  announced  that  the  SSHD's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

 6.  I now provide my decision with reasons, which I can set  out  briefly,
    given the position adopted on behalf of the SSHD at the hearing  before
    me.

Error of law discussion

 7.   The head note in AAH includes the following (my emphasis):

           "1.       Whilst  it  remains  possible  for  an  Iraqi national
           returnee (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or
           do so within  a  reasonable  time  frame,  will  depend  on  the
           individual circumstances. Factors to be considered include:


           i)                Whether P has any other form of documentation,
           or information about the location of  his  entry  in  the  civil
           register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage  certificates  or  an
           expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance. For someone
           in possession of one or more  of  these  documents  the  process
           should  be  straightforward.  A  laissez-passer  should  not  be
           counted for these purposes: these  can  be  issued  without  any
           other form of ID being available, are not of any  assistance  in
           'tracing back' to the family record  and  are  confiscated  upon
           arrival at Baghdad;


           ii)              The location  of  the  relevant  civil registry
           office. If it is in an area held, or formerly held, by ISIL,  is
           it operational?


           iii)            Are there male family members who would  be able
           and willing to attend the civil registry  with  P?  Because  the
           registration system  is  patrilineal  it  will  be  relevant  to
           consider whether the relative is from  the  mother  or  father's
           side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would  be  able
           to assist in locating the original place of registration of  the
           individual's mother, and from there the trail would need  to  be
           followed to the place that her  records  were  transferred  upon
           marriage. It must also be  borne  in  mind  that  a  significant
           number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves undocumented; if  that  is
           the case it is unlikely that they  could  be  of  assistance.  A
           woman without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
           redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in  that
           officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.


           Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court  of  Appeal's
           decision in  AA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944  is  replaced
           with the following guidance:


           2.       There are currently  no  international  flights  to the
           Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom
           are to Baghdad.


           3.       For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin in
           possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the  journey  from
           Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land,  is  affordable  and
           practical and can be made without a real  risk  of  P  suffering
           persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment nor would any
           difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


           4.       P is unable to board a domestic flight  between Baghdad
           and the IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


           5.       P  will  face  considerable  difficulty  in  making the
           journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land without  a  CSID  or
           valid  passport.  There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en   route,
           including two checkpoints  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
           airport. If P has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a
           real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint until such time as
           the security personnel are able to verify P's  identity.  It  is
           not reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and IKR by
           land absent the ability  of  P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
           checkpoint. This normally requires  the  attendance  of  a  male
           family member and production of P's identity documents  but  may
           also be achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up in  the
           chain of command."

 8. AAH makes it clear at [100] that a critical part of the enquiry will be
    what documents the individual in question has or might be  expected  to
    get.  The FTT accepted HA does not have a CSID and would not be able to
    engage the necessary support of any family members to get one.  He  has
    been outside of Iraq for 20 years and  has  no  family  in  Iraq.   The
    suggestion in the grounds of appeal that HA could obtain a CSID  via  a
    national back up  in  Baghdad  entirely  fails  to  address  the  FTT's
    findings at [36] that he does not  have  the  requisite  identification
    (such as a birth certificate) and the fact that he does not have family
    to vouch for him.  The grounds of appeal make no meaningful attempt  to
    challenge the FTT's finding that the country guidance in  AAH  must  be
    applied, notwithstanding further country evidence set out in the SSHD's
    CPIN.

 9. I do not accept the suggestion in the grounds of appeal  that  the  FTT
    failed to take into account the assertion in the decision  letter  that
    the Iraqi Embassy had  approved  a  laissez-passer  for  HA.   The  FTT
    referred to the use of a laissez passer at [16]  when  summarising  the
    SSHD's case.   In  any  event  as  Mrs  Petersen  acknowledged,  it  is
    significant that the headnote in AAH  (which  remains  binding  country
    guidance) is itself supportive of the FTT's reasoning that HM would not
    have the relevant form of identification  for  CSID  purposes.   It  is
    clear from AAH that a laissez passez is insufficient -  see  the  third
    sentence of the headnote at [1(i)] of AAH.  The contrary suggestion  in
    the decision letter is inconsistent with the country guidance  and  was
    not accepted by the FTT.

10. I turn briefly to the  other  grounds  of  appeal.   The  FTT  provided
    adequate reasons why Kirkuk remains unsafe at [31] - [33].  The grounds
    of appeal merely disagree with this finding.  In any event, the grounds
    do not articulate how, assuming HA will  be  safe  in  Kirkuk,  he  can
    travel without a CSID to either Kirkuk or the IKR.  Headnote [2] of AAH
    unequivocally states that there are no  flights  to  the  IKR  and  all
    returns from the UK are to Baghdad.  As headnote [4]  and  [5]  of  AAH
    make clear, HA would be unable to board a plane from Baghdad to the IKR
    or  travel  overland  safely  without  a  CSID.   AAH  remains  country
    guidance, notwithstanding the evidence contained in  the  SSHD's  CPIN.
    It follows that the finding that HA would not be able to obtain  a  new
    CSID was sufficient to dispose of the appeal in HA's favour.

11.  The  finding  that  HA  would  be  unable  to  access  employment  and
    accommodation in the IKR has been adequately reasoned by the FTT and is
    entirely consistent with [9] and [10] of the headnote in AAH.


Decision

12. The SSHD has not identified an error of law in the decision of the  FTT
    and is not set aside.




Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Dated: 19 September 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
