

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/14100/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 August 2019                        |On 4 September 2019             |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               Sabah Muhammed

                           (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)










                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with  the
   permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 11 February 2019  following
   a hearing of 22 January 2019 and which was sent  to  the  parties  on  28
   February 2019. The tribunal decided  to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal
   against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  of  06  December  2018,
   refusing to grant him international protection.

2. Shorn of all but the essentials, the  account  offered  by  the  claimant
   when seeking international protection may be summarised as follows: He is
   an Iraqi national, of Kurdish ethnicity, from Sulaymaniyah  which  is  in
   the part of Iraq under Kurdish administrative control (IKR). Towards  the
   latter end of 2016 he converted from Islam to Christianity and  commenced
   a relationship with a Muslim female. In June 2018 her  family  discovered
   the relationship and the  conversion.  They  threatened  him.  They  also
   informed his own family of the situation and his family disowned him. The
   claimant says, if returned to Iraq, he will be killed by members  of  the
   Muslim female's family because of  the  relationship  and  will  also  be
   killed because of his conversion.

3. The Secretary of State did not believe the claimant and nor,  on  appeal,
   did the tribunal. It is worth noting that the claimant gave oral evidence
   before the tribunal and had the  benefit  of  legal  representation  from
   experienced counsel.

4.  The tribunal explained  why  it  was  disbelieving  the  claimant,  with
   respect to both the relationship and the conversion, in a passage running
   from paragraph 12 to paragraph 27 of its written  reasons.  It  does  not
   appear to have been argued before the tribunal, or  indeed  subsequently,
   that if the claimant was disbelieved he could, nevertheless, succeed.

5. The claimant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  He
   did so without representation but he  did  have,  as  he  told  me,  some
   assistance in formulating his grounds of  appeal  and  in  formulating  a
   subsequently prepared skeleton argument.  The  grounds,  in  a  nutshell,
   contended that the tribunal had simply agreed with the  findings  of  the
   Secretary of State and had failed to adequately consider his evidence  in
   various respects. The skeleton  argument  sought  to  build  on  that  by
   arguing that the tribunal had made  a  succession  of  incorrect  factual
   findings and had, in consequence, reached incorrect conclusions.

6. Permission to appeal was granted and the granting judge said this:

       'It is arguable  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  imposed  her  own
       beliefs, understanding of religious precepts and cultural and social
       mores upon the appellant in reaching her  findings  on  credibility.
       That is not to say that the appellant will succeed in his appeal but
       the threshold of arguability is reached'.

7. Permission having been granted there  was  a  hearing  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered whether the  tribunal
   had erred in law and, if it had, what should flow from that. The claimant
   was present but unrepresented before me. Mrs  Pettersen  represented  the
   Secretary of State. I am grateful to each of them. The claimant, in large
   measure, simply relied upon the points made in his grounds of appeal  and
   in the skeleton argument. He did, though, suggest that the granting judge
   had been correct in saying the tribunal had  sought  to  impose  its  own
   personal views. He did not think there had been  many  contradictions  in
   his account. His life would not be safe if he were returned. A particular
   Christian website, the existence of which  the  tribunal  had  seemed  to
   doubt, does exist and is easy to access. Mrs  Pettersen,  for  her  part,
   argued that the tribunal had reached detailed findings which it had  been
   entitled to reach and that the  points  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
   claimant did not go beyond disagreement with the factual findings.

8. The tribunal's assessment as to credibility is, in my judgment,  careful,
   extensive and cogent. It is, of course, commonly the case  that  where  a
   number of adverse credibility points are taken, some  are  stronger  than
   others. In particular, with respect to this credibility  assessment,  the
   tribunal did not think the claimant had  persuasively  explained  why  he
   became interested in Christianity (paragraph 18 of the written  reasons).
   The tribunal did not think it credible that the claimant, as a  Christian
   convert, lacked knowledge about the faith apart from an understanding  of
   the significance of Christmas (see paragraph 23). The tribunal found  the
   claimant's credibility to be damaged by his failure to  claim  asylum  in
   Italy and France which were countries he had passed through on his way to
   the United  Kingdom  (see  paragraph  26).  Those  were  all  matters  of
   significance to which the tribunal was  entitled  to  attach  substantial
   weight. The tribunal identified other credibility concerns too.

9. In my judgment the grounds and the points made in the  skeleton  argument
   are really no  more  than  attempted  disagreement  with  the  tribunal's
   factual findings. The  claimant  (understandably  because  he  is  not  a
   lawyer) was unable to meaningfully add to  what  had  been  said  in  the
   grounds and the skeleton, before me. I do not see  that,  notwithstanding
   the terms of the grant, the tribunal did seek to impose its  own  beliefs
   or understanding  when  evaluating  the  credibility  of  the  claimant's
   account. There were certainly instances where it took points  based  upon
   plausibility but in doing that it does not seem to me that it  was  doing
   anything more than applying a straightforward and common-sense approach.

10. In the circumstances I have concluded that the tribunal did not  err  in
   law. Accordingly, this appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

Decision

The tribunal's decision did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.
Accordingly, that decision shall stand and  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I do not direct anonymity. Such was not  directed  by  the  tribunal.  There
does not seem to be any reason to direct anonymity and it was not sought.


      Signed

            M R Hemingway
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                   Dated                                1 September 2019

