
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/14222/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 April 2017                         | On 9 May 2017                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     EM
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F. Clarke of Counsel instructed by Fadiga and Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver, promulgated on 3  February  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.
 2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "In respect of the report prepared by the Competent Authority, that was
    prepared on behalf of  the  Home  Office.   The  Competent  Authority's
    conclusions are not binding on the judge and it is  a  matter  for  the
    judge as to what weight is attached to it.  However, in respect of  the
    expert report, it does seem that the  judge  has  given  little  or  no
    consideration to it.  The judge simply makes a short reference  to  the
    expert report at paragraph 27 of the  decision  and  nothing  more.   I
    further note that at paragraph 21 of the  decision,  the  judge  states
    that the expert had not explained why she was  qualified  to  write  an
    expert country report.  The judge makes no reference to  section  5  of
    the expert's report where the  expertise  and  qualifications  are  set
    out."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard brief submissions from  Ms
    Clarke following which Mr. Nath stated that he agreed that the decision
    involved the making of a material error of law and should be set aside.
     I stated that I was in agreement  with  the  representatives.   I  set
    aside the decision, and stated that my full reasons would follow.


Decision and Reasons on the Error of Law


 5. The findings and reasons  are  very  brief,  consisting  of  just  five
    paragraphs, [27] to [31].  The judge refers to  the  expert  report  at
    [21].  This paragraph states:


    "The appellant subsequently submitted a  part-prepared  country  report
    from Sonia Landesmann and sought more time for the  completion  of  the
    report.  When this was refused  the  completed  report  was  submitted.
    Miss Landesmann  clearly  produced  a  very  detailed  report,  largely
    drawing on third party  sources  but,  although  she  gave  substantial
    citations to support her qualification as a  psychotherapist,  did  not
    explain why she was qualified to write an expert country report."


 6. There is no further reference to this report apart  from  in  paragraph
    [27] where the judge states that he is "not persuaded that the findings
    of the  psychotherapist  are  reliable  since  she  had  not  seen  the
    contradictory evidence of the proxy  permission".   This  is  the  full
    extent of the consideration given to the expert report in the findings.




 7. I have carefully considered the expert report.  I find that in  section
    5, in addition to setting out her qualifications as a  psychotherapist,
    Miss. Landesmann sets out her experience of  preparing  expert  reports
    for Tribunal hearings.  She sets out her experience and  qualifications
    relating to Albania.  In particular, the report states:


    "Since 2003 I have written over a hundred reports for asylum cases many
    of which have been for Albanian issues such  as  trafficking,  domestic
    violence and blood feuds." [vii]


    "I have worked extensively with asylum seekers and refugees  since  the
    1980s abroad and subsequently in the UK as a teacher, a psychotherapist
    and as an expert assessing  mental-health  and  writing  a  variety  of
    country and psycho-social  reports...  [...]  This  includes  different
    levels of Tribunal." [viii]


    "I have written several country expert reports, and  conducted  several
    mental-health assessments for psycho-social reports, numbering  over  a
    hundred since 2003.  [...] Many have been on Albania and have  included
    blood feuds, trafficking, homosexuality and the position of  women  and
    children." [xxii]


    "Please note that although I have  not  been  able  to  spend  time  in
    Albania it is the case that I have worked on a  number  of  cases  from
    Albania both for cultural comment and psycho-social  reports.   I  have
    therefore had the opportunity to meet and interview a number of clients
    from Albania.  It is the case that I have had the  opportunity  to  ask
    questions in  much  more  detail  of  situations  specific  to  matters
    relating to honour, family, culture, blood feuds, trafficking and other
    matters often occurring in Asylum claims.  I will have had  the  chance
    to meet people affected by these  issues  in  a  manner  and  with  the
    opportunity for more intimate conversations then I would most  probably
    have done had I attempted to do so in situ in Albania." [xxiii]


 8. The judge has stated that Miss. Landesmann did not explain why she  was
    qualified to write an expert country report.  However, I find  that  in
    section 5 of her report she set out exactly  that.   She  set  out  her
    qualifications  and  experience  of  preparing  reports  for   Tribunal
    hearings, as well as her experience in relation to Albania.  The  judge
    has not considered this, or made any reference to it, and has therefore
    placed no weight on Miss. Landesmann's report.


 9. The issues covered  in  the  expert  report  go  to  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  To fail  to  give  any  attention  to  this  expert
    report, discounting it because of the  alleged  lack  of  expertise  of
    Miss. Landesmann, is a material error of law.


10. In relation to the report of the Competent Authority, the judge  refers
    to this under the title "Development of the appellant's case" [14].  He
    states:


    "On 16  August  2016  the  appellant  was  referred  to  the  Competent
    Authority to consider his claim to be the victim of slavery.   Although
    a reasonable grounds finding was made the conclusive grounds assessment
    on 28 October 2016 found that he was not a victim.   The  reasons  were
    summarised:


         x."


11. The judge did not set out the reasons why the Appellant was  found  not
    to be a victim of slavery.  All that appears is an "x".


12. Whilst it is a matter for the judge to decide  what  weight  is  to  be
    given to the Competent Authority's report, he has not even set out  the
    reasons why the Appellant was found not to be a victim in this  report.
    Further, he has not stated in his findings ([27] to [31])  what  weight
    he has given to the report of the Competent Authority,  nor  given  any
    reasons for attaching weight to the report.  It is not clear whether he
    has accepted the Competent Authority's findings.  There is  no  finding
    to this effect.  I find that the judge has failed to explain why he has
    given weight to the report of the Competent Authority, if indeed he has
    done so.


13. Although not pleaded in the grounds of appeal, I note  that  the  judge
    has made no reference at all to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No
    2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.
    The Appellant is 16 years old.  There was  evidence  before  the  judge
    that he suffers from PTSD.  He is therefore both a  vulnerable  witness
    in relation to his age and in relation to his mental  health  problems,
    yet there is no reference at all to the protocol to be followed in such
    circumstances, and the  subsequent  treatment  of  the  evidence  as  a
    result.  I find that this is a material error of law.


14. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


17. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Oliver.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

