
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14258/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th October 2019                          |On 19th November 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     EC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Loke promulgated on 17  July  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 14 December 2018 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania,  born  on  7  April  2003,  who
    claims to have arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom on  14  June
    2018 and claimed asylum on 18 June 2018.  The basis of the  Appellant's
    asylum claim is that he would be at risk on return to Albania as a  gay
    man.  In a decision dated 14 December 2018, the Respondent refused  the
    Appellant's asylum claim but granted him limited leave to remain as  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking minor.  The asylum claim  was  refused  as
    implausible and with adverse credibility findings made under section  8
    of the Assignment Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004
    because the Appellant had failed to claim asylum in  either  France  or
    Belgium prior to his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   Further,  there
    would be a sufficiency of protection  available  to  the  Appellant  in
    Albania and he would be able to internally relocate.

 3. Judge Loke dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  17  July
    2019 on all grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal found the Appellant to be
    a vulnerable witness on account of his age and  therefore  applied  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010, noting in particular
    the different ways in which a person's age can  affect  their  evidence
    and in paragraph 12 a number of matters relied upon by  the  Respondent
    were attributed solely to the Appellants age and not points which  were
    material consistencies or affected the  Appellant's  credibility.   The
    Appellant's claim was found to be consistent with objective evidence as
    to the country conditions in Albania.  However, the First-tier Tribunal
    made adverse credibility findings on other issues not attributed all to
    the  Appellant's  age,  including  first,   inconsistency   about   the
    Appellant's relationship with  K;  secondly,  inconsistency  about  the
    Appellant's account of an incident in a Park; thirdly, confusion in the
    Appellant's account about  the  need  for  secrecy;  and  finally,  the
    implausibility of the Appellant's claim to  have  been  imprisoned  and
    threatened by his father for almost a year but supported by his family,
    financially and organisationally to send him to the United Kingdom  for
    a better life.  Overall the Appellant's claim was not considered to  be
    reasonably likely and dismissed on credibility grounds.

The appeal

 4. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in  determining  the  Appellant's
    sexuality by reference to sexual acts rather than identification  as  a
    homosexual.  Secondly, that there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  the
    appeal in the way that  questions  were  put  to  the  Appellant  about
    whether  he  'liked'  another  boy,  with  reliance  on  references  to
    friendship without recognition that friendship is not necessarily  only
    platonic.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to
    acknowledge that the country  evidence  in  relation  to  Albania  with
    consistent with  the  Appellant's  claim  of  ill-treatment  by  family
    members, including  hiding  a  person  way,  beatings  and  ultimately,
    banishment.

 5. At the oral hearing, Mr Gilbert on behalf of the  Appellant  relied  on
    the written grounds of appeal and made  detailed  oral  submissions  by
    reference to the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  relation
    to the first and second grounds of appeal, Mr  Gilbert  emphasised  the
    context of the Appellant's claim and repeated statements in written and
    oral evidence that he was gay, describing his relationship  in  Albania
    as something other than platonic.  The Appellant in evidence used broad
    terms of friendship and  'liking'  another  person,  not  in  a  purely
    platonic way but in the context of his developing gay identity.  It was
    submitted that it was procedurally unfair for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to interpret the Appellant's evidence in a purely platonic way  without
    any notice or clarification as to the terms used.

 6. As to the findings in paragraphs 15 and 16  of  the  decision,  dealing
    with reasons for the adverse credibility finding about  consistency  of
    the evidence about the incident in the park and about how this  led  to
    discovery of the  Appellant's  sexuality,  Mr  Gilbert  submitted  that
    taking into account the Appellant is a minor and gave evidence  through
    an  interpreter,  there  was  no  material  inconsistency  between  his
    reference to kind of embracing a  person  in  the  park  and  his  oral
    evidence that he was holding hands with that person whilst  walking  in
    the park.  Mr Gilbert referred to the Appellant's chronology,  that  he
    claimed events were building from  2016,  from  when  he  was  seen  as
    different by other people and  being  bullied  in  the  run-up  to  the
    incident in the park, leading to gossip  and  his  father  finding  out
    about his sexuality.

 7. In relation to the third ground of appeal, it was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's account to have been hidden away, subjected to violence and
    then being ejected from the family home, was consistent with background
    evidence available to the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  removal  from
    Albania was wholly consistent with the level of  family  shame  of  the
    Appellant's  sexuality  in  the  context  of  an  extremely  homophobic
    attitude in Albanian society and that ultimately  this  could  only  be
    avoided by the Appellant leaving Albania.  It was however accepted that
    there was nothing in the expert report about  parents  facilitating  or
    paying for child to go to another country,  only  that  they  would  be
    abandoned or banished from the family.

 8. On behalf of the  Respondent,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  adverse
    credibility findings made in relation to the incident in the park  were
    entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence before it,  in
    particular that the Appellant had clearly  put  this  incident  as  the
    point in time and which is problem started and that he had  no  profile
    and no identification in relation to his sexuality prior to that.   The
    Appellant's evidence was  inconsistent  about  the  event  between  his
    written statement, his oral evidence and his initial interview.

 9. Further, there was no procedural unfairness, in particular  given  that
    the Appellant was  legally  represented,  he  was  not  re-examined  or
    questioned on the terms used and no submissions were made on this point
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  This could have been explored  by  Counsel
    and in any event the Appellant's age was expressly taken  into  account
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. On the third ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    submissions on the facilitation of his travel out of  Albania  required
    speculation on the family motives which was not in evidence before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  decision  expressly   records   that   the
    background evidence has been taken into account in the decision and  in
    circumstances where the Appellant did not say he was being punished  or
    sent away from Albania, but being taken away for a better life, it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to find on the evidence that his  claim
    was  not  consistent.   Overall  it  was  submitted  that  the  adverse
    credibility findings made against the Appellant were open to the First-
    tier Tribunal on the evidence and the  grounds  of  appeal  essentially
    amounted to disagreement with the findings made rather than identifying
    any legal error.

Findings and reasons

 1. In order to assess whether there is an error of law on  the  first  and
    second grounds relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,  it  is  necessary  to
    consider more specifically the nature of the findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal and the evidence that was before  it  relevant  to  these
    matters.  The key findings in paragraphs 14 to 16 as follows:

         "14.  There are however key  credibility  issues  which  I  do  not
         assess to be  attributed  to  the  Appellant's  age,  and  which  I
         consider to  be  central  to  the  Appellant's  case.   First,  the
         Appellant indicated in his asylum interview that both K and himself
         disclosed their feelings for each other and were in a  relationship
         together [A1 Q76-78].  The Appellant stated that  they  kept  their
         relationship a secret [AI Q81-82].   However,  in  the  Appellant's
         oral evidence, when pressed about the nature of the relationship he
         re-characterised the relationship with  K,  describing  K  as  'his
         closest friend'.  When asked what he did with K that was  different
         to any other friendship with another male he stated that they would
         hang around together all the time.  When I asked the  Appellant  if
         he and K ever had a sexual relationship, the Appellant denied this.
          Thus there is a key inconsistency between the type of relationship
         the Appellant described an interview, a 'relationship' that he felt
         had to be kept  secret;  and  the  'closest  friendship'  that  the
         Appellant described in oral evidence that was not in  fact  sexual.
         This inconsistency clearly goes to the heart of this asylum  claim,
         namely the Appellant's sexuality which he claims was  evidenced  in
         his relationship with K.

         15.  Secondly, the Appellant indicated in his asylum interview that
         he and K were seen embracing in the park.  This  is  maintained  at
         [10] of his witness statement dated 24 June 2019.  However, in oral
         evidence the Appellant states  that  he  and  K  were  simply  seen
         walking in the park and holding hands.  Strangely, the incident  in
         the park is not mentioned at all in the Appellant's statement of 13
         September 2018.  At [9] of that statement the Appellant states  his
         problem started when he was 12 and people realised he was gay.  The
         Appellant goes on to state  he  did  not  behave  like  other  male
         friends, making no mention of  the  park  incident.   However,  the
         Appellant stated in oral evidence that the park  incident  was  the
         sole  key  event  from  which  others  discerned  the   Appellant's
         sexuality.  Thus, I would expect, notwithstanding  the  Appellant's
         age, that he would be consistent about the park incident, and their
         activity in the park.

         16.  Thirdly, there is resulting in confusion  in  the  Appellant's
         account for the need for  secrecy.   In  interview  at  Q81-82  the
         Appellant is clear that he and K had to keep their  relationship  a
         secret.  Whatever the feelings were as disclosed between  Appellant
         and K, given the Appellant in oral  evidence  confirmed  that  this
         friendship was nonsexual, there is  no  reason  why  the  Appellant
         would  need  to  keep  it  secret  as  claimed  in  his  interview.
         Furthermore, at [41] of the Appellant's statement of 24  June  2019
         the Appellant states that his embrace of K in the park was  nothing
         unusual.   As  indicated  previously,  the  Appellant  changed  his
         evidence stating that he and  K  were  holding  hands  rather  than
         embracing.  In any event, this begs the question as to how such  an
         incident  immediately  led  to  the  Appellant's  sexuality   being
         discovered."

 2. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal from the Appellant was,  in
    summary, as follows.

 3. In his asylum interview, the Appellant was asked a series of  questions
    about when he realised that he was gay and whether he was identified by
    others as such or treated differently.  He stated that he realised when
    he was 12 years old 'because I had a close male friend ... and  he  was
    living there next to my house ... we were kind of related together, and
    this is how it started kind of neutral liking, he said  to  me  I  like
    you' [AI Q40].  The Appellant stated that he felt  different  to  other
    boys because he didn't like having arguments with them or getting  into
    fights, but others noticed that  he  was  different,  hitting  him  and
    swearing at him from around the middle  of  2016.   [AI  Q45-51].   The
    Appellant was asked whether he openly expressed his sexuality, which he
    denied and was further  asked  about  why  he  was  beaten  up  if  his
    sexuality was not known.   His  answer  to  this  at  question  55  was
    'because they saw me and my close friend, in a park and we were kind of
    embracing each other and other  people  saw  us  and  then  after  they
    started telling everyone in the school and everyone on the  street  and
    after  a  while  everyone  knew  about  this'.   Later  in  his  asylum
    interview, the Appellant stated that he was in a relationship  with  K,
    having been drawn to him because they were so close to each  other  and
    knew each other very well.  The relationship was kept secret  and  they
    didn't tell anyone about it before the incident in the park,  following
    which schoolchildren and teachers treated him differently, as  did  his
    family who then kept him locked in at home.

 4. In his written statement dated 13 September 2018,  Appellant  describes
    problems starting when he was 12 years old when people told him he  was
    not normal and not like his other  male  friends,  following  which  he
    realised he was attracted to boys.  He said at school that he would get
    pushed around and beaten up and he had no support  or  protection  from
    staff at the school.  In paragraph 12 the  Appellant  stated  that  his
    problems further escalated because his father found  out  from  rumours
    that were spread by villagers  and  that  day  (without  specifying  or
    describing events of a particular day) when he came home, he was beaten
    by his father.  In relation to K the Appellant stated "I  had  a  close
    friend, K from my area.  We grew up together and he was very  close  to
    me.  He was the only person who believed in me and trusted me.  I  knew
    that he liked me and I liked him back.  We were able to  be  open  with
    one another, we were very happy with  one  another.   Even  during  our
    problems at school, we faced them together knew that at the end of  the
    day we could confide in each other and understand each other.   However
    when our families found out we were not allowed to see one another  and
    this made the situation even more difficult."

 5. In his written statement for the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,
    the Appellant addressed matters raised in the Respondent's reasons  for
    refusal letter, including the Appellant's trust of K, who he  told  the
    liked after K had told him that he  was  gay  and  that  he  liked  the
    Appellant.  In relation to the incident  in  the  park,  the  Appellant
    confirmed that he and K embraced one another in public but stated  that
    there was nothing wrong  with  that  as  everyone  hugged  each  other,
    including family members, friends and people who see each other to  say
    hello.  He stated that people started to speak and gossip about him and
    K, with word getting round and his family hearing  rumours  from  other
    people.

 6. Whilst there is not a transcript as such available of  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, there is a  typed  record
    of proceedings on file from the Judge and a handwritten record from the
    Appellant's Counsel.  There is no suggestion by the Appellant that  the
    oral evidence given by him has  been  mis-recorded  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or misrepresented in the decision, nor is there any dispute as
    to the records which are available; the ground of appeal turns  on  the
    interpretation given by the Judge  to  the  evidence.   Throughout  the
    Appellant's  oral  evidence,  the  term  predominantly  used  both   in
    questions and answers about the Appellant's  feelings  for  others  was
    'like' or 'liking'.  The term was not expressly  defined  or  explained
    either in questions or answers, but  was  clearly  in  the  context  of
    feelings rather than purely platonic friendship.

 7. The Appellant was separately asked how  his  relationship  with  K  was
    different from that with his other male friends,  which  the  Appellant
    responded that he didn't understand the question.  He  was  then  asked
    whether he did the same things with his other male friends  as  he  did
    with K, to which  he  said  no.   The  Appellant  was  asked  what  was
    different, he said, we hung around together and went to places together
    and we stayed a lot together as for the other male  friends  they  were
    different.  It was put to the Appellant that what he described was just
    a friendship, to which he responded 'he was my closest friend'.

 8. Taking into account all the evidence that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the terminology used in evidence and the  context,  including
    the Appellant's age and the nature of his asylum claim that he  was  at
    risk of persecution on return to Albania because of his sexuality, I do
    not find any procedural unfairness nor any error of law in the  adverse
    credibility  findings  reached,  which  were  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of what was before them.

 9. It is not in dispute that a person's sexuality is not defined by sexual
    acts, but I do not find that this was the approach taken by the  First-
    tier  Tribunal,  which  at  its  highest  simply  recorded   that   the
    relationship between the Appellant and K was not a sexual one, nor  had
    the Appellant ever suggested that it was.  There was instead a separate
    consideration of the nature of the relationship, based on the  evidence
    available and whether that supported the credibility of the Appellant's
    claim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  adverse  credibility
    findings on the basis that the Appellant's claimed relationship with  K
    was not sexual, but on the basis that it  simply  didn't  go  beyond  a
    friendship nor was it different  to  any  other  friendships  that  the
    Appellant had.  In particular it  is  notable  that  when  specifically
    asked what was different, the Appellant could not explain any  specific
    differences or different things that he did with K  compared  to  other
    male friends and when challenged as to whether it was just a friendship
    he simply stated that K was his closest  friend.   That  is  consistent
    with the way he initially  described  his  relationship  with  K  in  a
    statement in 2018, which was in terms of friendship and supporting each
    other.  On this evidence, it was open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    find that there was only a close friendship between the  Appellant  and
    K, not a relationship or anything more and that in these circumstances;
    this did not support the Appellant's claim to be homosexual.

10. Those findings are similarly not  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal attached any specific or purely platonic definition on the use
    of the term 'like' which was predominantly used on  all  sides  by  the
    parties as shorthand for the Appellant's feelings for  other  boys  and
    there is nothing in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  suggest
    that it was taken in anything other than  this  context.   The  reasons
    given by the First-tier Tribunal do not  draw  any  adverse  inferences
    from the particular language used in evidence and as such there  is  no
    procedural unfairness in the hearing or decision which could amount  to
    an error of law.

11. Finally, in relation to the adverse credibility findings, the  findings
    in relation in particular to the claimed  incident  in  the  park  were
    properly open to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  evidence  before  it.
    There was  an  inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's  claim  as  to  what
    precisely happened, why it would happen at all if the relationship  was
    being kept a secret, whether if, as claimed, it  was  normal  behaviour
    for family and friends to embrace in public, why  this  would  identify
    the  Appellant  as  gay  and  as  to  the  chronology  on  whether  the
    Appellant's problems first  started  before  or  after  this  incident.
    These inconsistencies are indisputable on the evidence and could not be
    explained by the Appellant's age or that his evidence was given through
    an interpreter.  For these reasons I find no material error of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision on either the first or second ground
    of appeal.

12. As to the final ground of appeal,  this  relates  to  the  findings  in
    paragraph 17 of the decision which were as follows:

         "Finally the Appellant's account of his father imprisoning him in a
         room for almost a year and threatening to kill him, and also taking
         the decision to send him  to  the  United  Kingdom  is  simply  not
         credible.  The Appellant states in oral evidence that he was beaten
         regularly and at [12] of his witness statement dated 24  June  2019
         he stated his father did  not  care  about  the  Appellant  or  his
         feelings.   This  is  at  odds  with  the  Appellant's  account  in
         interview at Q28 and 116 where the Appellant states that his family
         also sent him away for a better life.  The Appellant's account that
         he had shamed his family, and that was why  his  family  wanted  to
         send  him  away  for  a  better  life  is  not  credible.   If  the
         Appellant's family felt so deeply shamed by  him  that  they  would
         imprison him almost a year and would kill the Appellant upon return
         to Albania, then I would not  expect  them  to  have  extended  the
         finances or organisation required to  send  the  Appellant  to  the
         United Kingdom, or to wish him to have a better life."

13. The Appellant relies upon the country expert  report  of  Vebi  Kosumi,
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal, itself quoting a UN report in
    2017 and further relies on  the  Respondent's  CPIN;  which  refers  to
    parents keeping their children's  sexuality  secret,  forcing  them  to
    suppress that identity, breaking off relations or forcing them to  move
    away from home; with  domestic  violence  being  a  common  occurrence.
    However, the main point relied  upon  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 17, is not that the Appellant's claim of treatment in Albania
    by his family was  implausible  or  inconsistent  with  any  background
    evidence, but that their positive support for him to have a better life
    in the United Kingdom (which was the Appellant's own evidence as to why
    they sent him away) was inconsistent with the claims of  ill-treatment.
    Although the country evidence refers to  individuals  ultimately  being
    banished from the family home, there is no suggestion that  individuals
    were in any way supported to leave the family home, nor that they  were
    positively supported by family members when this occurred.   I  do  not
    therefore find any failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider
    relevant country expert evidence, nor  any  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasons for its rejection, given that  the  evidence  itself  does  not
    support a key part of the Appellant's claim, nor does  it  address  the
    key  issue  upon  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made   an   adverse
    credibility finding.  There is no material error of law  on  the  third
    ground.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]         Date         18th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

