
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00061/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Columbus House, Newport           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 December 2018                     |On 31 December 2018                |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    E A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Holmes, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. I refer to the Appellant as the Secretary of State and the
         Respondent as the Claimant in this decision. The Claimant is a
         national of Somalia. He entered the United Kingdom on 15 March 2006
         and claimed asylum on the basis that he was a member of a minority
         clan. He was granted refugee status on 12 February 2007 after
         succeeding an appeal against the Secretary of State's decision. On
         8 May 2013 he was convicted of sexual assault and sentenced to 2
         years imprisonment. He was served with a notice of liability to
         deportation. On 24 June 2014 the Claimant was issued with a
         notification of intention to cease his refugee status. On 10 August
         2016 the Secretary of State made a decision to make a deportation
         order and wrote to the Claimant to inform him of the intention to
         cease his refugee status. On 2 May 2017 the Secretary of State made
         a decision to refuse a protection and human rights claim. In a
         separate letter of the same date the Secretary of State ceased his
         refugee status concluding that he would no longer be at real risk
         of persecution on return to Somalia on account of his clan
         membership.


      2. The Claimant appealed against this decision to the First-tier
         Tribunal and his appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Robertson. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal
         against that decision and permission was granted by First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Lambert on the grounds that it was unclear whether
         the appeal was allowed on the basis that internal flight was unduly
         harsh, despite the fact that Mogadishu was the Claimant's home area
         and the decision did not indicate whether the appeal was allowed on
         asylum or humanitarian protection grounds.

The Grounds

      3. The grounds are lengthy and I summarise them briefly here. Ground 1
         asserts that the First-tier Tribunal, in concluding that the
         Secretary of State had not demonstrated a durable change in
         Somalia, failed to apply the case of SSHD v MA (Somalia) [2018]
         EWCA Civ 994. It is asserted that the First-tier tribunal did not
         conduct an individualised assessment and examine the circumstances
         in the Claimant's home area before considering the question of
         internal relocation. The Secretary of State intended to return the
         Claimant to Mogadishu, his home area, and it is submitted that
         internal flight was not relevant. It is asserted that the First-
         tier Tribunal failed to engage with the fact that there were no
         clan militias in Mogadishu, and no clan violence even for minority
         clan members as held in MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia
         CG [2014] UKUT0042. The Secretary of State further contends that MS
         (Art 1 C (5) Mogadishu [2018] UKUT 196 is wrong in law and
         incompatible with the conclusions of the Court of Appeal in MA
         (Somalia). The Secretary of State submits that if the availability
         of internal relocation is sufficient to prevent a person from
         acquiring refugee status then (on an application of the principle
         in MA (Somali)) must also be sufficient to justify the cessation of
         such status (provided the change which has rendered this is
         durable). It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
         determining the issue of cessation and persecution which was solely
         limited to clan membership. Similarly, a lack of support and severe
         destitution leading to the Claimant residing in an IDP camp did not
         amount to a protection claim or entitlement refugee status. It may
         however, amount to a breach of Article 3 and humanitarian
         protection subject to the submissions in ground two.


      4. Ground 2 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the
         Claimant is likely to find himself living in makeshift
         accommodation in an IDP camp is flawed because it is inconsistent
         with the approach in MOJ. The factors weighing in favour of the
         Claimant's ability to return to Mogadishu included previous
         residence until the age of eight, an ability to speak some Somali
         and being fluent in Arabic, (which it is said the First-tier
         Tribunal disregarded), having obtain some skills and qualifications
         and being a healthy young male. It was incumbent on the Claimant to
         demonstrate why he could not take advantage of the economic boom
         and the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to make findings in
         respect of this material consideration. The First-tier Tribunal
         noted the Claimant's ability to access the employment market
         stating that he was in theory well-placed to find work given that
         he spoke English and had some work history. The Secretary of State
         submitted that the First-tier Tribunal misunderstood the influence
         and need of clan membership and that the Claimant did not need the
         assistance of clan membership to obtain employment. In respect of
         remittances the First-tier tribunal Judge found that the Claimant's
         family were not in a position to support him but no reasons were
         given for reaching this conclusion. It was not disputed that the
         Claimant resided with and was supported by his cousin and whilst
         this family member may not have been able to support him entirely
         (although that had not been determined), some remittances to use
         funds in the Somalia economy, coupled with an ability to work could
         conceivably avoid the Claimant's forced residence in an IDP camp.
         It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's findings are
         insufficient and that the inadequacy of reasoning is repeated in
         relation to the Claimant's claim to have a grandmother and aunt in
         Somalia when he applied for voluntary return funds. Finally, it is
         submitted that in Said v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 442 the Court found
         that there was no violation of Article 3 by reason only of the
         person being return to a country which for economic reasons could
         not provide him with basic living standards.

The Rule 24 Response

      5. The Claimant responds in relation to Ground 1 that the finding that
         the Secretary of State had not met the burden of showing that there
         was a durable change in the country conditions in Somalia was
         properly open to the Judge given that the Judge made a finding that
         the change was not durable; the Judge took into account the
         Claimant's personal circumstances and the Judge was bound to come
         to the conclusion that she did in the light of the approach
         mandated in MA (Art 1 C (5) Mogadishu) Somalia [2018] UKUT 00196.
         It is asserted that the Judge dealt with the issue of clan
         membership; did not treat minority clan status as determinative;
         took an individualised approach and that minority clan membership
         was still relevant.


      6. In relation to Ground 2 the findings in relation to humanitarian
         protection were legitimate findings and properly open to the Judge
         given the Claimant's absence from Somalia. It is submitted that the
         circumstances that faced the Claimant upon return to Somalia were a
         direct consequence of his having to flee in the past due to the
         risks attendant on him. It is submitted that the grounds lodged by
         the Secretary of State are in essence an attempt to reargue the
         merits of the appeal.

The Hearing

      7. The appeal therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to
         determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of
         Judge Robertson and if so whether to set that decision aside.


      8. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Howells submitted
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself in finding
         that the Claimant remained entitled to the protection of the
         Refugee Convention and gave weight to the fact that the Secretary
         of State had not invoked the cessation procedure in respect of all
         refugees from Somalia. That was irrelevant. The appeal related to
         the Claimant and the issue was whether it was appropriate to cease
         his status. In these paragraphs the Judge appeared to have given
         weight to the Upper Tribunal decision in MS (Somalia) promulgated
         on 22 March 2018 which was not compatible with the later Court of
         Appeal decision in MA (Somalia) handed down on 2 May 2018. In the
         leading Judgment Aden LJ at paragraph 2 concluded that a cessation
         decision is the mirror image of a refugee decision and the relevant
         question is whether there is a significant and non-temporary change
         of circumstances. The Judge had not applied that principle in
         paragraphs 18-21.

      9. MOJ was promulgated in 2014 and was lead country guidance and the
         Judge appeared to have been dismissive in paragraph 21. In MOJ (ii)
         the Upper Tribunal held that an ordinary civilian would not face a
         risk of harm and (iii) that there was a durable change as Al Shabab
         had withdrawn from Mogadishu. The Judge had given inadequate
         reasons for finding that the Claimant was entitled to the
         protection of the Convention and misdirected herself having had no
         regard to MA (Somalia). The case of MS involved a Somalia national
         who hailed from Kismayo and was to be returned to Mogadishu. The
         Claimant hailed from Mogadishu, the capital city. The Secretary of
         State had appealed MS.  If the test for cessation mirrored that
         attaching to a grant, the availability of state protection or
         internal relocation may be sufficient to justify a cessation,
         provided that there had been a durable change.

     10. With regard to Ground 2 the Judge misdirected herself on the law in
         considering the Claimant's prospective return to Mogadishu. The
         Judge failed to apply all of the considerations in MOJ.  At
         paragraph 26, the Judge said that in theory he would be well-placed
         to find work but found that he was from a minority clan and the
         inference was that it would hinder his prospects of acquiring
         employment. The Judge erred in linking the ability to find
         employment with his clan membership. Having found that he was well-
         placed to find employment, Judge should have found he had a
         reasonable prospect of acquiring living conditions not below those
         acceptable.

     11. Mr Holmes submitted that the decision was impugned by submissions
         that were carefully put but not in a way that was put before the
         First-Tier Tribunal. The Secretary of State was now saying that no
         reasonable Judge could make this decision. Permission was granted
         on the basis that Judge had not appreciated that it was the
         Claimant's home area but the Judge repeatedly noted that he was
         from Mogadishu. The main thrust was what is said to be a conflict
         between MS and MA (Somalia) which dealt with two separate
         considerations. There was no conflict because they addressed
         different points. The Tribunal ought to be cautious before
         stretching the reasoning in MA (Somalia). The facts of this case
         were relatively unusual as he had been absent for over 20 years.
         Given the lack of family support the Claimant ticked each and every
         box and that was relevant because return was to a small area. He
         had no family there and the issue of clan links was important. MOJ
         made clear that minority clans could not provide support and this
         was relevant to the persecution issue because the persecution of
         minority clans remained so in the rest of the country. If he could
         not survive in Mogadishu he may be forced to move elsewhere. The
         Judge held that the Secretary of State had not met the burden. That
         ought to dispose of the submissions of the Secretary of State.


     12. The grounds seemed to be saying that it was not open to the Judge
         to consider Art 3 in the context of this case. This was wrong.
         Article 3 was pleaded. The Court of Appeal tackled question of
         whether the breach of Article 3 was caused by ongoing violence and
         crisis. The Article 3 breaches came about as a result of failure of
         state and Somalia remained in a state of war. It was open to the
         Judge to allow the appeal under Article 3/humanitarian protection.
         The Judge was entitled to accept evidence of family members, he was
         from a minority clan and the findings were open to the Judge and
         made in the context of his being credible.

     13. Both parties asked for the matter to remitted if there were an
         error. Further, given there was no challenge to the findings on the
         s72 certificate those findings should stand.

Discussion

     14. It does not appear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was referred
         to MA (Somalia).  The Court of Appeal considered the following
         issues that are relevant to this appeal:

             (1)  the test to be applied by the state which recognised a
             person as a refugee ("the recognising state") when determining
             whether (or that) a refugee's status can be ended ("a
             "cessation decision") under the Qualification Directive;


             (2)  whether a cessation decision can be made without also
             considering the question whether the refugee's rights under
             Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights ("the
             Convention") would be violated if he were to be returned to
             his country of origin;


             (3)  whether Article 3 would be violated if a person to be
             returned is at risk of being subjected to living standards
             which fall below humanitarian standards in his country of
             origin.

     15. The Court held in the light of the submissions they had heard in
         relation to C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08, C0179/08, Aydin Salahadin
         Abdulla, Kamil Hasan, Ahmed Adem, Hamrin Mosa Rashi & Dier Jamal v
         Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 2 March 2010 at paragraph 2 that:

             "(1) A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision
             determining refugee status. By that I mean that the grounds
             for cessation do not go beyond verifying whether the grounds
             for recognition of refugee status continue to exist. Thus, the
             relevant question is whether there has been a significant and
             non-temporary change in circumstances so that the
             circumstances which caused the person to be a refugee have
             ceased to apply and there is no other basis on which he would
             be held to be a refugee. The recognising state does not in
             addition have to be satisfied that the country of origin has a
             system of government or an effective legal system for
             protecting basic human rights, though the absence of such
             systems may of course lead to the conclusion that a
             significant and non-temporary change in circumstances has not
             occurred."

     16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 21 that the
         Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of proof and the
         Claimant remained entitled to the protection of the Refugee
         Convention. The reasons for this conclusion are to be found at
         paragraphs 18 to 22 of the decision and were that although there
         were no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence and no clan
         based discriminatory treatment even for minority clans, minority
         groups outside Mogadishu were likely to face political, social,
         economic and judicial discrimination and human rights abuses which
         may amount to persecution.


     17. According to MS (Article 1C (5) Mogadishu the Secretary of State is
         not entitled to cease a person's refugee status pursuant to Article
         1C (5) of the Refugee Convention solely on the basis of a change of
         circumstances in one part of the country of proposed return. The
         Judge further reasoned at paragraphs 20 and 21 as follows:

             "20. The Respondent has accepted at para 9 of the refusal
             letter that those returning to areas outside of Mogadishu may
             face a real risk of harm if they have no recent experience of
             living in Somalia, and persecution by Al-Shabaab because of
             actual or imputed religious or political opinion. It was
             submitted that the Appellant could return to Mogadishu. But it
             was found in MS that there should be no pre-condition that the
             refugee has to return to specific safe parts of the country in
             order to be free from persecution.


             21.  In looking more widely and whether any changes in
             Mogadishu are 'significant and non-temporary' I bear in mind
             that MOJ was decided in 2014 and was not a case dealing with
             cessation of refugee status. Overall I do not find that there
             has been a "durable" change in Somalia. I am not satisfied on
             balance that there have been such changes in Somalia. I am not
             satisfied on balance that there have been such changes in
             Somalia generally as required to remove the Appellant from the
             protection of the Refugee convention. The Respondent has not
             discharged the burden of proof and the Appellant remains
             entitled to the protection of the convention."

     18. The Claimant was granted refugee status on the basis of his, or his
         mother's, membership of a minority clan.  The First-tier Tribunal
         was, following MA (Somalia), required to consider whether the
         circumstances which formed the basis for granting protection still
         existed and required protection to be given; whether there was of a
         change in circumstances such that the Claimant could no longer
         refuse to accept the protection of the country of origin. In
         establishing whether there was relevant protection the relevant
         question is whether the institutions of the state of origin "have
         taken reasonable steps to prevent persecution and that they
         therefore operate an effective legal system for investigating and
         punishing acts of persecution and that the individual will have
         access to that protection if he ceases to have refugee status".
         Further, the protection had to be considered on an individualised
         basis: the recognising state does not have to consider whether the
         institutions achieve a particular standard for all purposes.  The
         Judge failed to consider whether there was protection put in place
         against the same risks as those to which he was previously subject.


     19. I find that the Secretary of State is correct that in concluding
         that the Claimant remained entitled to the protection of the
         Convention the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not conduct an
         assessment which was the mirror image of a decision determining
         refugee status. The Judge did not consider whether the
         circumstances for granting protection still existed and whether the
         Claimant had a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area of
         Mogadishu or whether protection was sufficient on an individualised
         basis. I therefore find that Ground 1 is made out and that the
         error was clearly material because had the Judge applied MA
         (Somalia) the outcome may have been different.

     20. In relation to Ground 2, the Judge addressed the factors in the
         headnote (ix) of MOJ and Ors. Whilst I find that the Judge's
         findings at paragraph 24 were open to her on the facts of the case
         and adequately reasoned I find that in view of the conclusion at
         paragraph 27 it is unclear on what basis the Judge allowed the
         appeal. At paragraph 27 the Judge concluded "Return is unrealistic
         and would be unduly harsh. Accordingly I find that he remains a
         refugee."

     21. At paragraph 21 the Judge found that the Claimant remained entitled
         to the protection of the Refugee Convention and it is unclear from
         paragraph 27 whether the Judge was concluding that he was a refugee
         because of an assessment of the factors in MOJ which would clearly
         be a material error. The application of the test of 'unrealistic'
         and 'unduly harsh' was also in error because the Claimant was from
         Mogadishu and therefore internal flight did not arise. I also find
         that the conclusion that the Claimant's family in the UK were not
         in a financial position to support him on return at paragraph 25
         was unreasoned and reasons were required in circumstances where he
         lived with his cousin in the UK who provided him with food and
         shelter (paragraph 9 (v)).

     22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore contained
         material errors of law and in light of the fact-finding required in
         accordance with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement I find that
         the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. With the
         agreement of the parties the findings in relation to section 72
         stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.


I remit  this  matter  for  a  hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Robertson. The findings in relation to section 72 are preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 December 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray







