
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00093/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2021                   |On 18 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Georget, instructed by Polpitiya Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1993  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Albania. He was sentenced on 16 August 2018 to 29  months  imprisonment
    for the possession of a Class A  drug  with  intent  to  supply.  On  3
    September 2019, the Secretary of State decided to deport the appellant,
    to apply section 72 of the 2002 Act and  to  revoke  the  application's
    status as a refugee (the appellant had been granted indefinite leave to
    remain as a refugee on 25 August 2016). The appellant appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which, in a decision promulgated  on  12  February
    2020, allowed his appeal. The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State submits that (i) First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for concluding that  the  appellant  remained  at
    risk of a blood feud in Albania; (ii)  failed  to  consider  adequately
    whether the Albanian authorities were willing and able to  protect  the
    appellant in his home  area;  (iii)  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant had a viable internal flight alternative in Albania.

 3. At the remote hearing on 22 January 2021, I heard oral submissions from
    the representatives  of  both  parties.  I  note  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision not to uphold the section  72  certificate  is  not
    challenged on appeal. I reserved my decision.

 4.  The  judge's  reasoning  on  the  matter  of  the  revocation  of  the
    appellant's protected status is set  out  succinctly  at  [23-24].  The
    first ground of the Secretary of State arises from the judge's analysis
    at [23] of the appellant's claim that, in 2013, he took  a  holiday  in
    Kosovo during which he was attacked by unknown individuals  and,  as  a
    consequence, spent  3  months  in  hospital.  The  Secretary  of  State
    contends that the judge's findings  in respect of this claim (that 'any
    Balkan state' as a choice for a holiday was 'very  odd'  and  that  the
    claim was associated with the blood feud was 'purely speculative')  are
    not consistent with his conclusion  that  the  application  remains  at
    risk. As a result, the respondent contends that the  reasons  given  by
    the judge for concluding that the appellant remains at risk  on  return
    were inadequate. I find that this ground is without  merit.  The  judge
    made it clear [23] that 'if the attack took place, I do not  find  that
    it is evidence either way of a continued feud.' Significantly,  he  did
    not conclude that the appellant's account of  the  attack  in  any  way
    undermined everything which he had ever said about being subject  to  a
    feud (which the respondent has previously accepted as true) or that, if
    the attack had not occurred, that the appellant was, as a  consequence,
    now sufficiently protected in  Albania. I agree with the judge that the
    appellant's claims regarding  the  2013  incident  do  not  assist  the
    arguments of either party in the appeal. That was a conclusion patently
    available to the judge and it is neither inconsistent nor irrational.

 5. Secondly, at [24], the judge discusses the recent (October  2018)  CPIN
    upon which the respondent seeks to rely as evidence that there has been
    a fundamental and durable change of circumstances in Albania (the  test
    which both  parties  agree  should  determine  the  revocation  of  the
    appellant's protected status). Mr Bates, who appeared for the Secretary
    of  State  at  the  initial  hearing,  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    misrepresented the CPIN; the judge  had  referred  to  the  'declining'
    number of feuds in Albania but had not  also  stated  that  the  report
    recorded that feuds were 'few and declining.' I do not agree  that  the
    judge has misrepresented the evidence of the CPIN. The judge has  given
    cogent reasons for concluding that the appellant is still at risk; that
    risk can, of course, be posed by one of the 'few' feuds which  continue
    to exist. His omission of the adjective is not material.

 6. I also find that the judge reached sustainable findings as regards  the
    availability of protection provided by the  Albanian  state.  He  noted
    that a Cedoca report, which is almost  contemporaneous  with  the  CPIN
    (2017), 'included doubts that the police were able to deal  with  blood
    feuds' and that feuds were often not reported to the police. Whilst the
    judge accepted that the Albanian  government  had  'taken  measures  to
    reduce the practice of blood feuds' he found  that,  once  a  feud  was
    active (as the parties accept has been the case with the appellant) the
    evidence, including the CPIN, did not indicate  that  it  would  become
    'less effective as a result of government measures'. The judge  records
    that there was no evidence that the particular feud which  affects  the
    appellant had ceased and he concluded that, whilst gradual  change  had
    occurred, that change did not  amount  to  a  fundamental  and  durable
    change in circumstances. In my opinion,  those  are  rational  findings
    based on the entirety of the relevant evidence. It was not inconsistent
    for the judge to find that, whilst government action  may  be  reducing
    the incidence of new feuds, it was not necessary to  conclude  that  an
    active existing feud would have ceased.

 7. Finally, it is the case that the judge does not address the  matter  of
    internal flight. However, the respondent's decision letter  also  makes
    no mention of it whilst the judge's precis of the  submissions  of  the
    Presenting Officer at [17] shows that internal flight was not raised at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing. The judge has considered the Secretary
    of State's case as it was put to him, both in the decision  letter  and
    at the hearing; he was not required,  subsequent  to  the  hearing,  to
    raise new matters of his own motion upon which the parties  would  have
    had no opportunity to comment. Indeed, had he  done  so,  he  may  have
    fallen into legal error. The judge was entitled to proceed on the basis
    that, as internal  flight  was  not  raised,  the  respondent  did  not
    consider it to be a remedy available to this particular appellant.

 8. For the reasons I have given, I do not find that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by reason on legal error.  Accordingly,
    the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 29 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

