
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00006/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd December 2018                          |On 7th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     BS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or his family members.  This direction  applies
    both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  4th
    April 2017 allowed his appeal against the decision  made  on  the  19th
    December 2016.

The background:

 4.   The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is   set   out   within   the
    determination at paragraphs 2-4 and in the decision  letter  issued  by
    the Secretary of State.  It can be summarised briefly as follows.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom with his mother and brother  after
    being issued with settlement visas  for  family  reunion  to  join  his
    father, a refugee. The Appellant was  then  aged  16.  His  father  was
    granted asylum in February 2000.

 5. On 30 January 2006 the Appellant's settled status was confirmed.

 6. The Appellant has a number of convictions. In 2008 he was convicted  of
    theft and sentenced to a conditional discharge of six months. In  April
    2010 whilst a juvenile he was convicted of shoplifting  and  again  was
    sentenced to a conditional discharge of six months and ordered  to  pay
    costs. In March 2011 again whilst a juvenile, was convicted of  failing
    to surrender to custody and was sentenced to one day detention.

 7. In November 2010 he was convicted of attempted  robbery,  breach  of  a
    conditional discharge of failing to surrender to custody and  in  March
    2011 was sentenced to a total of 16 months imprisonment.

 8. In April 2011 he was convicted of affray  and  sentenced  to  6  months
    imprisonment.

 9. As a result of his conviction, on 7 July 2011 he was  notified  of  his
    liability to automatic deportation and responded to this  by  returning
    the accompanying questionnaire. On 11 December 2011 he was served  with
    the reasons for the deportation letter and an order  dated  1  December
    2011. He lodged an appeal against this decision on 15 December 2011.

10. On 1 March 2012 an immigration judge allowed the  appeal  and  remitted
    the decision to the Secretary of State to reconsider  his  claim  under
    the Refugee Convention. There is no copy of that decision in the papers
    before the Tribunal.  It  appears  that  in  May  2012,  his  case  was
    reconsidered and decision was made not to  pursue  deportation  against
    him on that occasion. However he  was  served  with  a  warning  letter
    advising him that should he  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    Secretary of State by way of further offending then  the  Secretary  of
    State would  be  obliged  to  give  further  consideration  as  to  his
    deportation.

11. In December 2015 he was convicted of having a blade/Article in a public
    place and failing to surrender to custody and was sentenced to 4 months
    imprisonment on 15 February 2016.

12. On 17 March 2016 he was served with a  notice  of  decision  to  deport
    dated 14 March 2016 (see M1). This  made  reference  to  the  Appellant
    being liable for deportation under section 3 (5) (a) of the  1971  Act;
    the decision made reference to his convictions and that his deportation
    was "conducive to the public good". The decision letter set out a  one-
    stop notice under section 120 and stated that there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.

13. On 29 April 2016 the Respondent wrote to the Appellant to inform him of
    the Respondent's intention to cease his refugee status. This letter was
    headed "notice of  intention  to  revoke  refugee  status."  This  made
    reference to his immigration history  including  his  circumstances  of
    entry to the United Kingdom under family  reunion  and  considered  the
    issue of return in accordance with the country guidance decision of MOJ
    and others. The decision made reference to the Secretary  of  State  as
    satisfied that the cessation of  refugee  status  remained  appropriate
    under paragraph 339A (v). The decision made it plain that at this stage
    the Secretary of  State  was  "merely  reviewing  whether  you  have  a
    continuing entitlement to refugee status". It went on to state "as part
    of the assessment of your continuing entitlement to refugee  status,  I
    am providing you with an opportunity to respond to the points  made  in
    this letter."

14. On 18 May 2016 a copy of this letter was forwarded to the UNHCR.

15. On 25 May 2016 the Appellant responded to this notice giving details of
    his circumstances in the United Kingdom and that if returned to Somalia
    he would be at risk of harm. The letter referred to general risk and no
    specific risk of harm was identified.

16. On 14 June 2016 the UNHCR responded  to  the  letter  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State.  In  that  letter  it  made  reference  to  country
    information that post  -dated  the  decision  of  MOJ  and  others  and
    specifically made reference to the Secretary of State to interview  the
    Appellant in order to obtain further information on existing grounds as
    well is to explore whether there are any additional individualised ones
    that should be considered (see page 4).

17.  On  5  September  2016  the  Appellant  made  representations  by  his
    solicitors in response to the  notification  to  cease  refugee  status
    asserting that the  Secretary  of  State  had  misapplied  the  country
    guidance decision.

18. On 19 December 2016 the Secretary of State issued a  further  decision;
    it was entitled "decision to  refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights
    claim". That  decision  letter  set  out  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history including his criminal convictions and  the  notices  that  had
    been sent to him at paragraphs 2 to 22.

19. At paragraphs 23 to 61 the Secretary of State considered the  cessation
    of protection  status,  and  at  paragraphs  35  to  37  gave  specific
    consideration to risk of harm as a result of his  father's  status.  It
    went on to consider the comments made in the UNHCR letter and  that  in
    the  light  of  the  Appellant's  convictions,  and  being  liable   to
    deportation, the Secretary of State was obliged to review  his  current
    refugee status before any action is taken  regarding  deportation  (see
    paragraph 41). The decision in that section concluded that it  was  not
    accepted that he would face risk on return or that he  would  be  faced
    with living circumstances falling below that  which  is  acceptable  in
    humanitarian protection terms.

20. At paragraph 58 of the decision it was considered that for the  reasons
    given and for those set out in the notification of intention  to  cease
    refugee status dated 29 April 2016, that his removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would not lead to a breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  or
    Article 15 (c) of the qualification directive.

21. Articles 2 and 3 were considered at paragraphs 62 and  63  and  further
    consideration was given to the representations of 5 September  2016  by
    reference to the decision of M OJ and others. The letter  at  paragraph
    68 made it plain that as part of the immigration status review, it  was
    considered that paragraph 339A (v) of the Immigration Rules in  Article
    1 (C) (5) of the Refugee Convention applied to his case and his refugee
    status may be ceased, if he can no longer, because of the circumstances
    in connection with which he had been recognised as a refugee has ceased
    to exist.

22. At paragraph 69 reference was made to the letter dated 29 April 2016 on
    the basis that the objective evidence demonstrated  that  his  fear  of
    persecution is no longer applicable on the basis that there had been  a
    fundamental and non-temporary change in Somalia therefore he  would  no
    longer continue to be a category of individual who would face treatment
    amounting to persecution in Somalia. The decision letter  concluded  at
    paragraph 73 that in the  light  of  the  reasons  given,  "it  is  not
    accepted that the notice of intention to revoke refugee status dated 29
    April 2016 was not in accordance with the law". It  went  on  to  state
    paragraph 74 that as  he  was  no  longer  a  refugee,  he  should  now
    surrender the settlement visa issued to him on 6 January 2015  and  the
    travel document issued on 8 January.

23. Paragraph 77 to 80 made reference to a claim under Article 8.

24. As to  his  deportation,  at  paragraph  81  it  was  stated  that  his
    deportation was "conducive  to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public
    interest because you are a persistent offender. This is because between
    30 October 2008 and the  15th  of  every  2016  you  accumulated  eight
    convictions 10 offences. Therefore, in accordance with paragraph 398 of
    the immigration rules, the public interest  requires  your  deportation
    unless exception to deportation applies. The exceptions are set out  at
    paragraph  399  and  399A.  The  decision  letter  went  on   to   give
    consideration to those issues. It concluded at paragraph 102  that  his
    deportation would not breach the U.K.'s  obligations  under  Article  8
    because the public interest in deporting  him  outweigh  the  right  to
    private and family life.

25. In a  paragraph  headed  "decision"  it  set  out  the  following:"  as
    explained above, your protection status has been ceased and your  human
    rights claim has been refused. Therefore, the decision  to  deport  you
    pursuant to section 5 (1) of the Immigration Act 1971 is maintained.

26. Under the section entitled "Appeal" the letter set out that  he  had  a
    right of appeal against the decision to refuse the protection of  human
    rights claim under section 82 (1) of  the  2002  Act  from  within  the
    United Kingdom and that any appeal must be made on one or more  of  the
    following grounds:

         that his removal from the UK would breach  the  U.K.'s  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention;

         that is removal from the UK would breach the U.K.'s obligations  in
         relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a   grant   of   humanitarian
         protection;

         that his removal from the United Kingdom would  be  unlawful  under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988.

    The letter went on to remind him that he had been served with a  notice
    under section 120 of the 2002 Act  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    decided not to certify human rights claim under section 94B of the 2002
    Act.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

27. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 27th March  2017.  In
    summary the judge considered that there was  little  factual  issue  of
    substance (paragraph 16). As to the issue of revocation of  protection,
    he applied the decision in M OJ and others and reach the conclusion  at
    paragraph 18 that this demonstrated a durable change in Mogadishu, that
    clan membership had changed and there were no clan militias and no clan
    violence in Mogadishu and no clan-based discriminatory  treatment  even
    for a minority clan member. He concluded that on the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant, read with the decision  in  MOJ  and  others,  that  he  was
    satisfied that there  was  such  alteration  of  the  circumstances  in
    Somalia that the  Appellant  no  longer  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason on return to Somalia.

28.  The judge went on to consider humanitarian  or  subsidiary  protection
    again applying the decision M OJ and others. Having done so he  reached
    the overall conclusion that the Appellant would reasonably likely  face
    destitution and to encounter conditions that, on  the  guidance,  would
    fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian  standards  (paragraph  24).   At
    paragraph 25 his conclusion was that in the light of his findings,  the
    Appellant was  entitled  to  protection  under  Article  3  or  in  the
    alternative, humanitarian protection. He went on to state  "in  respect
    of  the  latter  the  Appellant  might  well   be   thought   to   face
    individualised factors of risk given the recognisability of his father.
    It is not, however, in view of the finding made, necessary  to  address
    this issue further."

29. Under the heading "human rights protection" the  judge  also  concluded
    that it was unnecessary to address alternative relief under  Article  8
    but briefly summarised the provisions of paragraph 398(b) and  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal under Article 8  "were  it
    necessary to go that far."

30. Both parties sought permission to appeal that decision and the  grounds
    are set out in the papers. In relation to the application made  by  the
    Secretary of State  Immigration Judge Grimmett  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the 26th April 2017 in the following terms:

     "It is arguable that the judge erred in concluding that the  Appellant
    would be at risk of, inter-alia, destitution if returned when M OJ held
    that  there  was  no  clan-based  discriminatory  treatment  even   for
    minorities and that those returning may have an  advantage  in  seeking
    employment on return."

31. The Appellant also applied for permission  to  appeal  and  Immigration
    Judge Landes granted permission as follows:

         "although the judge allowed the  Appellant's  appeal,  he  did  not
         allow it on asylum grounds and it is contended that the judge erred
         in that respect. The grounds are arguable.  The  judge  appears  to
         have considered that there was a basis  for  considering  that  the
         Appellant would be at risk as the  son  of  his  father  [25],  but
         thought it unnecessary for him to continue to consider the risk. It
         is arguable that the judge should have at least considered  whether
         the Appellant's risk on return would be partly as a result  of  his
         membership of a PSG and thereupon he should qualify for asylum. The
         issue of whether the judge should have considered it at this  stage
         when he considered revocation of protection  [18)  is  less  clear;
         although the Appellant's father had claimed asylum on the basis  of
         his profession he was not, according to the refusal letter, granted
         asylum on that basis but on the basis of his minority clan status."

32. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 5 September 2017 I gave my decision in relation  to  the
    appeal brought by the Secretary of State and the appeal brought by  the
    Appellant. For the reasons that I gave in  that  judgement  I  was  not
    satisfied that the Respondents grounds as pleaded and argued were  made
    out and found that there was  no  error  of  law  demonstrated  in  the
    decision of the judge as asserted in the Secretary of State's  grounds.
    The grounds only referred to the decision of MOJ ( as  cited)  and  the
    findings in this regard. In those circumstances it was not necessary to
    consider the grounds whereby it is asserted that he failed to  consider
    Article 8 correctly as it was immaterial in the light of my  conclusion
    that the judge's decision to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds  was
    open to him. It is not necessary for me to repeat the reasons I gave as
    they are set out in that decision.

33. However the reasons also  set  out  in  that  decision  I  reached  the
    conclusion that the Appellant's  grounds  were  made  out  (the  cross-
    appeal). The decision letter considered the factual claim raised by the
    Appellant to be at risk of  harm  due  to  his  father's  status  as  a
    comedian (I refer to the decision letter at paragraphs 35-37).

34. I also found that it was plain that there was  evidence  placed  before
    the First-tier Tribunal to advance this specific head  of  risk.  There
    was a short witness statement of the Appellant dated 30  January  2017;
    paragraph 8 bundle B and in the supplementary bundle a  fuller  witness
    statement dated the 23 February 2017 along with  evidence  of  Internet
    searches and further evidence in bundle F. The grounds  also  refer  to
    some objective material which was relied upon  in  support  of  present
    risk of harm referable to others in similar situations. In addition the
    skeleton argument at paragraph 15-16 placed reliance on this  issue  of
    risk.

35. Looking at the determination itself, the judge made reference  to  this
    evidence in passing  at  paragraph  7  and  at  paragraph  9  and  made
    reference to his vulnerability as a returnee as the identified son of a
    well-known figure in Somali  culture.  The  judge  also  recognised  at
    paragraph 25 that the  "Appellant  may  well  be  thought  to  face  an
    individual  risk  given  the  recognisability  of  his   father",   but
    considered it is not however in view of the finding made, necessary  to
    address this issue further."

36.  It was plain from reading paragraph 18 that the judge did not find the
    Appellant to be at risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  and
    therefore a refugee on account of his clan membership. It  was  further
    plain that he allowed the appeal on Article  3/humanitarian  protection
    grounds and referred to the risk arising  to  the  Appellant  from  his
    father's status as an  "individual  factor  of  risk"  as  relevant  to
    humanitarian protection but not relevant on  a  freestanding  issue  of
    risk under the Refugee Convention. Consequently he had made no findings
    of fact on the evidence and importantly made  no  analysis  of  whether
    there was present risk of harm or  the  nature  of  any  such  risk  or
    whether it would be for a Convention reason.

37. I therefore considered that there was an issue raised  on  the  factual
    circumstances of the Appellant and one which had not been considered by
    the judge when reaching his overall decision. I was therefore satisfied
    that there was an error of law in the  judge's  determination  in  this
    regard although as I have set out in the preceding paragraphs, I  found
    no error in the determination as asserted by the  Secretary  of  State.
    Consequently I did not set aside the judge's findings of  fact  or  his
    decision on Article 3 and humanitarian  protection.  I  have  not  been
    asked to revisit this issue.

38. However, as Appellant sought for  the  issue  relating  to  whether  he
    should be granted refugee  status,  based  on  the  issue  of  risk  as
    identified above, to be determined and there were no findings  of  fact
    or analysis of the evidence relating to such a risk made by the  judge,
    this issue required further consideration by way  of  an  oral  hearing
    before the Tribunal.

39. I therefore issued directions for the decision to  be  re-made  by  the
    Upper  Tribunal.  In  particular,  I  directed  that  the   Appellant's
    solicitors should ensure that  a  fresh  bundle  of  documentation  was
    provided for the hearing which contained the relevant material  to  the
    issue that needed to be decided.  As  I  indicated  previously  to  the
    parties before me, the papers did not appear to be complete.

40. Since I made that decision the case  has  been  listed  for  a  resumed
    hearing. At one hearing the Appellant's solicitor appeared without  the
    Appellant and it was unclear as to whether he had been informed of  the
    correct date. The appeal was therefore adjourned.  Following  this  the
    Appellant solicitors came off the record and when the appeal was listed
    further, no Somali interpreter could be found for the hearing. It  also
    appears that administratively the appeal was adjourned because  it  was
    not possible to obtain a Somali interpreter.

41. The Appellant did not attend the hearing on the last date it was listed
    and enquiries were undertaken by Mr Diwnycz as to his current  address.
    The Appellant has not attended the hearing again and I am informed that
    the Appellant has not been complying with  any  conditions  as  to  his
    residence. I therefore satisfied that I should hear this appeal in  his
    absence and on the basis of the documents provided.

42. The purposes of the appeal I have taken into account the  documentation
    that has previously been provided on behalf of the Appellant  which  is
    contained in a number of bundles. There is also the  previous  skeleton
    argument provided by his Counsel to which I have had regard.

43. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Diwncyz relies  upon  a  written
    response prepared by his colleague Mr McVeety dated 8 February 2018.

44. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that  he  would  be  at  risk  in
    Somalia because his father has the profile of a famous comedian. It  is
    further asserted that he has  appeared  in  programmes  in  the  United
    Kingdom which are broadcast to Somalia (see decision  of  the  FTTJ  at
    paragraph 7).

45. There is little evidence before this Tribunal as to the nature  of  any
    such risk. The Appellant  has  not  appeared  before  the  Tribunal  to
    provide any oral evidence  and  the  written  evidence  that  has  been
    produced on his behalf provides little or no detail.  The  evidence  in
    his witness statement dated 12 January 2017 stated that he would be  at
    risk because "my father  is  a  well  known  person;  he  is  a  famous
    comedian." It is asserted that he is known all over Somalia and that if
    he is returned there he would be targeted on account  of  his  father's
    profile.

46. There is a further witness statement dated  23  February  in  which  he
    stated again that his  father  was  a  famous  comedian  and  that  his
    behaviour would be considered to be "un- Islamic". It  makes  reference
    to his father having to leave Somalia because of this but also that  he
    had not continued his comedy since 2003 due to medical reasons.  It  is
    further asserted that the Appellant had not referred to  this  in  2012
    because he was under stress at the time.

47. There is  a  witness  statement  provided  by  the  Appellant's  father
    confirming he  has  not  been  a  comedian  since  2003.  There  is  no
    information concerning the nature of the comedy or the content  of  any
    such broadcasts in the witness statement.

48. Other evidence that has been provided on the Appellant's behalf relates
    to Internet research undertaken which shows that his father has been  a
    comedian in  Somalia  (refer  to  the  screenshots  and  the  you  tube
    information). It therefore shows some information available online.

49. However whilst the Secretary of  State  accepts  that  the  Appellant's
    father was a comedian in  Somalia  it  has  not  been  demonstrated  or
    properly evidenced that his profile would cause any  risk  of  harm  to
    this Appellant.  Contrary  to  the  Appellant's  evidence,  his  father
    claimed asylum in 1991 on the basis that he was a member of the theatre
    company but it was refused in 1992. In 1999 an application was made  to
    upgrade his leave to full refugee status but that was not based on  any
    risk due to previous or current activities as a  comedian  but  on  the
    basis of his clan membership. It is therefore not the position that  he
    was granted refugee status because of  his  activities  as  a  comedian
    which is what the Appellant has stated in his witness statement.

50. On the Appellant's own evidence,  his  father  has  not  broadcast  his
    comedy since 2003 although it appears from the  screenshots  that  past
    comedy has been rebroadcast. However in any event the evidence does not
    demonstrate the  nature  of  the  comedy  is  such  that  it  would  be
    reasonably likely to cause this Appellant to be at risk. The  interview
    record makes reference  to  the  following  "anyone  listening  to  him
    speaking will find him comic," it then refers to a joke  that  he  told
    "recalling stopping a lorry to ask the driver the time."  There  is  no
    evidence that his comedy has any political content  or  any  un-Islamic
    content or that he is perceived  in  any  such  light.  As  Mr  Diwncyz
    submits there is no evidence in the form of a DVD or even a  transcript
    of any interviews that have taken place to demonstrate the  content  of
    his comedy. The you tube documents and screensavers also do not  assist
    in this regard.

51. Similarly there is no evidence as to why he was awarded the distinction
    of entertainer of the year given his last performances. Again there  is
    no information or any evidence to demonstrate the content and nature of
    any previous or later broadcasts.

52. It is for the Appellant to evidence the factual basis of his claim that
    his connection to his father would place him at risk. He has  not  done
    so.

53. Whilst the skeleton argument previously provided makes reference to the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in MSM (journalists: political opinion: risk)
    Somalia [2015] (and see the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  that
    case reported [2016) EWCA Civ 715, it does not  assist  the  Appellant.
    There is no evidence before the Tribunal that the Appellant's  father's
    profile can anyway be compared with the position of MSM and his factual
    background as a journalist. Whilst it is suggested that he is a  "media
    worker" there is no evidence before this Tribunal to show  the  content
    of any of the comedy to demonstrate that it will be viewed as a form of
    political opinion or in particular would be viewed as  "un-Islamic"  by
    Al Shabab or any other group operating in Somalia.

54. There  is  also  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  would
    necessarily be known as the son of the comedian having left the country
    when he was 15 years of age.

55. The objective material provided is a news report dated  1  August  2012
    relating to the murder of Somalia's "most famous comedian". However  it
    is clear from the news article (an online article) that the  nature  of
    his comedy was to impersonate Islamic fighters. I accept the submission
    made by Mr Diwncyz  that  there  is  no  evidence  to  demonstrate  the
    Appellant's father is engaged in any similar type of comedy.

56.  Therefore having considered the nature of the  evidence  provided,  it
    has not been demonstrated to the requisite standard  that  there  is  a
    reasonable  likelihood  that  the  Appellant  (if  returned)  would  be
    identified either as the son of the famous comedian or that even if  he
    were, that he would be at risk on return as a result  of  his  father's
    profile. The Appellant has failed to discharge the burden upon  him  to
    demonstrate the factual basis necessary to support such a risk of harm.
    He therefore cannot succeed on that basis.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on  Article
    3 grounds shall stand. I dismiss the Appellant's claim based on Refugee
    Convention grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.  The  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed[pic]                             Date: 4/12/2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
