
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00092/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 17 June 2020        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 26 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 12 February 2020  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan  ('the
        Judge') allowed KS's appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
        human rights grounds against the order for his deportation from the
        United Kingdom.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,
        sitting as a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal. The  operative  part
        of the grant is in the following terms:


             It is arguable, as clearly set out in the  grounds,  that  the
             Judge erred in his assessment of  the  revocation  of  refugee
             status given the appellant's reasons for  claiming  asylum  in
             2001 no longer subsist and he has done nothing in  the  UK  to
             cause him to be at risk on return.


     3. Following the Covid-19 pandemic directions were sent to the parties
        advising them of the preliminary view of the  Upper  Tribunal  that
        the question of whether the Judge had made an error of law that was
        material to the decision to allow the appeal could be determined on
        the papers and seeking their views.
     4. No response has been received from the Secretary of State who  will
        no doubt rely on the grounds of appeal in any  event.   A  response
        from KS's  representative  has  been  received  objecting  to  this
        proposed course of action on the basis of the benefits of  an  oral
        hearing and claiming the Judge, in any event, has not  erred  in  a
        manner material to the decision but, if he has, that the matter  be
        remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.



Background


     5. KS is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 23 April 1983 who  is  subject
        to an order for his  deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom.  KS's
        immigration and offending history is set out between [14 -  22]  of
        the decision under challenge.
     6. KS was recognised as a refugee on 17 October 2001  but  was  served
        with notice of intention to revoke his refugee status on  19  March
        2019 leading to its revocation on 11 June 2019.
     7. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [43] finding  neither  the
        appellant nor his partner credible  or  consistent  witnesses  with
        regard to their current claimed relationship for the reasons  given
        at [44 (i) - (iv)] of the decision under challenge.
     8. In relation to the challenge to the revocation decision  the  Judge
        finds at [51 - 54]:


             51.  The fact that the appellant was recognised as  a  refugee
                  in October 2001 on the basis that he was  forced  to  work
                  for the LTTE, and he was detained for period of  5  months
                  by the authorities. I find that if this is the premise  of
                  the grant of refugee status to the  appellant  in  October
                  2001, the would  be  some  type  of  record  kept  of  the
                  appellant's past detention by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
                  and he would be subject to  further  difficulties  on  his
                  return to the country of origin, Sri Lanka.
             52.  I find that the appellant would  be  on  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities official records because of his  past  arrest,
                  detention and also due  to  his  late  father's  suspected
                  membership of  the  LTTE.  The  appellant  is  covered  by
                  category (4) and (5 of GJ, which states:


                  (4)      If  a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
                      security services there remains a real risk  of  ill-
                      treatment or harm requiring international protection.


                  (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka
                      for a  person  at  real  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan
                      authorities, since the government  now  controls  the
                      whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to  return
                      to a named address after passing through the airport.


             53.  Further, the fact that the appellant has previously  been
                  granted asylum in the UK, he would be on the radar of  Sri
                  Lankan authorities as a person who been of  some  interest
                  the authorities there.


             54.  I find that the respondent has failed to  establish  that
                  there has been a fundamental durable change in Sri Lanka.


     9. At [57] Judge finds KS's deportation will put the United Kingdom in
        breach of article 3 ECHR.
    10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  on  3  grounds.
        The first asserted the Judge failed to apply the  correct  approach
        regarding the question of cessation of refugee status as  found  in
        MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994.  The material before  the  Judge,
        including that from  the  Secretary  of  State  which  supported  a
        finding there has been fundamental durable change in Sri Lanka.  It
        is asserted the Judge's statement the Secretary of State failed  to
        establish this  is  so  a  conclusion  arrived  at  without  proper
        engagement of the applicable test or proper analysis of the country
        situation at the time KS claimed asylum and  the  position  at  the
        date of the hearing to establish whether there has been a change of
        circumstances that is of a significant and non-temporary nature.
    11. Ground 2  asserts  the  Judge  materially  erred  when  considering
        whether KS will be on the records of the Sri Lankan authorities due
        to past arrest and detention and suspicion  of  his  late  father's
        activities; misconstruing the head note of GJ when finding that the
        appellant's past detention meets the GJ requirements. It is  argued
        paragraph (4)  of  the  headnote  considers  current  detention  as
        opposed to past detention with no  reference  in  the  headnote  to
        historical  detention.  The  Secretary  of  State  also  refers  to
        paragraph 356(8) of GJ which found the Sri Lankan authorities aware
        of  migrants  who  had  some  past  involvement  with   the   LTTE,
        particularly  those  from  the  Northern  Province  such   as   the
        appellant, but were only concerned  with  those  that  represent  a
        current risk to the Sri Lankan government. The Judge finds at [44 (
        iv)] that KS had not been politically active in the UK  undermining
        the Judge's findings regarding KS's profile placing him at risk  on
        return.
    12. Ground  3  asserts  the  Judge's  finding  at  [53]  is  devoid  of
        sufficient reasoning as the Judge fails to set out how he has  come
        to the conclusion that the appellant will be on the radar  the  Sri
        Lankan authorities as a person who had been of some interest to the
        authorities there solely because he has been granted asylum in  the
        UK. This is not made  out  such  finding  originates  from  GJ  and
        appears to be purely  speculative  not  supported  by  any  of  the
        evidence.
    13. The Secretary of State also note the Judge allowed the appeal under
        the Immigration Rules with  there  being  no  consideration  as  to
        whether the appellant met the Rules, the inference to be drawn from
        the Judge's findings would suggest KS had  not  met  the  rules  in
        relation to his relationship with his partner and children.
    14. Although the appellant's representative in his reply to the earlier
        directions sets out the best case possible, when arguing any  error
        is not material, I do not agree.
    15. The Judge was required to approach the  question  of  cessation  of
        refugee status in line with the guidance provided in  MA  (Somalia)
        and properly analyse all the available evidence which he  does  not
        appear to have done so. The Judge makes a  finding  purportedly  in
        accordance with GJ in relation to the country situation and risk on
        return which does not appear to be supported  by  the  findings  in
        that Country Guidance case. The Judge speculates as the future risk
        at [53] yet such a conclusion is not supported by adequate  reasons
        and does not appear to have been one reasonably open to  the  Judge
        in  any  event.  The  Judge  also  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules with no reasoning, no  analysis,  or  ability  to
        identify which rule he was talking about.
    16. I find the errors made by the Judge  are  so  fundamental  that  it
        undermines  the  decision  in  its  entirety.  I  agree  with  KS's
        representative, and in accordance with the Presidential Guidance on
        the remission of appeals, the interests  of  justice  and  fairness
        requires this matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
        at Taylor House to be heard afresh, de novo, by a judge other  than
        Judge MA Khan.



Decision

    17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit this appeal
        to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard by a
        judge other than Judge Khan.

   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 June 2020












