

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00155/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 3rd March 2020                   |On: 17th June 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                           Mohamed Hassan Mohamed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by IAS (Liverpool)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born in  1986.  He  appeals,  on
    protection and human rights grounds, against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him.

    Background and Decision to Deport

 2. The Appellant was brought to the United Kingdom in  1998  when  he  was
    approximately 12 years old. He had initially sought protection  as  the
    dependent of the cousin[1] who had brought  him  here,  but  when  that
    cousin abandoned him he sought asylum in his own right in 2002. He  was
    granted refugee status and, on the 7th March 2003, indefinite leave  to
    remain.

 3. The Appellant is a serious criminal.  He received his first  conviction
    aged 18 and has received many more  since:  his  PNC  record  shows  26
    offences plus 2 non-recordable offences.   His criminal career  started
    with   a   series   of   driving-relating   crimes   (driving    whilst
    uninsured/disqualified,  using  a  mobile  phone  at  the  wheel),  has
    included drug offences (Class B and A) and latterly escalated to Actual
    Bodily Harm[2], for which the Appellant was  sentenced  to  27  months'
    imprisonment[3] on the 13th February 2017.  The Court further imposed a
    restraining order for 5 years, preventing the Appellant from contacting
    either of the victims of the assault or  from  returning  to  the  area
    where it took place.

 4. As a result of this offending, the Secretary of State  has  decided  to
    deport the Appellant.  The legal framework for the Secretary of State's
    decision is section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007,  which  requires
    her to 'automatically' deport foreign criminals:

         '32  Automatic deportation

            (1)   In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

                (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                (b)    who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                and

                (c)    to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

            (2)   Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to  a  period
            of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

            (3)   Condition 2 is that-

                (a)    the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                State under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration
                and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal), and

                (b)    the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

            (4)   For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
            1971  (c.  77),  the  deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
            conducive to the public good.

            (5)   The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
            respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).'

 5. The Appellant can however successfully resist  deportation  if  he  can
    demonstrate that one of the 'exceptions' set out in section 33  of  the
    same Act applies to him:

         '33  Exceptions

            (1)   Section 32(4) and (5)-

                (a)    do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                applies (subject to subsection (7) below), and

                (b)    are subject to sections 7 and 8  of  the  Immigration
                Act 1971 (Commonwealth citizens, Irish  citizens,  crew  and
                other exemptions).

            (2)   Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
            pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

                (a)    a person's Convention rights, or

                (b)    the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                Convention.

            ...'

 6. In respect of s33(2)(a) the Secretary of State  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom, with leave, for a long time.
    She is not  however  satisfied  that  he  is  culturally  and  socially
    integrated here, or that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration in Somalia. As such any interference with his Article 8
    rights would be proportionate.

 7. In respect of s33(2)(b) the Secretary of State  imposed  a  certificate
    under s72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The
    effect of such a  certificate  is  that  the  Appellant  is  no  longer
    entitled to a grant  of  refugee  status  or  humanitarian  protection,
    because of his serious criminality.

 8.  For  good  measure  the  Secretary  of  State  has  found   that   the
    circumstances connected with the Appellant's grant of refugee status no
    longer exist, and that it would now be safe to return him  to  Somalia.
    The Secretary of State's 'refusal letter' is dated 20th September 2018.
    It relies upon the guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia
    CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) to the effect that the conflict in the  city
    is now over, that al-Shabaab militants have been defeated,  that  there
    is an economic boom that works to the advantage of returnees, and  that
    clan warfare is a thing of the past.    That, contends the Secretary of
    State, deals with any residual Article 3 claim that the Appellant might
    have.

    The Appeal

 9. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on  two  grounds:  he
    submitted  that  he  remained  a  person  in  need   of   international
    protection,  and  further  that  it   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 private life to deport him today.

10. On the 29th November 2018 the appeal came before Judge Mark  Davies  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. By his decision  of  the  10th  December  2018
    Judge Davies dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  which
    was granted on the 4th March 2019 by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun.

12. On the 20th May 2019 the matter came before me. In my written  decision
    of the same date I set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  aside.
    My reasons for doing so are as follows.

13. The first thing to  be  said  about  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is that it betrays a lack of anxious scrutiny. Whilst  defects
    in its structure might be salvageable, a fundamental error  appears  to
    have arisen in that the  First-tier  Tribunal  repeatedly  ascribes  to
    Appellant's  Counsel  Mr  Brown  submissions  that  he  did  not  make.
    Paragraph  49  reads  "Mr  Brown   suggested   the   offences...   were
    victimless". That is a most surprising submission for  any  Counsel  to
    have made, but particularly where the  victim  of  the  assault  was  a
    vulnerable woman  brutally  attacked  in  her  own  home.  I  am  quite
    satisfied that Mr Brown said no such thing. I can be so  satisfied  not
    just because he denies it, but because it is squarely contrary  to  the
    Appellant's written case, and because Home Office Presenting Officer Ms
    Young, who appeared for the Respondent at first  instance  and  at  the
    'error of law' hearing in May 2019, agrees that it simply was not said.
       Further  and  more  significantly,  the  Tribunal  appears  to  have
    proceeded on the basis [at its paragraph 52]  that  Mr  Brown  conceded
    that Article 3 could not be relied upon.  Again,  both  representatives
    agreed before me that the Tribunal here fundamentally misunderstood the
    Appellant's case. Article 3 was not conceded, and for the  Tribunal  to
    have proceeded on the basis that it was is an error of  fact  amounting
    to an error of law.

14. The  Appellant  further  took  issue  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    analysis of section 72. It is submitted  that  in  its  assessment  the
    Tribunal omitted to take material evidence into account.    Before  the
    First-tier Tribunal the Appellant had sought to rebut  the  presumption
    that he presents an ongoing danger to the  community  very  largely  by
    relying on the evidence of one Paul McCann, the  Appellant's  probation
    officer.   Since Mr McCann was a person well placed to comment  on  the
    question of ongoing risk,  this  was  potentially  important  evidence.
    Aside from an acknowledgment at its paragraph 25  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal read it, Mr McCann's evidence features not at all in the final
    reasoning from paragraph 57 on.

15. In addition I could  find  no  clear  reasoning  in  the  determination
    addressing the question  of  cessation,  other  than  the  comments  at
    paragraph 64 about the ability of the  Benadiri  clan  to  support  the
    Appellant if he returns to Mogadishu.  This reasoning fails to  address
    the evidence relied upon by the Appellant but more fundamentally  fails
    to even engage with the submissions made by  the  Respondent,  who  had
    relied on MOJ.  As the headnote of MOJ makes clear, members of minority
    clans cannot look to their fellow clan members for support:

         "On the other hand, relocation in  Mogadishu  for  a  person  of  a
         minority clan with no former links to the city, no access to  funds
         and no other form of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to
         be realistic as, in the absence of means to establish  a  home  and
         some form of ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of
         having no alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within
         an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having to live  in
         conditions that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards".

16. This failure to engage with the evidence  in  its  assessment  of  risk
    further led the Tribunal to err in its assessment of whether there were
    "very significant obstacles" to integration under paragraph 399A of the
    Rules. In its assessment of whether the Appellant met the "integration"
    test in the same rule I am satisfied that further error arises in  that
    the Tribunal appeared to discount twenty years of life  in  the  United
    Kingdom simply on the basis of the conviction: see Tirabi (deportation;
    lawfully resident; s5(1)) [2018] UKUT 199 (IAC).

17. My written decision of the 20th May 2019 concluded:

         "For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal must be set aside in its entirety.  If  the  Tribunal
         fundamentally misunderstood the case for the Appellant  there  must
         be real doubts about whether he had a fair hearing.  I  am  further
         satisfied that the Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  make  relevant
         findings, failing to take material evidence into  account,  and  in
         failing to apply country guidance".

18. I directed that the matter be  brought  back  before  me  so  that  the
    decision  in  the  appeal  could  be  remade.   There   followed   some
    significant and unfortunate delay.  A hearing on the 2nd July 2019  was
    adjourned because the Appellant  was  unwell.  A  hearing  on  the  7th
    October 2019 was  adjourned  because  Counsel  was  not  available.   A
    hearing proceeded on the 8th November 2019; I heard oral evidence  from
    the Appellant, recorded verbatim in a typed note, and submissions  from
    the parties.  I reserved my decision. The on the 18th November 2019 the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal (President Mr  Justice  Lane  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington) in SB (Refugee Revocation: IDP Camps) Somalia
    [2019]  UKUT  00358  (IAC)  became  available.   Given  its   potential
    relevance to the Appellant's case, I gave directions that  the  parties
    were at liberty to make further submissions should they wish to do  so.
    The parties responded by requesting that a further hearing  be  listed:
    this took place on the 3rd March 2020 when  Mr  Brown  and  Mr  McVeety
    addressed me on the impact of SB on the  Appellant's  case.  A  further
    cause for delay was that my typed note, taken on the 8th November 2019,
    was for a time unavailable to me because the file became corrupted  and
    could not  be  opened.    I  am  grateful  to  the  parties  for  their
    assistance in helping me resolve that issue. I  can  confirm  that  the
    full record of proceedings  of  the  November  2019  hearing  has  been
    available to me for the purpose of preparing this decision: I have  the
    typed note of Mr Brown (agreed by Mr McVeety), I have twice listened to
    the recording of the hearing made at the Civil Justice Centre,  and  in
    addition the corrupted file has now been recovered.

19. What follows is my 'remade' decision on the outcome of the appeal.

    Issue 1: section 72

20. The Secretary of State has decided  to  impose  upon  the  Appellant  a
    certificate under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002:

         '72  Serious criminal

            (1)   This section applies for the purpose of the  construction
            and application of Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention
            (exclusion from protection).

            (2)   A person shall be presumed to have been  convicted  by  a
            final  judgment  of  a  particularly  serious  crime   and   to
            constitute a danger to the community of the United  Kingdom  if
            he is-

                (a)    convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

                (b)    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two
                years.

            ...

            (6)   A presumption under subsection (2), (3)  or  (4)  that  a
            person constitutes a danger to the community is  rebuttable  by
            that person.

            ...'

21. It is not in dispute that the Appellant has been sentenced to a  period
    of 27 months imprisonment and so the conditions at s72(2) are  met.  It
    is however open to the Appellant to seek to rebut the presumption  that
    he continues to constitute a  danger  to  the  community:  s72(6).   In
    seeking to do so Mr Brown relied upon the following matters:

      i) That the Appellant's offending had to be set in the context of  his
         life. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom  as  a  12-year  old
         boy,  accompanied  by  his  cousin.  He  credibly  describes  being
         distressed  at  the  separation  from  his  family  and   how   his
         relationship with his  cousin  became  strained.   His  cousin  was
         himself traumatized, resorting to drug and alcohol  abuse  to  deal
         with that. The Appellant was thereafter abandoned  by  this  cousin
         and was taken into care. The Appellant describes being  traumatized
         by these events and in his own words: "I had never had  any  proper
         guidance and I fell into bad company". His first offence  was  when
         he was still a teenager.  It should further be noted that  in  June
         2015, a year before the index offence, the  Appellant  was  himself
         subject to a serious assault. He was stabbed in a  shop  in  London
         multiple times and states  that  as  a  result  his  mental  health
         deteriorated.

     ii) The Appellant has expressed remorse for his offending behaviour. In
         his statement dated 21st November 2018 the Appellant says this:  "I
         acknowledge that I  went  down  the  wrong  path  and  I  committed
         offences and caused a lot of harm to people. I feel sad  and  sorry
         for my behaviour. I am disappointed in myself. I regret my actions,
         I let myself down and I regret that I hurt people".

    iii) The Appellant has not been convicted since the index offence[4]  of
         actual bodily harm.  He has further testified that  he  has  turned
         his life around and that he wishes to make a fresh start and make a
         positive contribution to society. Whilst in prison he undertook  an
         alcohol awareness course (the Appellant avers that he was under the
         influence of  alcohol  during  some  of  his  offences),  an  anger
         management course and an Islamic spiritual  course.  He  has  spent
         time privately trying to "heal" himself.

     iv) It is the view of the probation service that since his release from
         prison  the  Appellant  has  exhibited  "positive  engagement   and
         compliance". In his letter dated the 17th November  2018  Probation
         Officer Mr Paul McCann reports that  the  Appellant  has  expressed
         deep regret for his actions, and has said that he  understands  the
         hurt that he caused.  He has also explored  the  triggers  for  his
         offending behaviour and has sought to avoid alcohol  and  "negative
         peers".  In navigating various challenges  since  his  release  the
         Appellant has, in Mr McCann's estimation, exhibited a  "pro-social"
         attitude: as an example Mr McCann cites the Appellant's decision to
         co-operate with the police after he himself  was  attacked,  rather
         than seek out his own retribution.  Mr McCann's letter concludes:

             "Mr Hassan was initially assessed as a medium risk of  serious
             harm to the public. This assessment is based on the nature  of
             the offence and his current circumstances. However,  since  Mr
             Hassan has been under the supervision of probation he  appears
             to be managing himself and his triggers appropriately. I  have
             no evidence to indicate that Mr Hassan is not  complying  with
             his licence in the community.

             Mr Hassan is an intelligent,  polite  and  helpful  individual
             who, with the correct support  and  direction,  can  become  a
             positive, productive member of society".

    I note that Mr McCann has supplemented his 2018 evidence with a further
    short but undated letter, lodged with the Tribunal under  cover  of  an
    email dated the 26th June 2019.  Therein  Mr  McCann  states  that  the
    Appellant completed all of his probation requirements in February 2019.
    He attended all appointments as required and was polite and  compliant.
    Mr McCann states that in his opinion the Appellant has the  ability  to
    be a productive member of society.

22. Mr Brown asked me to take all of  the  foregoing  into  account  in  my
    assessment of whether the Appellant continues to pose a danger  to  the
    community. At the forefront of his  submissions  was  the  unchallenged
    fact that the Appellant has not been convicted  of  any  offence  since
    February 2017, when he was sent to prison for  the  assault  that  took
    place in August 2016. He was released in March 2018  and  has  been  on
    immigration bail  ever  since.  He  has  therefore  been  back  in  the
    community for well over two years and has not been in any  trouble.  In
    Mr Brown's submission,  this  should  be  contrasted  with  the  period
    between 2004 and 2016,  when  the  Appellant  was  committing  criminal
    offences with some regularity. This  cessation  in  offending  must  be
    assessed in the light of Mr McCann's evidence that the Appellant showed
    good engagement with probation services, and that he complied with  all
    of the requirements imposed upon him. Mr McCann's professional view  is
    that  the  Appellant  is  now  managing  himself  and  his   "triggers"
    appropriately, and that the Appellant is capable of being a  productive
    member of society.  All of that, submits Mr Brown, must then be  placed
    in the overall context of this Appellant's life. As a young refugee  he
    was separated from his family, brought to  this  country  by  an  older
    relative who apparently made little or no effort to care for him before
    abandoning him; he was taken into care and fell into bad  company.  His
    offending behaviour started in that chaotic youth, and his record,  and
    its apparent halt since 2016, must be assessed against that background.

23. Mr McVeety  asked  that  I  begin  my  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    behaviour by reminding myself of the nature of his criminality.  In the
    years between 2004 and 2016 he was convicted of 26 offences.  The  last
    was the index offence for which he now faces deportation. I  have  been
    provided with the sentencing remarks of Mr Recorder Potter, handed down
    at Cambridge Crown Court on the 13th  February  2017.  Recorder  Potter
    sets out the background to the  offence.  The  Appellant  and  his  co-
    defendant paid a visit to the home of man whom  it  is  said  owed  the
    Appellant money. At first the  Appellant  appeared  to  deal  with  the
    question of the debt in a reasonable manner, but moments after he  left
    the property he, for whatever reason, changed his approach. He returned
    to the house in an aggressive state of mind and swung a weapon  at  the
    man who owed him the  money.  The  man  tried  to  get  away  from  the
    Appellant who, instead  of  pursuing  him,  grabbed  a  woman  who  was
    present. Recorder Potter comments that the woman believed that she  was
    assaulted to "get back" at the Appellant's debtor:  in  his  assessment
    that is exactly right. The sentencing remarks continue:

         "You hit her with sufficient force on two occasions with a glass, a
         weapon, that caused her to fall to the floor. That should have been
         the moment when you thought twice  about  continuing  the  escapade
         that you were embarked upon but you didn't, and  you  continued  to
         assault a woman who was in no state to defend  herself  whilst  she
         was lying on the floor, pressed up against the bannisters  in  full
         sight of her partner who could see  what  was  going  on,  and  you
         kicked her not just to the leg and the shoulder  but  also  to  the
         face and at some stage in the stomach. You've seen the  photographs
         and what you did to her face causing to her cuts  and  bruises  and
         humiliating her still further because the severity  of  the  attack
         was such that she actually wet herself. You  only  stopped  because
         your co-defendant ... told you to  stop  and  at  that  point  [the
         victim], clearly terrified and suffering, as she was  to  tell  the
         police, excruciating pain ran from the location, jumped  through  a
         window and broke her ankle, fractured her  ankle,  and  you  caused
         that, no-one else".

24. Mr McVeety asked me to note the "utter  contempt"  that  the  Appellant
    demonstrated towards the woman he assaulted, who in the facts rehearsed
    by the sentencing judge, owed him nothing and was entirely innocent. In
    respect of the Restraining Order the Judge added that he considered  it
    necessary for the protection  of  the  two  individuals  who  were  the
    subjects of the attack and to "protect Cambridgeshire",  the  scene  of
    the crime. The Order was imposed for five years.   Mr  McVeety  pointed
    out that at the date of the hearing that Order was still in  place.  He
    submitted that this was a strong indication that the Appellant remained
    a danger to the community in the form of those two individuals.

25. It is not in dispute that the Appellant has  committed  a  particularly
    serious crime. That is  not  the  question  before  me  (cf  IH  (s.72;
    'Particularly  Serious  Crime')  Eritrea  [2009]  UKAIT  00012).    The
    presumption that the Appellant  seeks  to  rebut,  in  accordance  with
    s72(6), is that he continues to be a "danger to the community".

26. In my assessment of that matter I have had regard  to  the  Appellant's
    difficult life. Although I have not been shown any independent evidence
    (for instance  in  probation  or  social  services  reports)  that  the
    Appellant was indeed 'led astray' in  his  youth,  on  the  bare  facts
    before me I see no reason to reject his  evidence  that  this  was  the
    case. He grew up in Somalia in a time of conflict, lost his  father  to
    violence and then the rest of  his  family  to  forced  migration.  The
    'uncle' who was supposed to care for him did no such thing and he ended
    up in the care system. The rest is history, set out in black and  white
    in the PNC.  I accept Mr Brown's characterisation  of  the  Appellant's
    youth as chaotic, and one that  perhaps  unsurprisingly  led  him  into
    trouble. The question for me, in my consideration of  the  certificate,
    is whether he has left that chaos behind.

27. I have placed what weight I can on the Appellant's history, and on  the
    fact that he has not been convicted of any offence since  2017.  Having
    done so, I am unable to find  that  these  matters  are  of  sufficient
    weight to rebut the presumption in the statute.

28. As to the challenges faced by the  Appellant  in  his  youth,  this  is
    something of a double edged  sword.   If  he  is  the  product  of  his
    upbringing, then with the criminal record that he has, it might be said
    that  there  would  need  to  be  very  powerful  evidence  indeed   to
    demonstrate  that  he  has  overcome  what  has   become   his   innate
    criminality. On the other hand it is of course not the case that  every
    refugee child who faces hardship ends up becoming a  violent  criminal:
    indeed that is very rarely the case, serving only to underline that the
    Appellant chose his own path.

29. I have looked with care at the evidence of Mr McCann,  the  Appellant's
    probation officer. He has  made  a  very  positive  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's  engagement  with  probation  services,  and  his  personal
    interaction with Mr McCann. I accept and give some weight to  the  fact
    that the Appellant has complied with the terms of his licence.  I  must
    however agree with Mr McVeety that  Mr  McCann  has  chosen  his  words
    carefully. He records that the Appellant has  "expressed"  deep  regret
    and that he has the "ability" to become a positive member  of  society.
    That someone has the "ability" to not be a criminal is hardly a  matter
    that can attract any significant weight in my evaluation: all  but  the
    most extreme of offenders have that. That the Appellant  has  expressed
    regret for viciously assaulting a defenceless woman in her own home  is
    of course to be welcomed but having looked with care at his evidence  I
    am not persuaded that he appreciates the magnitude of  that  event  for
    the victim, or why others  might  regard  it  with  revulsion.  In  his
    witness statement he simply says of the attack:  "I  am  sorry  for  my
    actions that night". I note that he devotes considerably  more  of  the
    statement to describing trauma that he has experienced.

30. Whilst I have borne in mind that there appears to  be  a  cessation  in
    criminality, the weight that can be attached  to  the  recent  lack  of
    offending is minimal, given that the Appellant remained on licence  for
    some of that period and was throughout on notice that he was subject to
    deportation proceedings: in those  circumstances  there  were  powerful
    incentives for him to stay out of trouble which would disappear  should
    this appeal be allowed.  I also recognise that for quite a  significant
    proportion of the time since the Appellant's release he  has  been  too
    injured to be out committing crimes: he was stabbed  in  an  attack  in
    Liverpool in October 2018 and then in April 2019 fell down  the  stairs
    at his home, injuring his ankle to the  extent  that  he  has  been  on
    crutches ever since.

31. Finally, there is the matter of the Restraining Order, which remains in
    place. Restraining Orders may be imposed by a sentencing judge under s5
    of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (as amended by  s12  of  the
    Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004):

         '(1) A court sentencing or otherwise dealing with  a  person  ("the
         defendant") convicted of an offence may (as well as sentencing him
         or dealing with him in any other way)  make  an  order  under  this
         section.

         (2)  The order may, for the purpose of  protecting  the  victim or
         victims of the offence, or any other person mentioned in the order,
         from conduct which-

             (a)  amounts to harassment, or

             (b)  will cause a fear of violence,

         prohibit the defendant from doing anything described in the order.

         (3)  The order may have effect for  a  specified  period  or  until
         further order.

         (3A) In proceedings under this section both the prosecution and the
         defence may lead, as further evidence, any evidence that  would  be
         admissible in proceedings for an injunction under section 3.

         (4)  The prosecutor, the defendant or any other person mentioned in
         the order may apply to the court which made the order for it to  be
         varied or discharged by a further order.

         (4A) Any person mentioned in the order is entitled to be  heard  on
         the hearing of an application under subsection (4).

         (5)  If without reasonable excuse the defendant does anything which
         he is prohibited from doing by an order under this section,  he  is
         guilty of an offence.

         (5A) ...

         (6)  A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable-

             (a)  on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for  a  term
             not exceeding five years, or a fine, or both, or

             (b)  on summary conviction, to imprisonment  for  a  term  not
             exceeding six months, or a fine not  exceeding  the  statutory
             maximum, or both.

         (7)  A court dealing with  a  person  for  an  offence  under  this
         section may vary or discharge the order in question  by  a  further
         order.'

32. It is established that an order may only be imposed where  a  Judge  is
    satisfied that it is  necessary  to  protect  the  victim/victims  from
    harassment or a fear of violence: R v Stuart Brough  [2011]  EWCA  Crim
    2802.  This was the test applied by Recorder Potter  in  February  2017
    when he told the Appellant, who had  not  opposed  its  imposition:  "I
    would have imposed it anyway, I tell you bluntly".  I accept Mr Brown's
    submission  that  the  existence  of  the  restraining  order  is   not
    determinative of the question of ongoing risk, but it is a matter  that
    I must give  some  weight  to.  The  Judge  considered  its  imposition
    necessary to protect the individuals concerned for  a  period  of  five
    years. That was his assessment in February 2017 and the  Appellant  has
    neither sought for the Order to be discharged (as would be open to  him
    under s5(4) of the Act) or produced any weighty evidence before me that
    it should be.

33. Taking all of the above into account I cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger  to
    the community.  It follows that the Appellant can  succeed  on  neither
    refugee nor humanitarian protection grounds.

    Issue 2:  Cessation and Article 3

34. The parties are in agreement that whatever the Tribunal's  decision  on
    s72, the Appellant can  still  succeed  in  his  appeal  on  protection
    grounds if he can demonstrate that he would face a real risk of inhuman
    and degrading treatment upon return to Somalia, contrary to the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 ECHR. The Respondent accepts that
    at the date that the Appellant was granted refugee status the  question
    of serious harm under Article 3 could be deemed  to  'stand  and  fall'
    with the refugee claim.  As such the grant of refugee  status  in  2003
    amounted to an acceptance that the Appellant then faced a real risk  of
    serious harm in Somalia.

35. The Respondent submitted before me that such a risk no longer pertains.
    There has been significant and durable change on the ground  such  that
    the Appellant no longer faces any such risk.  The Respondent relies  in
    particular  on  the  findings  in  MOJ  (Somalia)   and   SB   (Refugee
    revocation).

36. MOJ was decided in 2014. Its central conclusions, insofar as  they  are
    relevant to the Appellant, are expressed in the headnote:

         ii) Generally, a person who is "an ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
             associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government
             or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or   international
             organisation) on returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of  harm
             such as to require protection under Article 3 of the  ECHR  or
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In  particular,
             he will not be at real risk simply on account of having  lived
             in a European location for a period of time  of  being  viewed
             with  suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as  a  possible
             supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab  as  an  apostate  or
             someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised by living
             in a Western country.

        iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the Al Shabaab
             withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and  there  is  no  real
             prospect of a re-established presence within  the  city.  That
             was not the case at the time of the country guidance given  by
             the Tribunal in AMM.

         iv) The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
             casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab  target  groups
             such as politicians, police officers, government officials and
             those associated with NGOs  and  international  organisations,
             cannot be precisely established by  the  statistical  evidence
             which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it is established
             by the evidence considered as a whole that there  has  been  a
             reduction in the level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
             largely due to the cessation of confrontational warfare within
             the city and Al Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
             carefully selected targets.  The present level  of  casualties
             does not amount to a sufficient  risk  to  ordinary  civilians
             such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

          v) It is open to an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
             further still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral
             damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was
             not targeted at him by avoiding areas and establishments  that
             are clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it
             is not unreasonable for him to do so.

         vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab  for
             civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees
             from the West.

        vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will
             look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
             for assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing  a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.

       viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
             Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
             assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
             protection  function  than  previously.  There  are  no   clan
             militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan  based
             discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

         ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
             after a period of absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but
             are not limited to:

                . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                . length of absence from Mogadishu;

                . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

                . access to financial resources;

                . prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self employment;

                . availability of remittances from abroad;

                . means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

          x) Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.

         xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

        xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those who
             originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live
             in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)  risk
             or facing a real risk  of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan   with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards.

37. Applying MOJ the following factors clearly weigh against the Appellant:



      a)  as  an  ordinary  civilian  he  is  not  in  general  at  risk  of
         indiscriminate violence engaging Article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive;

      b) he does not face a real risk of harm  (for  instance  from  Islamic
         militants) because he is a returnee from the West;

      c) al-Shabaab have withdrawn from Mogadishu and there is no real  risk
         of forced recruitment;

      d) insofar as there pertains a risk of terrorist violence in Mogadishu
         it is not unreasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  avoid  such
         attacks by staying away from obvious  targets  such  as  government
         buildings;

      e) there is no real risk that the Appellant would be subject  to  clan
         violence in Mogadishu.

38. Mr Brown took issue with at least some of these  conclusions,  pointing
    to evidence post-dating MOJ which indicates that the Tribunal may  have
    been unduly optimistic about the ability of Somalia, and  Mogadishu  in
    particular, to escape the decades-old cycle of violence.

39. Before I address the most recent evidence  I  note  that  I  also  have
    before me an expert report on conditions  in  Somalia.  Its  author  is
    Karen O'Reilly, a protection officer for the UNHCR with long experience
    of working in East Africa processing the claims of Somali refugees.  Ms
    O'Reilly states that she has particular experience in interviewing  and
    assessing the claims of Benadiris. Her report  is  dated  22nd  October
    2018. It is based on her knowledge of the situation in Somalia  gleaned
    from interviews with refugees, and upon  objective  country  background
    material, for instance reports by Human Rights Watch and the Red Cross.
     Ms  O'Reilly  identifies  four  factors  which  she  contends  are  of
    particular significance in assessing the risk to the Appellant.

40. The first is that in her opinion the Benadiri minority continue to face
    a real risk of serious harm in Somalia today. She cites interviews that
    she has conducted with refugees who state  that  their  family  members
    have inter alia been shot, beaten, robbed, bombed or raped  by  members
    of the Abgaal or Habir Gedir clans. Ms O'Reilly then  notes  that  such
    accounts are consistent with external country information sources which
    confirm  that  the  "Benadiris/Reer  Hamars  have   historically   been
    persecuted in Somalia". Her report then sets out extracts from  a  2012
    Canadian Immigration Board report, a 2010 Minority Rights Group report,
    2008 UN materials and an extract from a paper written by an Anita  Adam
    in 2015.

41. The second issue identified by Ms O'Reilly is the "deterioration in the
    security situation in Somalia".  In this section she takes  issue  with
    the Home Office's assessment that conditions on the ground have further
    improved since MOJ.   Third, Ms O'Reilly stresses the poor humanitarian
    situation, and fourth, the  obstacles  to  employment  and  integration
    faced by those who have been away from the city for a long time.

42. In addition to the expert report the Appellant has produced a bundle of
    more recent material. The 2019 Human Rights Watch report found that  in
    2018 fighting and insecurity led to an estimated  2.7  million  Somalis
    being internally displaced, exposing them to a risk of serious abuse by
    security forces of various  descriptions,  and  to  harsh  humanitarian
    conditions which the UN  believe  to  include  indiscriminate  killing,
    forced eviction, sexual violence and limited access to basic  services.
    Notably Human Rights Watch also report on incidents of  clan  violence,
    in direct contradiction to the conclusions in MOJ  that  clan  militias
    were no  more.  The  bundle  also  contains  considerable  evidence  of
    continuing violence in  the  city  including  numerous  car  bombs  and
    targeted assassinations.

43. In evaluating this evidence I have borne in mind the test to be applied
    when considering whether to depart from extant country guidance.  In SG
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940
    indicated that there  must  be  "strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
    evidence".

44. I regret to say that I did not derive very  much  assistance  from  the
    report of Ms O'Reilly. I do not doubt that Ms O'Reilly has accrued many
    years' experience  in  interviewing  Somali  refugees  and  in  reading
    reports on the region but neither has given her any particular  insight
    beyond that available to this Tribunal, which  has  of  course  similar
    experience in hearing the first-hand accounts of refugees, and is  able
    to read the human rights reports for  itself.    The  report  therefore
    added little to what is already known and accepted, for  instance  that
    minorities  such   as   the   Benadiri   have   historically   suffered
    disproportionately during the long conflict in Somalia.

45. Having regard to the more recent bundle I am prepared  to  accept,  for
    the purpose of this appeal, that  there  continues  to  be  significant
    terrorist activity in Mogadishu and  that  the  security  situation  is
    generally changeable. It can be said that the view expressed in 2014 in
    respect of inter-clan violence has proved to be unduly optimistic:  the
    UN, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty  International  all  refer  to  clan
    militias being involved in fighting.  I  do  not  accept  however  that
    conditions have deteriorated  to  the  extent  that  Article  15(c)  is
    generally engaged in Mogadishu.     Al-Shabaab  have  not  retaken  any
    territory in the city, and in that respect  the  overall  situation  is
    much the same as it was when the Tribunal heard the  evidence  that  it
    did  in   MOJ.   Although   the   threat   of   terrorist   attack   on
    government/international targets has not diminished to the extent hoped
    by that Tribunal, the reality is that most inhabitants of the city  are
    able to live and work without facing  a  real  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence.

46. As for the humanitarian situation, it remains  the  case  that  a  huge
    number of civilians continue to depend upon international organisations
    and/or the Somali government for sustenance and shelter.    This brings
    me to those parts of MOJ dealing with  socio-economic  conditions.  The
    Appellant stresses the following matters:

      a) Where an individual has no family or clan connections  to  turn  to
         there will need to be a careful assessment of his circumstances;

      b) If he has no means of supporting himself there is a  prospect  that
         he will find himself living in  circumstances  falling  below  that
         which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms;

      c) As a minority clan member there is a real risk that he will end  up
         in an IDP camp "where there is a real possibility of having to live
         in  conditions  that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
         standards".

47. As Mr Brown acknowledged at the  final  hearing  in  this  appeal,  the
    findings to this effect in MOJ must now be read in light of  subsequent
    Court of Appeal commentary, in two cases in  particular:  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 and  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA  Civ  1345,
    such commentary being found to be  authoritative  by  the  Presidential
    panel of the Upper Tribunal in  SB [at �49].

48. The issue arising in SB was whether the guidance at (ix) -(xii) of  the
    headnote in MOJ could be read as a general finding that  returnees  who
    were at a real risk of ending up in an IDP camp - i.e.  those  with  no
    connections or means of supporting themselves - thereby  faced  a  real
    risk  of  living  in  conditions  contrary  to  the  United   Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 3.   In Said Burnett  LJ  (as  he  then  was)
    stressed that such  a  generalised  finding  could  not  be  considered
    consistent with the jurisprudence  on  Article  3.  That  jurisprudence
    emphasises that absent a Sufi and Elmi exception - where the conditions
    on the ground result from human action - the threshold  to  be  met  is
    particularly  high;   more   importantly   the   assessment   must   be
    individualised, and  based  on  the  characteristics  of  the  returnee
    concerned. The guidance in MOJ could not therefore be read as a blanket
    finding. All that the Tribunal could have intended  was  that  decision
    makers conduct an individualised assessment.  Burnett LJ's  conclusions
    were subsequently endorsed by Hamblen LJ in MS.

49. With that guidance in mind the Tribunal in SB went on,  with  reference
    back to the earlier country  guidance  in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  00445,  to
    say this:

         "55. ... The largely naturally-caused events  that  led  the  Upper
         Tribunal in AMM to find that the high threshold for Article 3 harm,
         as regards conditions in IDP camps, had been met, no longer applied
         at the time of MOJ.  Given that there is nothing in MOJ or anywhere
         else that we have seen which suggests human agency  is  responsible
         for the generalised conditions faced in IDP camps  (as  opposed  to
         instances of specific harm), that high threshold needs to  be  met.
         Insofar as MOJ might  have  been  read  to  suggest  otherwise,  or
         insofar as it might otherwise be read as indicating  a  generalised
         risk of Article 3 harm, Burnett LJ's judgment cogently explains why
         that is wrong.  Irrespective of whether his  judgment  is  formally
         binding on us, it is fully-reasoned and compelling  and  should  be
         followed. In our view, it will be an error of law for  a  judge  to
         refuse to do so.

         56.  We are reinforced in  this  conclusion  by  MI  (Palestine)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1782. In
         his judgment, Flaux LJ held that  Burnett  LJ  in  Said  "evidently
         considered that the country guidance case [viz MOJ] showed that the
         conditions  in  Somalia,  although  harsh,  could  no   longer   be
         attributed to the direct and indirect actions of the parties to the
         former conflict so that the N Test applied to the applicant's  case
         and he could not satisfy that test, hence the Secretary of  State's
         appeal succeeded" (paragraph 18).

         57.  Mr Toal submitted that, in relation to paragraph 31  of  Said,
         there was "no inconsistency between the requirement  to  conduct  a
         properly individualised assessment  of  an  applicant's  particular
         circumstances and recognition  that  some  predicaments  shared  by
         large groups of people violate the Article  3  rights  of  all  the
         members of the group".  In this regard, Mr  Toal  relied  upon  the
         judgment of the Strasbourg Court in Salah Sheekh v the  Netherlands
         (2207) App 1948/04.  In that case, the ECtHR held that a person who
         belonged to Asharaf clan would, as such, be at real risk of Article
         3 ill-treatment and it was unnecessary for him or her to  show  any
         further reasons why, as an individual, he or she might be at  risk.



         58.  Whilst this is, of course, correct,  it  does  not  carry  the
         present claimant's case any further.  As a person who may be in  an
         IDP camp, the claimant would not, for the reasons we have given, be
         as such at real risk of Article 3 harm.  In order to establish  the
         risk of such harm he  would,  therefore,  have  to  show  that  his
         personal circumstances meant he reached the requisite threshold".

50. It is against this legal framework  that  I  evaluate  the  Appellant's
    likely circumstances upon return to Somalia.

51. When he claimed asylum in 2002 the Appellant, then aged only 16,   made
    a witness statement in which he explained  that  his  father  had  been
    killed in the war in Somalia and that his mother had asked  a  relative
    to take the Appellant away because she was unable to cope with  looking
    after her 5 children alone. Their home in Jowar had been  seized  by  a
    militia and at the date that the Appellant and his cousin left  Somalia
    the family were sheltering in the home  of  an  aunt.  The  Appellant's
    evidence today is that his family all left Somalia at the same time  as
    he did - over 22 years ago - and that he no longer has  any  connection
    or clan affiliations there.  Nor does he have any friends that he knows
    of living in the country.   He can recall that he and his  family  were
    from the Benadiri minority, but is unaware of what  sub-clan  he  might
    have belonged to: he professes little understanding of the clan  system
    or how it works.  At the hearing in November 2019 the Appellant told me
    that he has a sister in America whom he found through Facebook. She  is
    married and works in a shop - she got  resettled  in  America  straight
    from a refugee camp. Other than that he has not been able to  find  his
    mother or any other family member. He has had no contact with  his  mum
    for over 20 years.  When he was in immigration detention  there  was  a
    poster  advertising   an   organisation   that   helped   with   family
    reunification. He gave them all his details but they did not  get  back
    to him with any news.   The Appellant  states  that  although  he  does
    still have Somali friends his main means of communication is in English
    and that he has forgotten much of his Somali.

52. Although Mr McVeety took  some  issue  with  the  assertions  that  the
    Appellant knows no-one in Mogadishu - or anywhere else  -  to  whom  he
    could turn, the reality is that I have no evidential basis to  conclude
    otherwise. The Appellant has consistently  said  that  he  has  had  no
    contact with his mother for over 20 years and as Mr Brown  points  out,
    there is no indication that the Appellant had any family  support  when
    he ended up in care, or in hospital having been stabbed on two separate
    occasions.  I am further prepared to accept the  Appellant's  assertion
    that  he  has  no  understanding  of,  or  access  to,  any  clan-based
    affiliations. As a member of the Benadiri minority it is unlikely  that
    any such affiliation would in  any  event  be  of  much  assistance.  I
    therefore proceed on the basis that he will be returning  to  Mogadishu
    with no connections to call upon.  I further accept that as someone who
    has not been there since childhood he may face  immediate  difficulties
    in navigating the city, for instance in knowing which area might be the
    most suitable place to live.

53. As to the Appellant's ability to obtain work in Mogadishu  and  sustain
    himself, I am not prepared to accept that the Appellant  will  struggle
    with his language skills. He spoke no language but Somali until he  was
    12 years old and for some time after his arrival in the United  Kingdom
    continued to live with his cousin  to  whom,  it  can  be  assumed,  he
    continued to speak Somali. He  told  me  himself  that  he  has  Somali
    friends. I think it unlikely, in those circumstances, that  his  spoken
    Somali is of sufficiently poor standard to present any kind of obstacle
    to him making himself understood.

54. I was referred to his evidence that  he  has  since  his  release  from
    prison sustained  an  injury  that  has  left  him  disabled.  He  fell
    downstairs at his home in April 2019 and broke his  ankle.  He  had  to
    have an operation in which two plates were fitted in his leg and at the
    hearing in November 2019  he  told  me  that  his  mobility  was  still
    significantly affected (he attended that hearing on crutches).  At that
    time he was having to sleep on a friend's sofa because he is unable  to
    cope with the stairs in his own place. He still had staples in his leg.
      The Appellant further avers that he is taking medication to help with
    depression, and that he suffers  from  memory  problems.   He  is  very
    frightened of being returned to Somalia and does not know how he  would
    cope there.    I was provided with some medical evidence to support the
    Appellant's claims: an x-ray of his ankle showed his stapes and plates,
    his GP records show that he is being prescribed 10 mg of citalopram for
    depression, and various items of correspondence show that he was  being
    treated for a fracture at the Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University
    Hospital during 2019.  I was not however  shown  any  medical  evidence
    that his ankle injury would lead  to  long-term  mobility  problems  as
    suggested by the Appellant in his evidence: his discharge summary  from
    the hospital dated the 17th April 2019 states that he should  not  bear
    weight on his leg for 6 weeks.

55. Having had regard to that evidence I do accept that the Appellant is so
    debilitated by his ankle injury or depression that he would  be  unable
    to work to support himself. His fracture does appear to have been quite
    complex but it is now 14 months since the injury occurred and there  is
    no medical evidence before me to indicate that  it  will  lead  to  any
    significant long-term impairment of mobility.   As to his depression  I
    note that 10mg citalopram is the lowest possible dose that this  common
    anti-depressant is prescribed at, and that there  is  no  psychological
    evidence before me to support a conclusion that mild  depression  could
    have any significant impact on the Appellant's ability to integrate  in
    Somalia.

56. I now apply those findings to the conclusions of the Tribunal  in  MOJ,
    read with the subsequent clarification of the Court of Appeal  and  the
    President's decision in SB.

57. The Appellant is undoubtedly going to face some obstacles in resettling
    in Mogadishu. He will have to take measures to protect his own security
    such as avoiding obvious targets for terrorist attack: as the  Tribunal
    concluded in MOJ, it is not  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  do  so.
    Although he has no current friends or family in the city  there  is  no
    obvious reason why such contacts  - the essence of  a  private  life  -
    cannot in time be established: it  is  of  course  the  case  that  the
    Appellant knew no-one when he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.    It
    remains open to him to do some research, possibly with  the  assistance
    of his sister in America, and find relatives or old family friends  who
    may still be in the area.  If he wishes to avoid entering an  IDP  camp
    he is going to have to work to support himself. He has not demonstrated
    why he would be unable to do so. He has sufficient spoken Somali to  be
    able to  communicate,  and  in  addition  speaks  fluent  English;  his
    probation officer Mr McCann assessed that he is  an  intelligent  young
    man who has the ability to be a productive  member  of  society.   With
    those factors in mind I find that the Appellant has failed to show that
    he would not be able to "access the economic  opportunities  that  have
    been produced by the economic boom, especially as there is evidence  to
    the effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense of  those  who
    have never been away".  If for whatever reason the Appellant does  find
    himself in an IDP camp he will, on the evidence before me,  undoubtedly
    face socio-economic conditions far below those that he has  enjoyed  in
    the United Kingdom. He has not however demonstrated  that  he  has  any
    particular characteristics or vulnerabilities  which  would  mean  that
    those conditions would be of sufficient severity as to  engage  Article
    3.

58. It follows that the Appellant can no longer refuse to avail himself  of
    the protection of his country of nationality, because the circumstances
    in connection with which he was recognised as a refugee - the  position
    of the Benadiri in 1998 - have ceased to exist.

    Issue 3: Article 8

59. Section 33(2)(a) of the Border Act 2007 provides that the Appellant can
    avoid deportation if it can be shown that it would be contrary  to  his
    rights under the European Convention on  Human  Rights.  The  Appellant
    asserts that his removal would be a disproportionate, and so  unlawful,
    interference with his private life, as protected by Article 8 ECHR.  In
    a case where Article 8 is invoked I must be  guided  as  to  where  the
    public interest lies by s117C Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002. Section s117C(4) sets out the following tests  in  respect  of  a
    claimant's private life:

         '(4) Exception 1 applies where-

            (a)   C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
            most of C's life,

            (b)   C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
            Kingdom, and

            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
            integration into the country to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
            deported.'

60. If the Appellant can demonstrate that each of requirements are met, his
    appeal must be allowed on human rights grounds, notwithstanding that it
    is in the public interest to deport foreign criminals.

61. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State  Mr  McVeety  conceded  that  the
    Appellant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
    his life. I am satisfied that this was a concession properly made.  The
    Appellant was granted refugee status on the  7th  March  2003  and  was
    subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain. The deportation  order
    was not signed until the 19th September 2018, giving  the  Appellant  a
    total of 15 years, 6 months and 12 days  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave to remain. Prior  to  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
    Appellant has spent 12 years, 4 months  and  16  days  outside  of  the
    country; since the deportation order was made a further 1 year 8 months
    and 21 days have accrued, making an aggregate total of approximately 14
    years.

62. The Secretary of State did not accept that the  Appellant  is  socially
    and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.

63. The Appellant himself points out that he has lived in this country  for
    22 years. He has grown up here and speaks English without  any  accent.
    He states that he knows no culture other than the  United  Kingdom  and
    that he has many friends in this country - they are from all over,  not
    just Somalis. He also has friends who are Arabs, Africans, Yemenis  and
    Liverpudlians. The Appellant told me that if he allowed  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom he would like to go to college and do something like
    IT.  I accept that these are all matters which indicate some degree  of
    social integration.

64. Against those  matters,  however,  I  must  weigh  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has, during his adult life in the United  Kingdom,  committed
    no fewer than 26 criminal offences. This is not a Tirabi  situation  in
    which one crime is balanced against a settled life. This is a  question
    of whether, during the years 2004  and  2016  when  the  Appellant  was
    committing crime with solid regularity, it can  be  said  that  he  was
    socially and culturally integrated here. Although it was  not  part  of
    the Respondent's case, there is some suggestion in  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant's actions arose in the context of his  involvement  in  a
    gang: he told his GP as much in 2018.  If that is right then  it  would
    be entirely consistent with the Appellant's record, not just in respect
    of his violent or drug related offences, but in  his  many  convictions
    that indicate a general rejection  of  authority,  i.e.  driving  after
    disqualification, failing to surrender to custody  or  to  comply  with
    community orders.

65. In this regard Mr McVeety  placed  reliance  on  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]
    EWCA  Civ  551  where  the  Court  draw  a  clear  distinction  between
    integration in an anti-social,  pro-criminal  milieu,  and  integration
    within the lawful  social  structure  of  the  United  Kingdom  [�56-57
    Binbuga].  Being a criminal does not automatically place an  individual
    outwith society, but in order to show that the test is met  there  must
    be some evidence of participation  within  the  "various  incidents  of
    society such as clubs, societies, workplaces or  places  of  study"  as
    opposed simply to association with pro-criminal peers.  I have no  such
    evidence in this case. Although I believe that he would  for  a  period
    have attended school in  London  I  have  seen  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has ever worked, or been involved  in  any  lawful  community
    organisation in this country. His only real engagement  has  been  with
    the criminal justice system.  I  heard  no  evidence  from  friends  or
    family. In those circumstances I find that the Appellant has failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof  and  show  that  he  is  culturally  and
    socially integrated in the United Kingdom.

66. It follows that I need say very little about whether the Appellant  can
    meet the final  limb  of  the  test,  that  he  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Somalia. I need do no more  than  refer
    back to my findings in respect of risk on  return.  I  there  concluded
    that as a Somali man with an ability to speak the language  there  were
    no real obstacles to the Appellant in  time  managing  to  establish  a
    private life for himself in Mogadishu. He may  not  know  anyone  there
    today, but I was shown no evidence to suggest that there would  be  any
    impediment to him making new friends and building his  own  connections
    there. He has further failed to demonstrate that he would be unable  to
    find work and support himself.

67. I am not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  that  the
    'private life' exception to automatic deportation applies to  him.  Nor
    am I satisfied that there are in this case any particular  reasons  why
    the public interest in deportation would, exceptionally, be outweighed.
    The Appellant has no particular 'pull' factors compelling his remaining
    in the United Kingdom - he  has  no  family  here,  nor  is  there  any
    evidence of strong  social  ties  such  as  a  career  or  friendships.
    Conversely  there  are  no  'push'  factors  relating  to  his   likely
    circumstances in Somalia that are of sufficient gravity to warrant  the
    appeal being allowed. The Appellant will undoubtedly face challenges in
    rebuilding his life in Mogadishu but for all of the  reasons  rehearsed
    above these fall short of establishing  the  sort  of  very  compelling
    circumstances that would render this deportation disproportionate.




    Decisions

68. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it must be set aside in its entirety.

69. The decision in  the  appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  the  appeal  is
    dismissed on all grounds.

70. There is no order for anonymity.


     [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
Date 11th June 2020
-----------------------
[1] Also referred to elsewhere as the Appellant's 'uncle': the Appellant
clarified before me that the man in question was his cousin but because he
was older it was culturally appropriate to refer to him as 'uncle'.
[2] In my 'error of law' decision dated 20th May 2019 I mistakenly referred
to this offence as Grievous Bodily Harm. Although that was the original
charge, the jury returned a verdict of guilty of Actual Bodily Harm
[3] References in the papers to the Appellant having been sentenced to 30
months for the index offence are inaccurate: he received a sentence of 27
months, and an outstanding suspended sentence of three months was
reactivated.
[4] Confusingly a number of different dates have been given in the papers
in respect of the index offence of ABH.  Counsel's instructions were that
the assault took place in June 2016, and the Appellant himself states that
it took place in 2015.  I have based my decision on the information gleaned
from the PNC, record of indictment and the sentencing remarks: the assault
took place on the 19th August 2016 and the Appellant was convicted and
sentenced in the Crown Court on the 13th February 2017.

