
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00069/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th May 2017                       |On 14 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                   A M h A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on [ ] 1993.  He entered the
    UK illegally on 10th June 2007 and applied for asylum.  He was  granted
    refugee status on 5th October 2007  with  leave  to  remain  until  5th
    October 2012.  However, the Appellant was  convicted  of  a  string  of
    offences  including  robbery,  handling  stolen  goods,  breach  of   a
    suspended sentence, and  causing  death  by  careless  driving.   As  a
    consequence, it was decided to revoke the  Appellant's  refugee  status
    under the provisions of Article 1C(5) of the  1951  Convention  and  to
    deport him.  The Appellant appealed on human rights grounds,  and  that
    appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Gribble  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 26th December  2016.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR
    for the reasons given in her Decision dated  16th  October  2016.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and such permission  was
    granted on 10th January 2017.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because, as she wrote at paragraph 42 of
    her Decision, she found that the Appellant did not qualify for  asylum.
    At the hearing before me, Mr Bedford argued that the Judge erred in law
    because she had placed the burden of proof upon the  Appellant  whereas
    in cessation cases the burden of proof was reversed and fell  upon  the
    Respondent to show that the Appellant's existing refugee status  should
    be revoked.

 4. In response Mrs Aboni argued that there was no such error of law as the
    Judge had considered the cessation provisions and dealt  with  all  the
    issues in the appeal.

 5. I find that the decision of the Judge contained a material error of law
    and therefore I set it aside.  The Judge dealt with the appeal  on  the
    basis of whether it was safe for the Appellant to  return  to  Somalia.
    Therefore, she placed the burden of proof upon  the  Appellant  as  she
    stated at paragraph 15 of the Decision.   However,  the  issue  in  the
    appeal was whether  there  were  any  new  circumstances  so  that  the
    Appellant no longer qualified for asylum protection.  It is  trite  law
    that by virtue of  Article  14.2  of  the  Qualification  Directive  as
    interpreted in Abdulla v Germany [2010] ECR 1-01493 that the burden  is
    reversed and falls upon the Respondent to show that this is  the  case.
    The decision of the Judge is therefore  fundamentally  flawed  and  the
    decision in the appeal needs to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be re-made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons as those given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date     13th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

