
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00137/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 18 October 2017                         |On 30 November 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                              OMAR MOHAMED ADAN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr J. Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim and to revoke  refugee  status  in  the  context  of
    deportation proceedings.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron dismissed the appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 July 2017. The judge was satisfied that the appellant
    had rebutted the presumption that he is a danger to the  community.  He
    did  not  uphold  the  certificate  made  under  section  72   of   The
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").  The  judge
    found that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Mogadishu as
    a minority clan member and that he would be able  to  reintegrate  with
    the assistance of family and clan members. The judge concluded that the
    public interest in deportation outweighed the substantial private  life
    the appellant had established in the UK.

3.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i) The judge was wrong to refer to paragraph 399A of the immigration
          rules, which only applied  to  revocation  of  protection  status
          where the asylum application was made  on  or  after  21  October
          2004: see Dang (Refugee - query revocation -  Article  3)  [2013]
          UKUT 00043.


      ii) The judge erred by placing too much weight on the evidence  given
          by the appellant's ex-wife in a previous application when she did
          not give evidence at the hearing and her evidence  could  not  be
          tested.

     iii) In assessing the reliability of information contained in the pre-
          sentence report  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
          circumstances in which the interview took place,  which  included
          the use of an Arabic rather than a Somali interpreter.

      iv) The judge failed to conduct an adequate fact  sensitive  analysis
          of the circumstances  the  appellant  would  face  on  return  to
          Mogadishu or of the background evidence, which indicated that the
          situation might have deteriorated since  MOJ  &  Ors  (return  to
          Mogadishu) Somalia [2014] UKUT 00442 was decided.

4.    I have considered the grounds of appeal and the  submissions  made  by
    both parties before coming to a decision in this appeal.

Decision and reasons

5.    The two main points argued on behalf of the appellant at  the  hearing
    were (i) the  judge's  findings  relating  to  the  likelihood  of  the
    appellant having family members in Somalia were  unsustainable  and  in
    turn that impacted on the subsequent assessment of Article  3  risk  if
    returned to Mogadishu as a minority clan member; and (ii) in any event,
    the judge  failed  to  give  sufficient  scrutiny  to  the  appellant's
    individual circumstances in assessing the Article 3 risk in Mogadishu.

6.    It was open to the  judge  to  consider  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's wife when she was interviewed in  relation  to  her  asylum
    claim in 2001. It appears that her account was accepted and it  was  on
    that basis she was recognised as a refugee. The judge was  entitled  to
    take into account the fact that the appellant's account differed in two
    material respects. Firstly, that he left Mogadishu  in  1994  when  she
    said that the family fled to Kenya after an attack in  2001.  Secondly,
    that the appellant's brother was killed in 1994,  when  his  wife  said
    that it was his brother who helped to finance her travel to the  UK  in
    2001. The judge gave some consideration to whether she might  fabricate
    aspects of her claim, but concluded that there was no  reason  why  she
    would do so.

7.    However, if the appellant's evidence was  taken  at  its  highest  the
    family fled Mogadishu for Kenya in 1994, and were  resident  there  for
    some years before raising the funds for his  wife  to  leave  in  2001,
    there might be a motive for the  appellant's  wife  to  exaggerate  the
    claim  in  relation  to  the  last  incident  in   2001   to   give   a
    contemporaneous reason for claiming asylum even  if  she  had  suffered
    past-persecution in Somalia. The judge did not appear to consider  what
    weight could be placed on discrepancies between two  sets  of  evidence
    when the  evidence  of  one  person  could  not  be  tested  in  cross-
    examination. The fact that her account was accepted at the time  was  a
    matter that could be considered, but there is nothing to  suggest  that
    the judge approached the discrepancies  with  caution  given  that  the
    appellant's former wife was not available to give evidence.

8.    My observations about the judge's approach to the  discrepancies  with
    the wife's earlier account do not, taken alone, amount to an  error  of
    law. However, other concerns have been raised about the  assessment  of
    the evidence relating to the likelihood of the appellant having  family
    members in Mogadishu who could assist him.

9.    The judge appeared to place undue weight on  information  relating  to
    the appellant's family  circumstances  contained  in  the  Pre-Sentence
    Report. First, the context of the report was to  recommend  appropriate
    sentencing. The role of  the  probation  officer  was  not  to  take  a
    detailed family history. Second, the judge  accepted  that  there  were
    "clear  factual  errors"  in  the  report  and  knew  that  an   Arabic
    interpreter was used thereby clearly giving rise to the possibility  of
    misunderstanding. Third, the ages of the children  that  the  appellant
    was said to have in Somalia did not accord with his immigration history
    in the UK. While it was open to the judge to note that it was difficult
    to see how the probation officer would have  obtained  the  information
    except from the appellant, given his recognition that there were  clear
    factual errors in the report, the information was at best  unclear  and
    unreliable and little weight could be placed on it.

10.   Even if those findings relating to the  appellant's  family  situation
    were sustainable he failed to go on to consider whether the appellant's
    claim that he had no family members who could assist him  in  Mogadishu
    nevertheless was capable of belief on the low standard of proof at  the
    date of the hearing. At highest, the evidence given by the  appellant's
    wife in her asylum statement in 2001 stated: "My husband's brother  had
    some money. He agreed to assist us. He only had enough to pay  for  one
    of us to get to a safe country. I was chosen to go because I  was  most
    at risk". She did not say where his brother was living  or  whether  he
    fled Mogadishu with other members of the family. This comment  followed
    a description of the family fleeing  from  Mogadishu  to  Mombasa.  The
    chronology suggested that he paid an agent when they got to  Kenya  not
    before they left Mogadishu. It appears that the judge extrapolated from
    this limited information  that  it  was  likely  that  the  appellant's
    brother was living in Mogadishu.  At  its  highest  the  evidence  only
    suggested that he might have been there in 2001. The evidence needed to
    be assessed at the date of the hearing in 2017, some 16 years later, at
    which point there was no evidence  to  indicate  that  the  appellant's
    brother was likely to be living in Mogadishu. Even taking into  account
    his former wife's  evidence  there  was  little  reason  to  doubt  the
    appellant's claim that he had no relatives there who would be  able  to
    assist him.

11.   Those matters form part of my assessment of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. The combination of those points and the First-tier Tribunal's
    subsequent findings relating to risk on return to Mogadishu lead me  to
    conclude that the decision contains errors of law.

12.   The judge clearly was aware that the  appellant  is  from  a  minority
    clan. He referred to the country guidance in MOJ (Return to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 and made specific reference  to  what  was
    said about clan support at sub-paragraph (viii) of the headnote  [127].
    The judge accepted that minority clans would be able to provide  little
    assistance [130]. The judge found that the appellant would able to work
    despite the injury to his leg [131].  Although  he  accepted  that  the
    appellant's brother in law could provide support without much impact on
    the family budget in the UK, he concluded that his brother in law would
    be able to provide support  if  the  appellant  returned  to  Mogadishu
    [136]. He concluded that the appellant would be  able  to  obtain  some
    financial assistance from relatives in the UK  and  might  be  able  to
    obtain some assistance  from  clan  or  family  members  in  Mogadishu.
    Notwithstanding his medical issues the judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be able to work to support himself in Mogadishu [140].

13.   However, it is unclear on what basis the judge concluded that  "It  is
    however clear that some assistance can still be provided"  by  minority
    clan members when the Tribunal in MOJ made clear in sub-paragraph (vii)
    that: "such help is only likely to be  forthcoming  for  majority  clan
    members, as minority clans may have little to offer." The guidance  the
    judge outlined at sub-paragraph  (viii)  about  the  potential  support
    mechanisms provided by other clan members was prefaced  with  what  was
    said about the inability of minority  clans  to  offer  any  meaningful
    assistance.

 14.  Having placed reliance on the Pre-Sentence Report despite  the  "clear
    factual errors", the judge failed to take into account  the  fact  that
    the appellant was said to have been in receipt  of  Incapacity  Benefit
    since 2003 and was medically unfit for work. While it was open  to  him
    to  consider  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  brother  in  law   has
    accommodated him in the UK no analysis was undertaken as to whether the
    level  of  support  would  be  sufficient  to  provide  any  meaningful
    remittances. His brother in law supports a family with  seven  children
    and was said to have given only token amounts of money to the appellant
    in the UK.

15.   This is a finely balanced decision. I bear in mind that  a  protection
    and human rights claim must be given anxious scrutiny  because  of  the
    potential risk on return. Although many of the  judge's  findings  were
    entirely open to him to make other findings were made without reference
    to material  evidence  or  without  adequate  regard  to  the  relevant
    guidance on the conditions that minority clan  members  might  face  in
    Mogadishu. For these reasons, I reluctantly conclude that the  decision
    contains material errors of law and that it must be set aside.

16.   Given that the concerns relate to the findings of  fact  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal the evidence will have to be considered afresh.  As
    such, it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is set aside and the appeal remitted for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date   29 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








