
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 1 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                            Ahmed Mohamoud Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
               (given orally at the hearing of 12 March 2019)

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Somalia,  born  30  November  1991.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in April 2006 aged 14 years, with  a  family
    reunion visa to join his mother who had  been  granted  refugee  status
    here. The appellant is treated as a recognised refugee.

 2. The appellant is a prolific criminal offender, the most recent offences
    (robbery, attempted robbery and possessing imitation  firearm)  leading
    to a sentence of eight years' imprisonment in May 2014. A further eight
    months' imprisonment was imposed on the  same  occasion  for  dangerous
    driving and failing to provide a specimen.  Between September 2008  and
    May 2014, the appellant accrued nine convictions for 22 offences.

 3. This offending behaviour ultimately led the Secretary of State to  seek
    to deport the appellant.  The appellant made  representations  in  this
    regard which the Secretary of State rejected in  a  decision  dated  13
    November 2017, headed "Decision to Refuse Protection and  Human  Rights
    Claim".  That decision letter also notified the appellant that: (i) the
    Secretary of State had certified his protection application pursuant to
    section 72 of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 -  it  being
    said that the appellant is a danger to the community, and (ii) that the
    appellant's refugee status is revoked on the basis that there has  been
    a durable and fundamental change in the circumstances in Somalia  which
    led to the grant of status in the first place.

Discussion and Decision

 4. The appellant exercised his  right  to  appeal  against  the  decisions
    refusing his protection/human rights  claim  and  ceasing/revoking  his
    refugee status.  The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  19
    November 2018 and was dismissed  in  a  fourteen-page  decision  of  27
    November 2018.

 5. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Garro, in a decision dated 31 December 2018. Thus,  the  matter
    comes before me.

 6. It is important when analysing the grounds of  appeal  to  ensure  that
    when doing so one is identifying which strand of the appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that such grounds seeks to  challenge.   There  are
    three pleaded grounds:

          i)  The  First-tier  Tribunal   "erred   in   giving   inadequate
             consideration to the position of the appellant as a member  of
             the minority Ashraf clan in Somalia and the risk he would face
             suffering from  Bipolar  disorder,  lack  of  family  ties  in
             Mogadishu ...and the dire military situation."

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal "had  made  a  finding  based  on  the
             absence of any evidence to establish  the  appellant's  mother
             has the financial means to support the appellant  if  returned
             to Somalia."

        iii) "Insufficient evidence and consideration had been  before  the
             judge relating to the availability of the medication that  the
             appellant  uses  to  control  his  Bipolar  Disorder  and  the
             possibility of doing so without a prescription."




 7. Taking these in turn. The headline submission in ground 1  is  followed
    by a quote from the Home Office's Country Policy note of September 2018
    which itself quotes from the country guidance decision in MOJ &  Others
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). Thereafter  a
    quote follows from the case of MAB [2015] UKUT 00435, relating  to  the
    issue of undue harshness in the consideration of Article 8.

 8. Unpacking this ground at  the  hearing  it  was  evident  that  it  was
    intended to challenge the  decision  to  revoke/cease  refugee  status.
    Reliance was placed on the decision in AMA (Article 1C(5) -  proviso  -
    internal relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00011, the headnote  to  which
    materially reads:


         "Changes in a refugee's country of origin affecting  only  part  of
         the country may, in principle, lead to cessation of refugee status,
         albeit it is difficult to see how in practice protection  could  be
         said  to  be  sufficiently  fundamental   and   durable   in   such
         circumstances."


 9. The facts of the case  of  AMA  are  quite  telling  because  of  their
    resemblance to the facts of the instant case, in that  both  appellants
    originate from the town of Qoryoley in Somalia and in both cases  there
    was a proposal to remove the appellants to Mogadishu.

10. In the instant case, the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  (at  paragraph
    12(i)) that the appellant would be unable to return to  Qoryoley  as  a
    consequence of that town being under the control of Al-Shabaab.  It  is
    implicit in that finding that the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that
    there was a well-founded fear of persecution in Qoryoley  or  at  least
    that  there  had  not  been  a  fundamental  and  durable   change   of
    circumstances in that area.  However, the First-tier Tribunal  went  on
    to consider the position in Mogadishu, concluding  at  paragraph  12(v)
    that the country guidance decision of MOJ and Others  establishes  that
    there has been a durable change in Mogadishu and that there is  now  no
    clan violence and no clan based discriminatory  treatment  there,  even
    for minority clans.  The First-tier  Tribunal  continue  by  concluding
    that:

         "I find the case law  establishes  that  since  the  appellant  was
         granted asylum on account of his membership of a minor clan in 2006
         there has  been  a  durable  change  in  Mogadishu  and  that  this
         appellant would no longer be at risk of persecution on  account  of
         his minority clan membership in Mogadishu."

11. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in  law  in
    this regard.  The correct consideration was not whether there had  been
    a durable change in Mogadishu but  whether  the  circumstances  in  the
    country had changed fundamentally such that the appellant was no longer
    entitled to refugee status.  That is not a matter with which the First-
    tier Tribunal engaged at all. It failed to identify the  nexus  between
    the grant of refugee status based on the circumstances in Qoryoley  and
    the relevance of internal relocation to Mogadishu.

12. However, the First-tier Tribunal's error does not avail  the  appellant
    in  this  appeal  because  it  goes  only  to  the  challenge  to   the
    revocation/cessation decision. It is of determinative  significance  in
    this regard that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  concluded  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision to issue a certificate under  section  72
    of the 2002 Act should be maintained - a decision which was  inevitable
    in light of the appellant's lengthy criminal history but, in any event,
    is not challenged before the Upper Tribunal.

13. The relevance of this conclusion is plain once viewed in the context of
    the  Upper  Tribunal's  reported  decision  in  Essa   (Revocation   of
    protection status appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  00244  (IAC).   In  Essa  the
    Tribunal observed that an appeal made pursuant to section  82(1)(c)  of
    the 2002 Act (as in the instant case) is an appeal against  a  decision
    to revoke protection status and that the  only  permissible  ground  of
    appeal that an appellant can pursue is that the decision  breaches  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention. The Tribunal
    concluded, however, that where section 72(10) 2002 Act applies  (as  in
    the instant case), there is  a  requirement  that  the  appeal  brought
    pursuant to section 82(1)(c) be dismissed, even if the only  ground  of
    appeal is made out.

14. In the instant case the section 72 certificate was  maintained  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Following the reasoning on Essa this required  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal  brought   against   the
    revocation/cessation decision. That does not mean  that  the  appellant
    loses his refugee status. On the facts of this case I have  found  that
    the Tribunal erred in its consideration of whether  there  has  been  a
    durable change in the circumstances prevailing in Somalia.  Indeed,  on
    this issue I concur entirely with the reasoning at paragraph 50 of  the
    decision in AMA which considered an identical  scenario  and  concluded
    that the requisite significant non-temporary  change  of  circumstances
    was not made out by the Secretary of State, particularly given the fact
    that Qoryoley is a mere 120 kilometres from Mogadishu.

15. Where does  that  leave  the  appellant?  In  summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its consideration of whether there has been a durable
    change of  circumstances  in  Somalia.  That  error  was  not  material
    however, because the First-tier Tribunal was, following the decision in
    Essa, bound to dismiss the appeal against the decision  to  revoke  the
    appellant's refugee status. Nevertheless, on reviewing the  evidence  I
    find that the SSHD has not demonstrated that there has been  a  durable
    change of circumstances in Somalia for exactly the same reasons as were
    deployed by the Upper Tribunal in AMA.

16. I now turn to the second ground, which in reality is a challenge to the
    findings on Article 3 ECHR.  On this aspect of the appeal,  the  burden
    is on the appellant and it is for the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    there is a real risk of suffering treatment which would breach  Article
    3 (see MA (Somalia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 994). There  is  no  dispute
    that the standard in a destitution case is a high one (see Said  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 442).

17. The First-tier Tribunal found against  the  appellant  on  this  issue.
    There are  three  challenges  to  that  conclusion.   The  first  is  a
    challenge to the finding that the  appellant's  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom would provide the necessary amount of financial support to  him
    in Mogadishu, such that he would not be left destitute there.

18. It is submitted that there was no evidence to  support  the  contention
    that  the  shop  that  the  appellant's  mother  owns  is  sufficiently
    profitable to enable the appellant's mother to  provide  the  necessary
    funds to the  appellant.   In  this  regard,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    summarised the relevant evidence at paragraph 12(vii) of its  decision,
    concluding:

         "I find the ability of the appellant's mother to pay  her  children
         for their work in her shop suggests it is a profitable business and
         that she would therefore be able to provide financial assistance to
         the appellant when he  is  deported  to  Mogadishu.   I  find  this
         conclusion is supported by the win as expressed by the  appellant's
         mother and his brother in their written statements to  provide  the
         appellant financial support and  the  lack  of  production  of  any
         official  documentation  from  HMRC  in  the  UK   suggesting   the
         appellant's mother business is not profitable. "




19. I remind myself that it was for the appellant to demonstrate  that  the
    money would not be available. He could, of  course,  have  done  so  by
    providing the necessary accounts in relation to the business.  However,
    such evidence was not produced, and the First-tier  Tribunal  only  had
    limited evidence on this issue before it. In all  the  circumstances  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion was open to  it  on  the
    available evidence.

20. The First-tier Tribunal further concluded at paragraph 12(x) that:

         "There was no  evidence  placed  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
         appellant's bipolar  condition,  controlled  by  medication,  would
         prevent him from seeking or undertaking work in Mogadishu. There is
         therefore no reason why he would be unable  to  look  for  work  in
         Mogadishu and benefit from the  economic  opportunities  that  have
         been produced by the current economic  boom  there,  especially  as
         there is evidence to the effect that returnees are taking  jobs  at
         the expense of those who have never been away.  The appellant would
         be able to provide financially for  himself  once  he  has  secured
         employment in Mogadishu and could rely upon his family in the UK to
         support him until he obtains work.  The appellant has received some
         education in the United Kingdom and completed a number  of  courses
         etc."

21. The reasoning and conclusions in  this  regard  continue  at  paragraph
    12(xxii), where the First-tier Tribunal initially allude  to  the  fact
    the appellant's mother runs her own business, pays her  sons  and  that
    she had indicated a willingness to support her  son,  and  continue  as
    follows:

         "...but [she claimed] she did not have the means to do so. I  noted
         the  appellant's  brother  advised  the  family  would  financially
         support the appellant in  Somalia  ...  There  was  no  documentary
         evidence placed  before  me  to  suggest  the  ...business  is  not
         profitable...I find it is highly likely this appellant's mother and
         siblings would be able to  financially  support  the  appellant  in
         Somalia. I also find that this appellant produces qualifications he
         has obtained inside and outside  prison  and  his  work  experience
         assisting his mother in her shop, office work experience, in prison
         or just secure work."

22. It is plain that there are two alternative reasons which led the First-
    tier Tribunal to conclude that  the  appellant  would  have  sufficient
    financial resources available to him in Mogadishu so as to  enable  him
    to live in conditions which do not breach the high Article 3  threshold
    i.e. remittances from UK based family members and  the  ability  of  to
    earn his own income in Mogadishu.  In my conclusion,  on  the  evidence
    that was available to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was  entitled  to
    conclude as it did on both limbs and its findings in  this  regard  are
    not irrational.

23. Turning then to the third  limb  of  the  appellant's  challenge.  This
    relates to the appellant's ability to obtain  medication  in  Mogadishu
    for his bi-polar disorder.  This aspect of the case was dealt  with  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 12(ix) and (xv) of its  decision.
    The First-tier Tribunal  concluded,  having  considered  the  available
    evidence, that the appellant would be  able  to  access  medication  in
    Somalia for his bi-polar condition.  The appellant asserts this finding
    is irrational.

24. The Secretary of State provided evidence  of  mental  health  hospitals
    that could be accessed by the appellant in Somalia. In particular,  the
    Tribunal had evidence from Landinfo and the WHO on this issue.  It  was
    for the appellant to demonstrate that there is  a  real  risk  that  he
    would not be able to access such institutions or that such institutions
    would not have the relevant medication available.

25. On the available evidence, the First-tier Tribunal's findings  in  this
    regard are, in my conclusion, unimpeachable. It took account of all the
    relevant evidence and its conclusions were far from  being  irrational;
    indeed, they are conclusions I would have come to on the same evidence.
     The Tribunal further concluded that  the  relevance  of  the  bi-polar
    condition (if controlled) to the assessment of risk was negligible  and
    that it would not prevent the appellant  from  seeking  or  undertaking
    work.  In my conclusion, this was again a conclusion that was  entirely
    open to the First-tier Tribunal, for the reasons given.

26. In my conclusion, when looked at as a whole the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is adequately reasoned and the  Tribunal  reaches  conclusions
    which were open to it on  the  available  evidence.  Given  that  those
    conclusions were open to the Tribunal on  the  available  evidence  and
    bearing in mind that it was for the appellant to demonstrate  his  case
    under Article 3, I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    does not contain an error capable of leading  to  a  different  outcome
    i.e. the appeal being allowed.

27. I do of course remind myself  that  I  have  concluded  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its decision on the revocation/cessation  of  refugee
    status ground but, as I  have  indicated,  the  appropriate  course  is
    nevertheless for the appeal to be dismissed following the rationale  in
    Essa.

Notice of Decision

This appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed:                           Date:        30         April         2019

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

