
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00006/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd February 2016                         |On 7th March 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                         ntandoyenkosi logan madaka
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Reynolds, Counsel instructed by ITN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 21st February 1990.   He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  S  J  Clarke
    promulgated  on  19th  August  2015  dismissing  his   appeal   against
    deportation on asylum and human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant arrived in the UK on 10th December 1998 as a visitor  and
    was granted leave to enter for six months. He returned  to  the  UK  in
    April 2001 and again was granted leave to  enter  as  visitor  for  six
    months. On 22nd April 2002 he made an application for leave  to  remain
    which was refused in June 2003 and his appeal dismissed in  June  2006.
    In August 2007 he made a further application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain which was refused on 8th September  2008.  He  was  served  with
    notice of liability as an overstayer and on 28th November 2008 he  made
    an application for asylum.

3.   The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim was that he could not  return
    to Zimbabwe because he was  in  fear  of  being  perceived  as  an  MDC
    supporter as a member of the Ndebele tribe and because he had lived  in
    the UK  since  2000.  He  had  come  to  the  UK  in  2000  because  of
    difficulties his father was experiencing arising out of his  activities
    as a journalist. On return his name would be linked with  his  father's
    work as  a  journalist  and  he  would  be  perceived  to  support  the
    opposition party. The Appellant never  personally  suffered  harassment
    while in Zimbabwe. The Appellant was  granted  refugee  status  on  9th
    February 2009 for five years until 9th February 2014.

4.   On 21st January  2011,  at  Cardiff  Crown  Court,  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of robbery and possession of an imitation firearm with intent
    to cause fear of violence on two counts and sentenced to twelve  years'
    imprisonment which was reduced to nine years on appeal.

5.   The details of the offence are  as  follows:  The  Appellant  travelled
    with three others from Aylesbury to Cardiff in possession of  two  very
    realistic imitation firearms with a single purpose to  commit  robbery.
    The victim was a young woman making her way home  alone  in  the  early
    hours of the morning. The CCTV footage showed that the  four  offenders
    went to Cardiff to commit crime and checked  into  a  hotel  previously
    booked using a false name  and  paid  for  using  a  cloned  card.  The
    offenders changed their clothing and were dressed in black.  The  judge
    was satisfied that the way the robbery was going  to  be  achieved  had
    been crystallised between the four of them. Two of  the  offenders  got
    out of the car  and  followed  the  victim  and  confronted  her.  They
    demanded her property. One pointed the gun in her face and the other in
    her abdomen. One pulled her bag and they made their getaway  in  a  car
    and travelled back to the hotel, changed  into  different  clothes  and
    tried unsuccessfully to extract money from  an  ATM  using  the  stolen
    cards. The four offenders shared the  common  intention  in  coming  to
    Cardiff to commit robbery using imitation firearms and they all  played
    an equal part with different roles to achieve the aim needed.

6.   A deportation order was  signed  on  5th  March  2015.  The  Respondent
    decided that deportation was conducive to the public good  pursuant  to
    Section 32(4) of the Immigration Act 2007.

7.   The Respondent concluded that even though  it  was  accepted  that  the
    same party was in power when the Appellant was granted refugee  status,
    in light of the country  guidance  case  of  CM  (EM  country  guidance
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059, there  had  been  a  durable
    change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00083.  The
    Respondent confirmed that she had approached the UNHCR before making  a
    decision to cease refugee status.

8.   The  Respondent  concluded  that  Section  72(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  applied.  This  states  that  for  the
    purposes of Article  33(2)  of  the  Geneva  Convention,  a  person  is
    presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constitute a danger to the community of the UK  where
    he has been convicted in the UK of an offence and sentenced to a period
    of at least two years. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant  was
    a present danger to society and  issued  a  certificate  under  Section
    72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act.

9.   Article 33(2) states: "The benefit of the  [non-refoulement]  provision
    may not, however, be claimed by a refugee  whom  there  are  reasonable
    grounds for regarding as a danger to the security  of  the  country  in
    which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final  judgement  of  a
    particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to  the  community  of
    that country."

10.  Accordingly, the issues on appeal before the First-tier Tribunal were:

    (1)  Whether the judge should uphold the Section 72 certificate;


    (2)  Whether the Respondent's conclusion on the  cessation  of  refugee
         status was lawful, and


    (3)  Whether the Appellant's deportation was contrary to his  right  to
         family and private life under Article 8.




The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

11.  In summary, the First-tier Tribunal judge  upheld  the  certificate  on
    the grounds that the writers of the probation reports had not read  the
    sentencing remarks  of  the  trial  judge  and  had  misunderstood  the
    Appellant's role in the offence. The judge found the  assessments  were
    based on a misrepresentation of facts given  by  the  Appellant,  which
    continued right up until after he completed his  courses,  because  the
    Appellant never corrected the questions posed to the probation officer.



    12.  The assessment of medium risk in 2013 was on  the  basis  of  only
    having a role after the offence took place, rather than being an  equal
    part of a pre-planned  joint  enterprise.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant remained a significantly high risk to the public  because  it
    took him so  long  to  admit  his  role,  but  that  was  not  properly
    communicated to the probation officer.  The  Appellant  had  failed  to
    rebut the presumption that he constituted a danger to the community.

13.  The judge concluded that the Respondent had shown that the  Appellant's
    refugee status may cease and he could avail himself of  the  protection
    available in Zimbabwe on the basis that she was bound to  follow  EM  &
    Others (returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC)  "because  it
    considered the evidence before it and concluded that the risk on return
    for certain categories had  changed,  and  it  is  after  such  careful
    consideration of the evidence that it reached  the  conclusion,  rather
    than a blanket approach advocated  by  the  UNHCR.  Therefore,  because
    there has been such careful consideration of the evidence, and  because
    this new country guideline case is authority for it being safe for  the
    Appellant to return to Bulawayo in his country, I prefer to follow this
    authority."

14.  The judge found that the interference with  the  Appellant's  right  to
    respect for private and family life was justified  under  Article  8(2)
    and  there  were  public  interest  arguments  which   should   prevail
    notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.



Grounds of appeal

15.  Permission to appeal was sought on three  grounds.  Firstly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge's conclusions on  the  risk  assessment  were
    irrational and failed  to  take  into  account  material  matters.   In
    substituting her view for the professional  risk  assessors  the  judge
    failed to take into account the fact that the Appellant had no previous
    convictions, no internal prison disciplinary  convictions,  he  was  an
    enhanced prisoner, he had completed numerous offending  programmes,  he
    fully complied with his licence and he was  not  involved  in  criminal
    behaviour.

16.  Secondly, the judge erred in concluding that she was  bound  to  follow
    the country guidance case of EM. She  had  failed  to  properly  direct
    herself on the correct test in relation to cessation of refugee status,
    namely whether there had been a fundamental and durable  change  across
    the country of origin.

17.  Thirdly, in relation to Article 8,  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    risk  of  reconviction  was  higher  than  assessed  had  affected  her
    conclusions under Article 8. She had failed to properly apply  Danso  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596  in
    failing to give adequate reasons for why the Appellant's rehabilitation
    was not unusual.

    18.  Further, in determining  very  compelling  circumstances  she  had
    failed to have regard to Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47.  The criteria
    set out therein, namely the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence
    committed by the applicant, the length of the applicant's stay  in  the
    country from which he or she is to be expelled, the time elapsed  since
    the offence was committed, the applicant's conduct during that  period,
    the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the host  country
    and with the country of destination.  Following the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636,  the  judge
    should have given due respect to the guidance in Maslov.

19.  Permission was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  on  13th
    October 2015 on the grounds that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made irrational or erroneous findings in relation  to  the
    risk assessment reports;  secondly,  that  she  had  erred  in  law  in
    applying the wrong test in determining the cessation of refugee status;
    thirdly, the Article 8 assessment was flawed because of the  errors  in
    relation to the expert evidence regarding risk, in the consideration of
    the Appellant's 'unusual' level of rehabilitation, and  in  looking  at
    the issue of 'very compelling circumstances'.

20.  I propose to deal with each of the grounds  in  turn  setting  out  the
    submissions made by each  party,  the  findings  of  the  judge,  where
    necessary, and my findings and conclusions.


Ground 1 - the section 72 certificate

The Appellant's submissions

21.   Mr  Reynolds  submitted  that  the  probation  reports  assessed   the
    Appellant at low risk of reconviction and medium risk of serious  harm.
    At paragraph 46 the judge assessed the risk of reconviction  as  higher
    than low and at paragraph  33  the  risk  of  harm  sufficiently  high,
    notwithstanding the probation assessment.

22.  Mr Reynolds relied on the case of (Mugwagwa (s.72 - applying  statutory
    presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011]  UKUT  00338)  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal held that Section 72 creates statutory  presumptions  that  an
    individual convicted of a serious crime is a danger to  the  community.
    These presumptions relate to certain offences committed in the  UK  and
    abroad. The presumptions are rebuttable by evidence.

    23.  In  the  case  of  Mugwagwa,  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    concerning the Appellant's risk to the community, including the risk of
    reoffending, was  in  the  OASys  Report  which  stated  that  risk  of
    reconviction for non-violent or sexual offences within  two  years  was
    low. The Appellant in that case had been convicted  of  an  offence  of
    conspiracy to supply heroin and it was accepted by the Respondent  that
    the evidence in the OASys Report  rebutted  the  presumption  that  the
    Appellant was a danger to the public.

24.  Mr Reynolds relied on this case to demonstrate that  an  assessment  of
    low risk of reoffending in an OASys Report was sufficient to rebut  the
    presumption under Section 72(2).

25.  In the Appellant's case the OASys Report of  Mr  Ling  was  dated  24th
    February 2015.  Mr Reynolds referred  to  page  7,  paragraph  2.1  and
    submitted that it is clear that the probation officer appreciated  that
    the Appellant was part of a joint enterprise. The judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 25 were that Mr Ling had not appreciated the Appellant's part
    in the joint enterprise and that he had accepted,  at  face  value  the
    account told to him by the Appellant. The interpretation  at  paragraph
    25 was not open to the judge on reading page 7, paragraph  2.1  of  the
    OASys Report.

26.  From page 8, paragraph 2.8 of the probation report it  was  clear  that
    Mr Ling understood that the Appellant was  minimising  his  involvement
    and at page 9, paragraph 2.14, that the Appellant was still denying his
    involvement. It was clear from these paragraphs that Mr  Ling's  report
    was an objective assessment.  Mr Ling was  well  aware  that  what  the
    Appellant was saying was inconsistent with his  conviction.  The  judge
    wrongly concluded that Mr Ling's assessment was  subjective  and  based
    purely on the Appellant's account to him in that interview.

27.  Mr Ling concluded,  at  page  40,  R10,  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    committed the actual robbery and therefore he was not at high risk. The
    probation officer accepted that the offence was a serious one  and  the
    Appellant had been involved in a joint enterprise.

28.  In his letter of 22nd July 2015, Mr Ling confirmed that  the  Appellant
    was at medium risk of causing serious harm because he had not  actually
    threatened the victim and perpetrated the robbery.

29.  The judge had erroneously rejected the professional assessment  of  the
    probation officer. Had  the  judge  properly  taken  into  account  the
    matters referred to in the OASys  Report  she  would  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion. The presumption in Section 72(2) was rebutted  on
    the basis that the Appellant was at low risk of reoffending.

    The Respondent's submissions

30.  Ms Sreeraman relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    judge properly directed  herself  in  relation  to  Section  72.   When
    assessed holistically paragraphs 14 to 32 gave clear and cogent reasons
    why the certificate should be upheld. At paragraph 18  the  judge  took
    into account the case of Mugwagwa and acknowledged at paragraph 19 that
    the Appellant's account was at odds with the sentencing remarks.

31.  The probation officer's assessment in the OASys  Report  was  based  on
    the Appellant's account even though he was aware that the Appellant was
    convicted  of  a  joint  enterprise.  The  level  of  the   Appellant's
    involvement was not reflected in the account he gave to  the  probation
    officer and the Appellant did not take responsibility for its  absence.
    The probation officer's assessment of risk was flawed in  that  he  had
    not taken into account the sentencing remarks.

32.  It was accepted by Mr Reynolds  that  the  probation  officer  had  not
    taken into account the sentencing remarks and Mr Ling  had  provided  a
    witness statement to that effect which was submitted with Mr  Reynolds'
    skeleton argument dated 27th January 2016.

33.  Ms Sreeraman submitted that the judge had given clear reasons  why,  in
    view of the entirety of the evidence, the Appellant was at medium  risk
    of harm and the certificate was made out. The challenge to the  judge's
    finding was that the judge's  conclusions  on  the  assessment  of  the
    report were irrational.  The judge in fact found at paragraph  26  that
    the probation assessments were less than reliable because they depended
    on the Appellant's account and he has sought to distance  himself  from
    the offence. On reading the  probation  reports  the  failure  to  have
    regard to the level of the Appellant's actual  involvement  made  those
    reports less reliable. This finding  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence and there was no error in relation to Section 72.


The Appellant's reply

34.  Mr Reynolds submitted that the real issue between the two  parties  was
    whether the probation officer just accepted the Appellant's account  or
    whether he recorded what  the  Appellant  was  saying  and  objectively
    interpreted his account. When the letter of  22nd  July  2015  and  the
    OASys Report were read together it was clear that the judge's  findings
    were irrational. The letter dated 22nd July 2015  was  consistent  with
    the judge's sentencing remarks. The Appellant was involved in a robbery
    offence and Mr Ling fully understood the Appellant's role. It  was  not
    open to the judge to say that the probation officer did  not.   It  was
    incorrect for the judge to find that the probation officer had accepted
    the Appellant's account of the offence.


    Conclusions on the section 72 certificate

35.  It is accepted that the probation officer, Mr Ling did not  have  sight
    of the sentencing remarks prior to writing  the  OASys  Report  or  his
    letter of 22nd July 2015. I am not persuaded by Mr Reynolds' submission
    that the letter of 22nd July 2015  was  entirely  consistent  with  the
    judge sentencing remarks. The judge's sentencing remarks are set out in
    paragraph 5 above.  In his letter of 22nd July 2015 Mr Ling  makes  the
    following responses to the questions posed:

         "Was Mr Madaka the ring leader?
         Mr Madaka was not identified as being  the  ringleader  during  the
         commission of the robbery offence. He did not engage in the initial
         robbery act though involved himself  in  the  attempt  to  withdraw
         money from the victim's bank accounts knowing that  the  cards  had
         been taken during a robbery.
         Whether you think he is a danger to the public or not?
         Mr Madaka is assessed as presenting with a medium risk  of  causing
         serious harm to members of the public given his  involvement  in  a
         robbery offence which involved the  victim  being  threatened  with
         weapons (BB gun)."


36.  I find that the  questions  do  not  address  the  differences  in  the
    Appellant's account and the sentencing remarks  of  the  judge  and  Mr
    Ling's answers do not demonstrate an understanding of  the  Appellant's
    role in the offence consistent with the  basis  upon  which  the  judge
    sentenced him.

37.  At paragraph 19 of the decision, the  judge  refers  to  paragraph  2.1
    page 7 of the OASys report:

        "In the OASys Report Darren Ling writes that no PSR  was  completed
        in this case and details were  provided  by  the  Appellant  during
        interview. The account given to the probation officer  is  at  odds
        with that set out at length by the sentencing judge and repeated by
        me at length for this decision. The Appellant  told  the  probation
        officer that they went to Cardiff to buy a new  car,  they  arrived
        too late to go to the garage so they checked  into  a  hotel.  That
        evening they were driving around looking for a student bar when two
        offered to get out and ask for directions. He remained in  the  car
        and when the other two returned one was carrying a woman's  handbag
        which was the first the Appellant knew of the  robbery.  He  denied
        being aware that there were guns in the car  although  he  admitted
        having seen them at the home of one of the other offenders. He felt
        stuck in Cardiff and helpless. The probation officer writes that he
        is aware that the CCTV footage confirms that there  were  only  two
        offenders directly involved in the  actual  robbery  but  all  four
        received long sentences as part  of  a  joint  enterprise  and  the
        Appellant appealed his sentence which has not been  approved  by  a
        single judge. The probation officer is aware  that  the  vulnerable
        victim was alone, and had two guns pointed at her  face  and  chest
        area."

38.  At  paragraphs  20  and  21  of  the  decision,  the  judge  refers  to
    paragraphs 2.14 (page 9) and 7 (page 15) of the OASys report.


        "In the original OASys the Appellant  still  denied  any  knowledge
        that the index offence  was  to  take  place  and  could  offer  no
        explanation as to why the robbery  took  place.   He  denied  being
        influenced by his peers."


        "In the original OASys it reads that it remains unclear whether  or
        not the Appellant knew that the robbery was planned and because the
        Appellant was seen withdrawing cash he was not entirely innocent."


39.  On reading the OASys Report and the letter of 22nd July 2015, it  would
    appear that the probation officer was of the view that the  Appellant's
    role in the offence started after the robbery  was  committed  when  he
    used the victim's bank card and tried to withdraw money  from  an  ATM.
    It is clear from the judge's sentencing remarks that it was found  that
    the Appellant was involved with the planning of  the  offence  and  was
    well aware that a robbery was about to take place.

40.  It is not clear from  reading  the  OASys  Report  that  the  probation
    officer has approached the assessment of risk on a basis  different  to
    that set out to him by the Appellant. He might well have done, but  the
    question is whether the judge's conclusion that he had not done so  was
    one which was reasonably open to her.

41.  I am not satisfied on reading the OASys Report and the letter  of  22nd
    July 2015 that the judge's conclusion can be said to  be  perverse.  It
    was clearly apparent that the sentencing remarks were  not  taken  into
    account and the probation officer has confirmed this.  The  Appellant's
    account was vastly different to the basis upon which he was  sentenced.
    It is not clear from reading any of the sections of  the  OASys  report
    that the probation officer does not accept the Appellant's account  and
    he appears to approach the  risk  assessment  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's involvement  in  the  offence  came  some  time  after  the
    robbery. That interpretation of the report was one which  was  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before her  and  it  cannot  be  said  to  be
    irrational.

42.  Nor can it be said that an assessment in the  OASys  Report,  that  the
    Appellant was at low risk  of  re-offending  and  medium  risk  to  the
    public, was sufficient to rebut the presumption  under  Section  72(2).
    The case of Mugwagwa is not authority  for  that  proposition.  On  the
    facts of  that  particular  case,  the  Respondent  conceded  that  the
    evidence in the OASys report rebutted the presumption.

43.  At paragraph 18  and  27  of  the  decision  under  appeal,  the  judge
    acknowledged that the  Appellant  was  an  enhanced  prisoner  with  no
    adjudications and an exemplary custodial record. He complied  with  the
    sentencing  planning  process  and  completed  a  number  of  offending
    behaviour programmes.  The Appellant had fully engaged with his licence
    and there was no negative behaviour in prison. He had been involved  in
    no other criminal activity or behaviour.

44.  The judge, in  assessing  whether  there  was  evidence  to  rebut  the
    presumption in section 72(2), took into account all the evidence before
    her and concluded that it was insufficient to rebut  that  presumption.
    This finding was open to the  judge  on  the  evidence  and  I  am  not
    persuaded that it was irrational, as submitted by Mr Reynolds.

45.   The  judge's  conclusion  that  she  placed  little  reliance  on  the
    probation  report  was  not  unreasonable  in  the  circumstances   and
    therefore her conclusions at paragraphs 25 to  33  were  not  perverse.
    There was no error of law in relation  to  ground  1,  the  section  72
    certificate.


Ground 2 - cessation of refugee status.

The Appellant's submissions

46.  Mr Reynolds relied on  his  skeleton  argument  which  was  dated  22nd
    January 2016 and he referred me to paragraphs 34 to 39 of  the  judge's
    decision. He submitted that the country guidance case  of  EM  did  not
    deal with the cessation of refugee status.  It considered  the  loyalty
    test and whether there had been a change in relation to  that  test  in
    that it was no longer prevalent.

47.  The judge acknowledged that the Respondent's decision on cessation  did
    not appear to follow the UNHCR guidelines  as  it  did  not  deal  with
    border issues, namely fundamental and  widespread  change  and  whether
    protection was available. Mr Reynolds submitted that the Respondent had
    not proved  fundamental  change  for  the  three  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraph 22 of his skeleton argument, namely that Mugabe  and  ZANU-PF
    remain in power and  continue  to  persecute  persons  without  ZANU-PF
    connections.

48.  The UNHCR letter dated 8th October 2014  in  respect  of  the  proposed
    cessation of the Appellant's refugee status  highlighted  a  number  of
    then recent reports and  suggested  that  serious  protection  concerns
    persisted in Zimbabwe. The Respondent had not  proved  that  there  had
    been widespread change in circumstances  across  Zimbabwe  because  the
    country guidance cases of  EM  and  CM  showed  exactly  the  opposite.
    Persons continued to be at risk in high density areas  in  the  capital
    Harare and in Matebele and north and south.

49.  The Respondent had not proved that the actors of persecution had  taken
    responsible steps to prevent persecution on the basis of  what  was  in
    the country guidance cases, namely that ZANU-PF continued to engage  in
    persecution not only of persons with significant MDC profiles but other
    persons without ZANU-PF connections. The judge had erred in law because
    EM was not binding authority and the  Respondent  had  failed  to  show
    fundamental widespread change or that persecution had ceased.

50.  Following the country guidance it was safe for the Appellant to  return
    to Bulawayo.  However, the Respondent had not proved the element  which
    needed  to  be  established  for  cessation  which  was   fundamentally
    different from the recognition of refugee status. Further, the  judge's
    conclusion was contrary to the letter from the UNHCR which stated  that
    the change was not fundamental or durable to warrant cessation  in  the
    Appellant's case.  Although the judge preferred the country guidance to
    the opinion of the UNHCR she was not entitled to do so because she  was
    not applying the correct test for cessation.  She had failed  to  apply
    the test of whether the Respondent had proved fundamental  and  durable
    widespread change and whether there was effective protection available.




The Respondent's submissions

51.  Ms Sreeraman  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  demonstrated  that
    refugee status had ceased. The UNHCR guidelines were  not  binding  but
    persuasive. The judge had assessed the reasons  given  in  the  refusal
    letter as to why there had been durable and  fundamental  change.   She
    had regard to  the  relevant  factors  and  the  Respondent  had  given
    sufficient reasons to show that  the  test  was  made  out.  There  was
    sufficient evidence to show that the changes in Zimbabwe  were  durable
    and fundamental and the judge had  given  sufficient  reasons  for  her
    conclusions.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  current  country
    guidance in deciding whether there had been a fundamental  and  durable
    change.


The Appellant's reply

52.  Mr Reynolds submitted that  the  judge  acknowledged  the  Respondent's
    failure to follow the UNHCR guidelines  and  that  the  Respondent  had
    failed to say that cessation requirements were met.   The  judge  found
    that there  was  a  conflict  between  the  country  guidance  and  the
    guidelines.  However, there was no conflict because  the  issue  before
    her was one of cessation and therefore she was not bound by EM since it
    did not deal with cessation requirements.


Conclusions on cessation of refugee status

53.  I have had regard to the matters set out in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument  in  relation  to  the  UNHCR  guidelines   on   international
    protection  and  cessation  of  refugee  status.  In  particular,   the
    principle that conditions  within  the  country  of  origin  must  have
    changed in a profound and  enduring  manner  before  cessation  can  be
    applied.   For  cessation  to  apply  the  changes  need  to  be  of  a
    fundamental nature such that the refugee  can  no  longer  continue  to
    refuse to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
    nationality. Another  crucial  question  is  whether  the  refugee  can
    effectively re-avail him or herself of the protection or his or her own
    country.  Such protection must therefore be effective and available.
54.  In contrast, changes in the refugee's country of origin affecting  only
    part of the territory should not in principle lead to  a  cessation  of
    refugee status.  Refugee status can only come to an end  if  the  basis
    for persecution is removed without the precondition  that  the  refugee
    has to return to specific safe parts of the country in order to be free
    from persecution, also not being able to move or to  establish  oneself
    still in the country of origin would indicate that the changes have not
    been fundamental.

55.  In SB (cessation and exclusion)  Haiti  [2005]  UKIAT  00036,  the  IAT
    considered the UNHCR guidelines and came to the following conclusions:
         [26]  The  adjective  fundamental  is  really  no  more   than   an
         encapsulation of the wording of the clause  itself  because  it  is
         treated as requiring the changes to have addressed  the  causes  of
         the displacement which led to the grant of refugee  status  in  the
         first place.
         [28] The guidelines do not require a particular level of  good  and
         democratic governance to  be  achieved.  It  is  the  avoidance  of
         predictable return to the conditions of persecution which  must  be
         shown as a result of the changes relied on.  It is for that  reason
         that the UNHCR does not see the clause being  used  in  respect  of
         individuals usually because of  changes  which  affects  groups  of
         refugees which will be more enduring and fundamental.
         [29] Paragraph 13 [of the guidelines] deals with the  enduring  and
         stable relationship with that fundamental  change.  We  agree  that
         temporary changes in a situation of volatility do not suffice. Time
         should be allowed for the changes to  consolidate  so  as  to  show
         their durability.

56.  At paragraph 37 of SB the IAT held:
         "Aristide's return to power  had  been  a  fundamental  change;  it
         removed the basis  of  the  persecution  risk  to  this  individual
         underlying the grant of asylum. We do not accept that it is a legal
         requirement for the operation of the cessation clause that there be
         functioning institutions and rights provisions, as  the  indicators
         in the guidelines appeared to require. We agree, however, that  the
         absence of such institutions makes the  prediction  of  stable  and
         enduring change a more fragile exercise of judgement."

57.  In considering whether there has  been  a  fundamental  and  widespread
    change and whether there was indeed sufficiency of protection the judge
    was entitled to consider current country guidance. The country guidance
    case of EM shows  that  there  has  been  a  change  and  that  certain
    categories of refugees would not be at risk of return.

58.  In EM the Tribunal held that the evidence did not  show  as  a  general
    matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from  the  UK,  having  no
    significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing a real risk
    of having to demonstrate loyalty to the Zanu-PF. Further, a returnee to
    Bulawayo will in general not suffer the adverse attention  of  Zanu-PF,
    including the security forces, even if he or she has a significant  MDC
    profile.

59.  The Appellant was from Bulawayo and the Respondent proposed  to  return
    him there. The Appellant was not politically  active  within  the  MDC.
    Although his father was a journalist, it  was  not  accepted  that  his
    father had been detained or that he was suspected of  working  for  the
    opposition.  In  his  father's  appeal,  the  judge  found   that   the
    Appellant's father came to the UK to join his family,  not  because  he
    feared persecution from the authorities or because he was  a  supporter
    of the MDC.

60.  The judge found that the Appellant was granted refugee status  in  line
    with RN (Returnees), but following EM the situation had changed and the
    Appellant would no longer be at risk of harm on return.

61.  Therefore the reasons  for  the  grant  of  refugee  status  no  longer
    existed in relation to this Appellant and there was no error of law  in
    the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had  shown  that   the
    Appellant's refugee status should cease and he could avail  himself  of
    protection.

62.  I am not persuaded that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    position of the UNHCR since she specifically referred  to  it.  She  is
    entitled to prefer the situation as set out  in  the  country  guidance
    case in preference to that set out in the letter from the UNHCR on  the
    Appellant's behalf. She considered all the evidence before her and  her
    findings were open to her on that evidence. On reading paragraphs 34 to
    41 it is clear that the judge properly directed herself on the  correct
    test.

63.  In any event, there was no challenge to the  judge's  finding  that  it
    was safe for the Appellant to return to Bulawayo. Therefore,  given  my
    conclusion that there was no  error  of  law  in  relation  to  judge's
    decision to uphold the section 72 certificate,  any  error  of  law  in
    relation to the cessation of refugee  status  would  not  be  material,
    given that the Appellant's return to Bulawayo would not breach Articles
    2 or 3. There was no material error of law in  relation  to  ground  2,
    cessation of refugee status.


Ground 3 - Article 8

The Appellant's submissions

64.  Mr Reynolds relied on paragraph 15 of the grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    fact that the risk of reoffending was flawed for  the  reasons  already
    given.  Further, the judge  had  erred  in  his  application  of  Danso
    because the Appellant's rehabilitation was  out  of  the  ordinary  and
    unusual given the matters  referred  to.  There  were  very  compelling
    circumstances and the judge had failed to apply the principles set  out
    in Maslov in assessing those. It was five years since the commission of
    the offence and the Appellant's conduct since then was  exemplary.  The
    judge had not applied the Maslov principles to the  facts  set  out  in
    paragraph 46 and had not given sufficient weight to those factors.  The
    Appellant would have no accommodation and no support in Zimbabwe  where
    employment prospects were poor.


The Respondent's submissions

65.  Ms Sreeraman  submitted  that  the  judge  had  appropriately  directed
    herself in accordance with AJ (Angola).  She had taken into account the
    gravity of the offence and given cogent  reasons  for  why  deportation
    outweighed the Appellant's Article 8 rights. There  was  not  just  the
    risk of reoffending  but  also  revulsion  at  the  commission  of  the
    Appellant's offence. There was no flaw in the assessment of Article  8.
    The Appellant's case could be distinguished from Maslov  on  its  facts
    and therefore the principles set out therein were not  applicable.  The
    judge had conducted a correct assessment and dealt  with  all  relevant
    factors.


The Appellant's reply

66.  Mr Reynolds submitted that the judge had not applied the principles  in
    Maslov  and  AJ  (Angola)  was  authority  that  there  should   be   a
    consideration  of  these  factors  in  deciding  whether   there   were
    compelling circumstances. This had  not  happened  in  the  Appellant's
    case.


Conclusions on Article 8

67.  In relation to  the  Article  8  claim  the  judge  referred  to  Chege
    (Section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 and  took  into
    account the submissions by Mr Reynolds that there were very  compelling
    circumstances over and above paragraph 399 and 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules, namely: the Appellant has no previous convictions;  received  no
    internal  prison  disciplinary  offences;  was  an  enhanced  prisoner;
    completed numerous  offending  behaviour  programmes  including  Victim
    Awareness and Restore/Sorry Project; completed  educational  programmes
    including teaching English as a Foreign Language; complied  fully  with
    his licence; low risk  of  reconviction;  works  with  the  Forgiveness
    Project Charity; volunteer at the Brethren Christ Church;  was  awarded
    the Hardman Trust Award Scheme in recognition of his serious commitment
    to  personal  rehabilitation;  was  undertaking   Railway   Engineering
    Training with the London Skills and  Development  Network  following  a
    formal assessment and all his family, including  parents  and  siblings
    live in the UK; his mother suffers diabetes and neuropathy and will  be
    shortly retiring.

68.  The judge's finding that the above circumstances  were  not  compelling
    was open to her on the evidence. The judge clearly  took  into  account
    all the matters referred to in Maslov  at  paragraph  45  although  she
    failed to refer to the case itself. All the principles set out  therein
    are subsumed in her assessment at paragraphs 42 to 50.

    69.  The judge took into account the Appellant's rehabilitation and his
    exemplary behaviour since the commission of the offence five years ago.
    The Appellant was  released  in  February  2015.   However,  the  judge
    properly weighed the public interest given the serious  nature  of  the
    offence  and  concluded  that   the   compelling   circumstances   were
    insufficient to outweigh the public interest.

70.  The judge found  at  paragraph  51:  "Therefore,  taking  into  account
    paragraph 117A-D of the Immigration Act 2014 and following the approach
    as advocated by Chege in paragraph 30  to  ensure  a  full  and  proper
    assessment of the UK's obligations under Article 8, I conclude that the
    interference with the Appellant's right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life is justified  under  Article  8(2)  and  there  are  public
    interest arguments which should prevail notwithstanding the  engagement
    of Article 8."This finding was open to her on the evidence before  her.
    There was no error of law in relation to ground 3, Article 8.


Conclusion

71.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision which was promulgated on  19th  August  2015  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   J Frances                      Date: 26th February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        J Frances                 Date: 26th February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
