
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00141/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 09 April 2019                     |On 07 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. I find that it  is  appropriate
to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr M. Mohzam of Optimus Law
For the respondent:          Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  26  October
      2017 entitled "Decision  to  refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights
      claim". The decision included a decision to "revoke refugee status" on
      the ground that the appellant ceased to be a refugee with reference to
      paragraph 338A and 339A of the immigration rules and Article 1C(5)  of
      the Refugee Convention. Although the  respondent  concluded  that  the
      appellant ceased to be a refugee  he  also  certified  the  protection
      claim under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002 ("the NIAA 2002"). The provision is said to reflect Article 33(2)
      of the Refugee Convention, which permits expulsion of  a  refugee  who
      has been convicted of a particularly serious crime and who constitutes
      a danger to the community of the host country.

2.    The decision relating to the protection and  human  rights  claim  was
      made in the context of a contemporaneous decision to make an automatic
      deportation order  under  section  32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
      following the appellant's conviction for serious criminal offences.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge E.M.M. Smith  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  21  August  2018.  He  was  not
      satisfied that the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he  was
      a danger to the community for the purpose of section 72(6) of the NIAA
      2002. The effect of sections 72(9)-(10) obliged  him  to  dismiss  the
      appeal in so far as  it  relied  on  the  ground  that  revocation  of
      protection status would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under
      the Refugee Convention.

4.    The judge went on to consider  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  the
      human rights claim was unlawful with  reference  to  the  respondent's
      policy contained in paragraph 398 of the immigration rules and section
      117C(6) of the NIAA 2002.  He  concluded  that  there  were  no  'very
      compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
      deportation of a person who had been sentenced to a period of at least
      four years' imprisonment.

5.    The judge went on to consider whether the appellant would be  at  risk
      on return to Somalia with reference to the country  guidance  decision
      in MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442.  The  judge
      said that he took into account what was  said  in  the  expert  report
      prepared by Markus Hoene but  concluded  that  he  was  bound  by  the
      country guidance decision. There was nothing in the expert report that
      "went beyond  the  country  guidance  decision".  He  found  that  the
      appellant's father and brother could provide support from the  UK  and
      that there was some evidence to  indicate  that  the  appellant  could
      speak Somali. He concluded:

           "Having considered  the  all  of  the  evidence  before  me  and
           factoring in whether the appellant would be at risk if  returned
           to Somalia I am satisfied that his deportation is justified  and
           proportionate."


6.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
      following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to make findings  as  to  whether
           the appellant's refugee status ceased with reference to  Article
           1C(5) of the Refugee Convention  following  the  Upper  Tribunal
           decision in  Essa  (Revocation  of  protection  status  appeals)
           [2018] UKUT 00244 referred.


      (ii)  The judge failed to give adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  he
           concluded that the appellant failed  to  rebut  the  presumption
           that he constituted a danger to the community for the purpose of
           section 72 of the NIAA 2002.


      (iii)  The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant   factors
           identified in MOJ (Somalia) and failed to give adequate  reasons
           for placing little weight on  the  expert  report  in  assessing
           whether the appellant would be at risk on return to Somalia.


      (iv)  The judge failed to conduct a proper assessment of Article 8.




Decision and reasons

First ground - failure to make findings relating to cessation

7.    In  relation  to  the  first  ground,  following  the  Upper  Tribunal
      decision in Essa, the appellant argues that the judge failed  to  make
      any findings in relation to  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant's
      refugee status had ceased for the purpose  of  Article  1C(5)  of  the
      Refugee Convention.

8.    The legal framework underpinning the decision in Essa  is  complicated
      and requires some explanation. The Upper Tribunal  sought  to  explain
      the difficulties arising from the wording contained in the immigration
      rules and section 84(3)(a) of the NIAA 2002, which provides the ground
      of appeal against a  decision  to  revoke  protection  status  in  the
      following terms.

           '84(3)      An appeal  under  section  82(1)(c)  (revocation  of
                 protection status) must be brought on one or  more  of  the
                 following grounds-


                 (a)   that the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  status
                       breaches the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the
                       Refugee Convention;'


9.    Section 84(3)(a) is not founded  on  whether  removal  of  the  person
      would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
      Convention but solely on whether the revocation of such  status  would
      breach the Refugee Convention. In contrast, the wording of the  ground
      of appeal against a decision to refuse a protection claim  focuses  on
      whether removal would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
      the Refugee Convention.

           '84(1)       An  appeal  under  section  82(1)(a)  (refusal   of
                 protection claim) must be brought on one  or  more  of  the
                 following grounds-


                 (a)   that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                       would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                       the Refugee Convention;'


10.    To  understand  why  the  wording  of  section  84(3)(a)   could   be
      problematic one has  to  understand  the  difference  between  refugee
      status recognised under the Refugee Convention  ('Convention  status')
      and  refugee  status  as  defined  by  the   Qualification   Directive
      (2004/83/EC) ('European refugee status').  It  is  also  important  to
      understand the difference between the way the Refugee  Convention  and
      the Directive deal with cessation of status and with  those  who  have
      committed particularly  serious  crimes  who  pose  a  danger  to  the
      community in the host state.


|Refugee Convention              |Qualification Directive             |
|                                |                                    |
|A person has 'refugee status' as|'Refugee status' means recognition  |
|soon as they meet the definition|by a Member State of a third country|
|contained in Article 1A(2) of   |national or stateless person as a   |
|the Refugee Convention.         |refugee (Article 2(d)).             |
|                                |                                    |
|A grant of leave to remain as a |'European refugee status' is granted|
|refugee is a declaratory act    |by a Member State to a third country|
|recognising the existing        |national or stateless person who    |
|'Convention status'.            |qualifies as a refugee in accordance|
|                                |with the Directive (Article 13).    |
|                                |                                    |
|'Convention status' ceases in   |'European refugee status' ceases in |
|the limited number of           |the circumstances identified in     |
|circumstances identified in     |Article 11, which are broadly       |
|Article 1C of the Refugee       |consistent with Article 1C of the   |
|Convention whether or not the   |Refugee Convention. The effect is   |
|Secretary of State refuses to   |'European refugee status' can be    |
|renew leave to remain as a      |revoked, ended or the state can     |
|refugee or curtails existing    |refuse to renew status (Article     |
|leave.                          |14(1)).                             |
|                                |                                    |
|A core principle of the Refugee |The Directive also recognises that a|
|Convention is that no           |Member State can take action against|
|contracting state shall expel or|a refugee who is a danger to the    |
|return (refoule) a refugee in   |security of the country or who,     |
|any manner whatsoever to the    |having been convicted of a          |
|frontiers of territories where  |particularly serious crime,         |
|his life or freedom would be    |constitutes a danger to the         |
|threatened (Article 33(1)). The |community of the host Member State  |
|exception to the prohibition on |(Article 14(4)). In contrast to the |
|refoulement is when there are   |Refugee Convention, the Directive   |
|reasonable grounds for regarding|does not make provision for the     |
|the refugee as a danger to the  |lawful removal of a person with     |
|security of the country in which|'European refugee status', but for  |
|they are, or who, having been   |the status to be revoked, ended or  |
|convicted by a final judgment of|to refuse to renew refugee status   |
|a particularly serious crime,   |granted by the Member State.        |
|constitutes a danger to the     |                                    |
|community of that country       |                                    |
|(Article 33(2)).                |                                    |
|                                |'European refugee status' comes to  |
|If a person is a danger to the  |an end where there is cessation or  |
|community the person still has  |the person constitutes a danger to  |
|'Convention status' but can     |the community of the Member State.  |
|lawfully be expelled or removed |                                    |
|from the host state without     |                                    |
|breaching obligations under the |                                    |
|Refugee Convention.             |                                    |


11.   One of the crucial differences between the Refugee Convention and  the
      Directive is that there is no provision for the revocation of  refugee
      status under the Refugee Convention. 'Convention status' either ceases
      because of the circumstances surrounding the claim (Article 1C) or the
      host state is permitted to remove  a  refugee  if  they  constitute  a
      danger to  the  community  of  the  host  state  (Article  33(2)).  In
      contrast, the mechanism under the Directive is for  'European  refugee
      status'  granted  by  the  Member  State  to  be   revoked   in   both
      circumstances. The effect is that 'European refugee status'  comes  to
      an end and the person may become liable to removal.

12.    In  the  case  of  cessation,  the   practical   difference   between
      'Convention status' and 'European refugee status'  is  negligible.  In
      both circumstances, the status under either provision comes to an  end
      if the cessation criteria apply.

13.   The differences are more  pronounced  in  relation  to  removal  of  a
      person who poses a danger to the community of the host state. A person
      may retain 'Convention status' even if 'European  refugee  status'  is
      revoked with reference to paragraph 338A and 339AC of the  immigration
      rules and comes to an end.

14.   Section 72 of  the  NIAA  2002  is  said  to  reflect  the  provisions
      contained in Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  although  it
      inaccurately describes the effect of the provision as 'exclusion' from
      Refugee Status rather than framing the provision in terms of permitted
      refoulement. In EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630  the  Court  of
      Appeal emphasised that section 72 must be read to comply with  Article
      33(2) of the Refugee Convention. It is important to note that  section
      72 came into force before the Qualification Directive and is expressly
      intended to reflect the provisions of Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
      Convention and not Article 14(4) of the Directive.

15.   The Tribunal is obliged to consider section 72 of the NIAA 2002  where
      applicable. Section 72(10) was amended  to  reflect  the  new  appeals
      provisions. It states that the  Tribunal  is  obliged  to  dismiss  an
      appeal brought on grounds relating to  the  Refugee  Convention  under
      sections 84(1)(a) and 83(3)(a) of the NIAA  2002  if  the  presumption
      that the person constitutes a danger to the  community  has  not  been
      rebutted.

16.   In Essa, the Upper  Tribunal  explained  why  a  person  might  retain
      'Convention status' even if 'European refugee status' has been revoked
      with reference to the immigration rules because a person constitutes a
      danger to the community of the host state. The Upper Tribunal  pointed
      out the inaccurate transposition of the Directive in the terms of  the
      immigration rules with reference  to  the  earlier  decision  in  Dang
      (Refugee - query revocation - Article 3) [2013] UKUT  00043.  In  that
      case the Upper Tribunal discussed the difference  between  'Convention
      status' and 'European refugee status' and concluded:

           "20.  The provisions of the Refugee Convention which are that in
                 the circumstances of a case like this, a person  remains  a
                 refugee but is removable, are apparently inconsistent  with
                 those of Article 14(4) of the Qualification  Directive  and
                 para 339A(x) of the Immigration  Rules  which  provide  for
                 revocation of his status. There are three possible ways  of
                 dealing with this argument. The first is to say that  there
                 is  such  an  inconsistency  and  that  the   Qualification
                 Directive takes precedence over the Refugee Convention. The
                 second is the say that there is such an  inconsistency  and
                 that the  Refugee  Convention  takes  precedence  over  the
                 Qualification Directive  and  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
                 third is  to  say  that  the  status  revoked  under  those
                 provisions is different from the individual's status  under
                 the Refugee  Convention  and  that  there  is  in  fact  no
                 inconsistency. The  third  is  the  right  answer,  in  our
                 judgment."


17.   Dang was decided before the  changes  to  Part  V  of  the  NIAA  2002
      introduced by the Immigration Act 2014  ("the  IA  2014").  The  Upper
      Tribunal in Essa considered the wording of  section  84(3)(a)  of  the
      NIAA 2002, which confuses the revocation of protection  status  (which
      could only relate to 'European  refugee  status')  with  a  breach  of
      obligations under the Refugee Convention. The reason why  the  wording
      of section 84(3)(a)  is  problematic  is  because  the  mere  fact  of
      revocation of  'European  refugee  status',  taken  alone,  might  not
      necessarily breach obligations under the Refugee Convention.

18.   In Essa,  the  Upper  Tribunal  pointed  out  that  it  might  make  a
      difference in cases where the Secretary of State  certifies  the  case
      under section 72 of the NIAA 2002. Because of the differences  in  the
      way that Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention and Article 14(4)  of
      the Directive approach the status of people who constitute a danger to
      the community of the host  state,  a  person  may  retain  'Convention
      status' even though 'European refugee status' has been revoked.

19.   Section 84(1)(a) provides for an appeal on the ground that removal  in
      consequence of a decision to refuse a protection  claim  would  breach
      the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention. If  the
      Tribunal finds that the presumption that a person poses  a  danger  to
      the community has not been  rebutted  with  reference  to  section  72
      removal would not breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
      Refugee Convention because Article 33(2) permits expulsion or  removal
      of a refugee with 'Convention status' in those circumstances.

20.   In contrast, section 84(3)(a) only provides an appeal  on  the  ground
      that the revocation  of  status  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention. As  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Essa pointed out, unless or until a person becomes liable  to  removal
      it is possible to retain 'Convention status'. As long as they are  not
      subject to removal action, the revocation of 'European refugee status'
      is unlikely to breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under  Refugee
      Convention save in circumstances where the Secretary of State fails to
      comply with obligations to grant certain benefits to a  refugee  under
      the Convention.

21.   In my assessment, the effect of the decision in Essa is  that,  in  an
      appeal brought  under  section  84(3)(a)  NIAA  2002,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was still obliged  to  make  an  assessment  of  whether  the
      appellant ceased to  have  'Convention  status'  for  the  purpose  of
      Article 1C of the Refugee Convention.

        i) Cessation - If the Secretary of  State  has  decided  to  revoke
           'European refugee status' with reference to  paragraph  339A  of
           the immigration rules because he considers  that  the  cessation
           provisions apply, an assessment should  be  made  of  that  core
           issue for the purpose of 'Convention status' as well as  whether
           revocation of 'European refugee status' is lawful.


      (ii)  Danger to the community - If the Secretary of State has  decided
           to revoke refugee status because the person constitutes a danger
           to  the  community  with  reference  to  paragraph   339AC,   as
           assessment  of  whether  refugee  status  has  ceased  is  still
           necessary in order to ascertain  whether  an  appellant  retains
           'Convention status' and remains  entitled  to  certain  benefits
           under the Convention pending removal.


22.   If a person, in fact, ceases to have 'Convention status' and could  be
      removed in safety then technically Article 33(2)  becomes  irrelevant.
      Yet section 72 NIAA 2002 still obliges the Tribunal  to  consider  the
      certificate. This further anomaly serves to highlight  the  inaccurate
      way in which the immigration rules, section 84(3)(a)  and  section  72
      have been drafted and amended.

23.   What I understand the Upper Tribunal in Essa to  be  saying  is  that,
      even if a person continues to have 'Convention status' a finding  that
      he has failed to rebut the presumption that he constitutes a danger to
      the community would oblige the Tribunal to dismiss an  appeal  brought
      under section 84(3)(a) NIAA 2002. If the person constitutes  a  danger
      to the community any subsequent removal in consequence of the decision
      to revoke 'European  refugee  status'  would  not  breach  the  United
      Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  because  Article
      33(2) would permit removal of a person with 'Convention status' in any
      event.

24.   In this case the reason why the Secretary of State decided  to  revoke
      the appellant's 'European refugee status' was  because  he  considered
      that the appellant ceased to be a refugee. I find that the judge erred
      in failing to make any findings in relation to the  issue  of  whether
      the appellant's 'Convention status' ceased and  therefore  whether  he
      continued to be entitled to the associated  benefits  of  the  Refugee
      Convention pending removal.

Second ground - failure to give adequate  reasons  relating  to  section  72
      certificate

25.   On 06 May 2015 the appellant was convicted and sentenced to 16  weeks'
      imprisonment for possessing an offensive weapon in a public place.  On
      28 July 2015 he was  sentenced  for  a  series  of  offences.  He  was
      convicted of two robberies  with  violence  that  took  place  on  the
      evening of 02 May 2015. For the first count  he  was  sentenced  to  a
      period of 45  months'  imprisonment.  For  the  second  count  he  was
      sentenced to a period of 40 months'  imprisonment  to  run  concurrent
      with the sentence for the first count. In relation to three burglaries
      committed while the appellant was on bail for  the  robbery  offences,
      the appellant was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment in relation  to
      each count to run concurrent with one another, but to run  consecutive
      to the sentences for robbery. The aggregate sentence for the two  sets
      of offences was 57 months' imprisonment.

26.    There  is  no  doubt  that  these  were  serious  offences  involving
      robberies with violence and burglary of public buildings  including  a
      school and a healthcare centre. Under section 72(6) the burden shifted
      to the appellant to rebut the presumption that he constituted a danger
      to the community. Mr Mohzam accepted that there was little  more  than
      the appellant's statement as evidence to support his claim that he did
      not  constitute  a  danger  to  the  community.  There  was  no  OASys
      assessment or other independent evidence  of  rehabilitation.  It  was
      open to the judge to assess the reliability  of  the  appellant  as  a
      witness, having heard him give evidence at the hearing.  It  is  clear
      from his findings  that  he  was  not  impressed  by  the  appellant's
      attitude at the hearing. He noted that the  appellant's  own  evidence
      was that he was placed in segregation for a week while in  prison  for
      fighting.  Unlike  his  brother,  who  the  judge  found  to  be   "an
      intelligent and sensible young man",  the  judge  made  the  following
      finding based on the appellant's background and his assessment of  him
      as a witness at the hearing.

           "37.  I have taken into  account  all  the  evidence  but  I  am
                 satisfied that this appellant's  history  rightly  portrays
                 him as a violent man  who  is  a  danger  to  society.  His
                 conduct during this hearing emphasised that this  appellant
                 is prepared to use inappropriate conduct  as  and  when  it
                 suits him and his period in  custody  has  done  little  to
                 diminish  that.  I  am  satisfied  that  if   circumstances
                 prevailed he would again use violence."


27.   Mr Mohzam argued that the judge should have  taken  into  account  the
      appellant's statement but failed to particularise what aspects of that
      evidence might have  compelled  the  judge  to  come  to  a  different
      conclusion. In the statement the appellant expressed remorse  for  his
      actions and said that he was aware of the consequences for the victims
      of his crimes. He said that he  had  learned  a  valuable  lesson.  He
      committed the crimes because he was  in  the  wrong  company  and  was
      ashamed of what he had done. He claimed to be rehabilitated during his
      time in prison and had undertaken victim awareness and drug  awareness
      courses. He claimed that he had also written letters of apology to the
      victims. In so far as this evidence went, his expressions  of  remorse
      and claims to rehabilitation are common to many people who  are  faced
      with the prospect of deportation as a consequence of their actions. It
      was open to the judge to make his own assessment as to  whether  those
      expressions of remorse and contrition were evidence of genuine change.
      Having heard the appellant give evidence, he did not. The  reasons  he
      gave were adequate and were open to him on the evidence.

28.   For these reasons I find that there is no error of law in the  judge's
      findings relating to section 72. It was within a range  of  reasonable
      responses to the evidence for the judge to conclude that the appellant
      failed to rebut the presumption that he constitutes a  danger  to  the
      community. Section 72(10) required him to dismiss the appeal in so far
      as it related to the ground under section  84(3)(a)  relating  to  the
      revocation of protection status ('European refugee status').

Third ground - errors relating to Article 3 assessment

 29.  The third ground seeks to challenge the judge's  alternative  findings
      relating to risk on  return  to  Mogadishu  under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention. Mr Mohzam mounted a  two-pronged  attack  on  the
      judge's findings. He argued that the judge (i)  failed  to  take  into
      account all relevant considerations for a proper assessment of risk on
      return, including the appellant's minority clan  status  as  a  'White
      Somali' from the Reer Hamar minority clan; and  (ii)  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons to explain why he rejected the expert report.

30.   The judge  quoted  the  first  six  points  of  the  headnote  in  MOJ
      (Somalia). It is clear that he had the relevant issues outlined in the
      most recent country guidance in mind. In relation to the expert report
      the judge stated that he had "taken into account all  he  states"  but
      concluded that he was "bound by MOJ (Somalia)" and found  "nothing  of
      significance in  the  report  that  goes  beyond  MOJ".  One  is  left
      wondering what aspect of MOJ (Somalia) the judge found to be 'binding'
      given that the country guidance makes clear that  each  case  must  be
      evaluated on the facts. One is  also  left  wondering  why  the  judge
      concluded that there was nothing of significance in the expert  report
      such that went beyond the factors identified in MOJ (Somalia) when the
      expert concluded that the  appellant  would  face  a  higher  risk  of
      discrimination, hardship and potential targeting  by  elements  within
      Mogadishu because of his minority clan status in  the  context  of  an
      increase in security incidents in recent years. In fact, little or  no
      reasons were given to explain why little  weight  was  placed  on  the
      report. In assessing some of the factors identified in paragraph (iii)
      of the headnote in MOJ (Somalia) the judge said:

           "46.   When  factoring  in  the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
                 English, Arabic and as he accepted  some  Somali  the  fact
                 that he has been  further  educated  in  the  UK  and  has,
                 therefore, considerable skills to accompany him  should  he
                 return I have assessed  whether  his  return  would  breach
                 article 3.


           47.   It is argued on the appellant's behalf  that  he  has  not
                 lived in Somalia since he was 7 and has  no  connection  of
                 family there. The  appellant  has  been  supported  by  his
                 brother who is in employment and whilst he claimed it would
                 be difficult to support this appellant because they hope to
                 have children and move into a larger house  I  have  little
                 doubt that he will support  him  as  will  the  father.  It
                 became clear that to converse with  his  father,  who  gave
                 evidence  through  a  Somali  interpreter,  the   appellant
                 understands and speaks Somali."


31.   It is clear that the judge considered a  number  of  relevant  factors
      identified in paragraph  (iii)  of  the  headnote  in  MOJ  (Somalia).
      However, some important factors  were  missing  from  the  assessment.
      First, having found the appellant's brother to be a  credible  witness
      the judge failed to assess whether he could afford to remit the amount
      required to support the appellant in such a way that he would not fall
      within the potential situation of destitution and hardship  identified
      by the Upper Tribunal in MOJ (Somalia).  His  brother's  evidence  was
      that he would struggle to do so. No assessment was made as to  whether
      he could afford adequate remittances despite the fact that the  expert
      report set out estimated figures for the minimum  cost  of  living  in
      Mogadishu. His father's evidence was that he could not afford to  send
      remittances because he was on a  low  income.  It  appears  that  this
      evidence was not taken into account.

32.    More  importantly,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account   the
      appellant's minority clan status anywhere in the assessment.  Although
      the Upper Tribunal in MOJ (Somalia) found that minority  clan  status,
      in itself, was no longer sufficient to give  rise  to  a  well-founded
      fear of persecution the guidance in  the  headnote  mentions  minority
      clan status as a relevant factor in  several  places.  It  is  clearly
      still relevant to an assessment of risk on return even  if  it  is  no
      longer determinative. First,  at  headnote  paragraph  (i)  the  Upper
      Tribunal in MOJ (Somalia) found that assistance from clan members  was
      not likely to be forthcoming from minority clan members  because  they
      have little to offer. Second, at (iii) the extent to  which  a  person
      might be able to call on clan associations was a  relevant  factor  in
      assessing  risk  on  return.  Third,  at  (vi)  the   Upper   Tribunal
      specifically found that the return of a person from  a  minority  clan
      who does not originate from Mogadishu and who has no former  links  to
      the city, no access to funds and no other  form  of  clan,  family  or
      social support is unlikely to be realistic.

33.   Given the importance of the issues at stake, it was  insufficient  for
      the judge to take into account some but  not  all  the  considerations
      that were relevant to a proper assessment  of  risk  on  return  under
      Article 3. The fact that the appellant left Somalia when he was  seven
      years old and has no clan or family links in Mogadishu and is  from  a
      minority clan formed an important part of the assessment. Much of  the
      expert's opinion was also based on the differential risks to  minority
      clan members in Mogadishu even if it was no longer  sufficient,  taken
      alone, to give rise to a real risk of serious harm. For these  reasons
      I conclude that the judge's  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      placing little weight on the expert report  and  failure  to  evaluate
      other relevant considerations amount to errors of law.

Fourth ground - errors relating to the assessment of Article 8

34.   The fourth ground as pleaded in the original grounds was  general  and
      unparticularised.  Mr  Mohzam  did  not  develop  the  ground  orally.
      However, on closer inspection of the judge's findings  obvious  errors
      become apparent that cannot be ignored.

35.   At [40-41] the judge applied the  wrong  test  under  section  117C(6)
      NIAA  2002.  The  appellant  was  not  sentenced  to  over  4   years'
      imprisonment within the meaning of section 117D(4)(b), which does  not
      include a  period  of  imprisonment  only  by  virtue  of  consecutive
      sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of time. In the  suite
      of offences for which he was sentenced on 28  July  2015  the  longest
      sentence was 45 months' imprisonment, which was less than four  years'
      imprisonment. The appellant was eligible to argue that he came  within
      the exceptions to deportation.

36.   Although the judge went on to consider Exception 1  (section  117C(4))
      and Exception 2 (section 117C(5)) the assessment was made through  the
      lens of the "very compelling circumstances" test over  and  above  the
      exceptions. Even then, the  error  was  compounded  by  an  inaccurate
      statement of the  test  contained  in  Exception  2  where  the  judge
      apparently considered whether there were "very significant  obstacles"
      to the appellant  continuing  his  relationship  with  his  child.  No
      consideration was given to the best interests of the child nor did the
      judge evaluate the evidence given by the child's mother. No mention is
      made of the relevant test,  which  is  whether  deportation  would  be
      "unduly harsh" on the appellant's child. Although I have  some  doubts
      as to whether the evidence would have shown that the  effect  on  this
      child would have been more severe than the usual negative  effects  of
      deportation, the appellant and the child were  entitled  to  a  proper
      evaluation of  their  situation  given  the  serious  consequences  of
      deportation.

37.   Even if the  appellant  could  not  show  that  deportation  would  be
      "unduly harsh"  on  the  child  it  would  form  part  of  an  overall
      assessment  over  whether  there  were,  in  the  alternative,   "very
      compelling circumstances" that might outweigh the public  interest  in
      deportation. The circumstances the appellant might face  in  Mogadishu
      should have been a relevant part of the assessment. Given the flaws in
      the findings relating on the assessment of risk  on  return,  and  the
      other legal errors identified in the judge's  assessment,  I  conclude
      that the judge's findings relating to Article 8  are  so  flawed  that
      they cannot stand.



Conclusion

38.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
      of errors of law and must be set aside. Although I have concluded that
      the First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to the  certificate  under
      section 72 were sustainable, given that findings will need to be  made
      in relation to the issue of  cessation  first,  it  is  possible  that
      section 72 may not apply. Given that other core areas of the  decision
      relating to the assessment of Article 3  and  Article  8  issues  also
      involved the making of errors of law, I  conclude  that  it  would  be
      better if the whole decision is set aside so that a fresh decision can
      be made.

39.   I have considered the guidance given in paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice
      Statement dated 25 September  2012.  Although  the  normal  course  of
      action would be for the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision even  if
      it involves further fact finding, given the nature and extent  of  the
      judicial fact finding that will need to be carried out, and  the  fact
      that there  has  been  no  judicial  determination  of  the  issue  of
      cessation in the First-tier Tribunal as yet, this is a  case  that  is
      appropriate for remittal.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 01 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
