
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00070/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Piccadilly Exchange, Manchester   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th January 2018                       |On 17th January 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant
                                     And

                      ABDIFATAH ABDIFATAH AHMED MOHAMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Appeared in person, no legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Mr Mohamed, date of birth  1  January  1993  and  a  Somali  national,
      arrived in the UK on 13th October 2008, aged 15, on a  family  reunion
      visa after his mother had been recognised as  a  refugee.  His  family
      originated  from  Awdhegele,  Lower  Shabelle  and  he  had  lived  in
      Mogadishu. His mother had been recognised as a refugee as a member  of
      the Rahanweyn clan, sub clan Digil, sub sub clan Begedi and  that  she
      and her family had suffered persecution at  the  hands  of  the  Habar
      Gidir and other militias. He was  recognised  as  a  refugee.  He  was
      granted indefinite leave to remain on 11 April 2012. On 20  May  2016,
      he was convicted of possession of a controlled  drug  (Class  B)  with
      intent to supply and sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment. At the date
      of his conviction he was serving a community  order  for  two  earlier
      convictions for harassment and battery dated 27th March 2015 and  29th
      May 2015. Those convictions related to a former partner.


   2. The SSHD notified Mr Mohamed of her intention  to  cease  his  refugee
      status and sign a deportation order. Representations were sent to  the
      SSHD from Mr Mohamed's earlier legal  representatives  and  the  UNHCR
      wrote to the SSHD with comments on the  proposed  ceasing  of  refugee
      status. On 17th May 2017 the SSHD made a  deportation  order,  revoked
      his refugee status and refused his protection and human rights claim.

   3.  Mr Mohamed's appeal was heard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  31st
      August 2017 and, for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 26th
      September 2017, First-tier Tribunal judge Knowles allowed his appeal.

   4. The SSHD sought, and was granted, permission to appeal the decision on
      the grounds that it was arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had
      erred in law in allowing the appeal on Article  3  grounds.  The  SSHD
      submitted that the First-tier Tribunal findings were not in accordance
      with the country guidance case of MOJ (Somalia) CG [2014]  UKUT  00442
      (IAC); that there was treatment  available  for  type  1  diabetes  in
      Mogadishu; that the judge had failed to factor into his assessment the
      family assistance available; had failed  to  provide  reasons  why  Mr
      Mohamed could not benefit  from  the  economic  boom;  had  failed  to
      provide reasons why Mr Mohamed would require the assistance of an  IDP
      camp. Permission was also granted on the grounds that it was  arguable
      the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  failing  to  consider  the
      great public interest in deporting a foreign criminal.

        Error of law

   5. At its core the First-tier Tribunal judge allowed Mr Mohamed's  appeal
      on the grounds that he would be  at  risk  of  inhuman  and  degrading
      treatment in breach of Article 3, that his deportation pursuant to the
      deportation order would be  a  disproportionate  interference  in  his
      private and family life (Article 8).


   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge made the following undisputed findings:

   i) Mr Mohamed is a minority clan member - the Begedi;


  ii) Mr Mohamed is not at real risk of being persecuted  for  a  Convention
      reason and nor is he entitled to humanitarian protection;

 iii) Mr Mohamed's appeal against  the  revocation  of  his  refugee  status
      fails;

  iv) Mr Mohamed does not meet  the  high  threshold  for  protection  under
      Article 3 on health grounds;

   v) Mr Mohamed has not,  on  health  grounds,  shown  a  "degree  of  harm
      amounting to a sufficiently  adverse  effect  on  physical  and  moral
      integrity to engage Article 8";

  vi) He has no nuclear family or close relatives living  in  Mogadishu;  he
      has no family associations he can call upon in Mogadishu;

 vii) The circumstances of Mr Mohamed in  Mogadishu  before  he  joined  his
      mother were grave;

viii) Mr Mohamed left Somalia aged  15.  Although  he  spent  his  formative
      years there he has not lived there alone without family support;

  ix) It is reasonably likely that any clan  affiliation  he  has,  being  a
      minority clan, will have little support to offer him;

   x) His mother and brother in the UK could provide some financial  support
      to him in Somalia, albeit limited;

  xi)  He has had the benefit of a UK further education and language  skills
      which will benefit him on his return to Somalia;

 xii) He would need to privately fund  his  type  1  diabetes,  including  a
      fridge to cold-store his insulin


   7. The SSHD disputed the judge's findings (or lack of findings)

   i) That Mr Mohammed will face a real risk that he will have  to  draw  on
      the assistance of an IDP camp;

  ii) That there is a real risk that Mr Mohammed will not be able to  secure
      his medical needs and avoid living in circumstances which  fall  below
      the threshold of his protected Article 3 rights;

 iii) that Mr Mohamed would not be able to avail himself of employment;

  iv) that he could not participate in the economic  boom,  as  required  by
      MOJ;

   v) The lack of funds available.


   8. The judge has failed to address and make a finding  whether  there  is
      evidence that Mr  Mohamed  could  or  could  not  participate  in  the
      acknowledged economic boom in Mogadishu.


   9. The judge concluded Mr Mohamed would have to call on the assistance of
      an IDP camp despite there being financial assistance available to  him
      from his family in the UK and despite his acquired skills. There is no
      reasoning provided for that conclusion.

    10. The judge has erred in his conclusion that the circumstances in
        which he would live would fall below the Article 3 threshold. As
        made clear in SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 at [31] ".....An
        appeal to article 3 which suggests that the person concerned would
        face impoverished conditions of living on removal to Somalia
        should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi and Elmi at para
        292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case....".
        Although accepted by the SSHD (inevitably given MOJ) that living in
        an IDP camp would amount to a breach of Article 3, specific
        consideration should be given to Said in the absence of a real risk
        of being in such a camp. The judge's finding that Mr Mohamed would
        have to "draw on the assistance of an IDP camp" is not a finding
        that there is a real risk he will be in such a camp . Even if the
        judge's finding could be read to be such a conclusion, that
        conclusion was reached without consideration of the employment
        conditions in Mogadishu and the financial support available.

    11. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law such that I set aside
        the decision to be remade, the findings at [6] above being
        retained.


        Remaking the decision


  12. Mr Mohamed gave  oral  evidence  before  me.  Although  there  was  an
      interpreter  present,  it  was  very  clear  that  Mr  Mohamed  speaks
      excellent English and is to be commended for this. He did not have  to
      resort to the interpreter for assistance. He explained  very  fluently
      his current circumstances.  He  has,  he  said,  completely  distanced
      himself from the previous people who had such a bad influence on  him.
      He lives at home with his mother with whom he is  very  close  and  he
      doesn't go out other than for normal day-to-day activities. He says he
      has learnt a very serious lesson whilst  detained  and  he  says  that
      there are no circumstances in which he would behave in such a  way  as
      to result in him being imprisoned again. He said he would  not  commit
      any further crimes. He told me that he had been for  a  job  interview
      and was due to start a new job in the coming week.


  13. It was clear that he still has terrible memories of what  he  saw  and
      what happened when he was in Mogadishu as a teenager. Although he  did
      not refer directly to the basis upon which his mother  was  recognised
      as a refugee, the documents before me refer to her having  been  raped
      in front of him. I have no doubt at all that  these  traumatic  events
      have had a long lasting effect upon him and, as found  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge, that he has a close relationship with his mother.
      The index offence was committed when he was living away from home, the
      first time that he had been away  from  home  and  attempted  to  live
      independently.

  14. He has Type 1 diabetes and, according to the documents before  me,  he
      was very ill when he first arrived in the UK. After skilled  treatment
      and the introduction of  insulin  by  way  of  injection,  his  health
      stabilised and is now under control. He explained how he has to  carry
      medication with him and identify when he needs to self-medicate. I  do
      not doubt that he is dependent on injectable insulin and that he needs
      to be able to look after his medication properly.

  15. The country guidance case of MOJ makes clear that it is for the person
      facing return to explain why he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
      economic  opportunities  in  Mogadishu.  The  evidence  before  me  is
      evidence of Mr Mohamed's uncertainty and anxiety  at  returning  to  a
      city of which his last experience was traumatic and where he does  not
      know any one and has no contact with anyone  from  whom  he  can  seek
      assistance. Since leaving Somalia, Mr Mohamed has  acquired  excellent
      language skills and, although his previous work experience is limited,
      he has some experience that he can utilise, as shown by the fact  that
      he has now been offered employment in the UK having served his  prison
      sentence. The evidence that was considered by the Tribunal in MOJ  has
      not been distinguished and remains valid and  applicable.  Mr  Mohamed
      will be returning with relocation finance and access to funds from his
      family in the UK. He will be able  to  utilise  those  funds  to  find
      adequate accommodation (and a fridge) when first arriving  in  Somalia
      and there is no indication that he will not be able to seek work.  The
      risk of being in an IDP camp is not shown given the  access  to  funds
      and potential employment. It cannot be concluded that there is no real
      prospect of him securing access to a livelihood on return.


  16. Although he has Type 1  diabetes,  the  evidence  before  me  is  that
      medical treatment is available albeit  privately  funded.  I  have  no
      doubt that Mr Mohamed will find relocation difficult but treatment  is
      available, he does not meet the high threshold set by N  and  he  will
      have access to limited financial support.  He  will  be  in  no  worse
      position than other returnees and, given the  financial  support  from
      his  family  and  the  relocation  finance  and  the   potential   for
      employment, it is not likely that he will be destitute.

  17. Mr Mohamed has a close relationship with his  mother  and  I  have  no
      doubt but that separation from her and from his siblings will be  very
      upsetting both for them and for him. I acknowledge  that  he  is  very
      clear that he has "learnt his lesson"  following  his  conviction  and
      sentence of imprisonment. His oral evidence  and  his  demeanour  were
      impressive and I have sympathy for him and  his  family.  Nevertheless
      the legislative framework requires deportation despite this unless  he
      has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, is socially
      and  culturally  integrated  in  the  UK  and  there  would  be   very
      significant obstacles to his integration in to Mogadishu.

  18. Mr Mohamed came to the UK aged 15 in October 2008. He is now aged  24,
      having been in the UK for nearly 10 years. He has not been in  the  UK
      for most of his life although he has spent  some  of  his  adolescence
      here. He speaks English and has worked and is due  to  work.  Although
      the committing of a serious crime (as he has) is an indication that he
      is not socially and culturally integrated in the UK, when set  against
      his age when he came to the UK and his language fluency I accept  that
      he is,  just,  able  to  show  that  he  is  socially  and  culturally
      integrated.

  19. What he has not been able to show is that there will  be  significant,
      or even very significant, obstacles to his integration  in  Mogadishu.
      Although he will no doubt find it difficult, the difficulties he  will
      face are not very significant obstacles. The public interest  is  very
      firmly that Mr Mohamed should, because of his conviction and  sentence
      of imprisonment of 15 months, be deported. Whilst it is correct to say
      that he speaks English, will not be a burden on the  UK  taxpayer  now
      (because of his employment), that he has been lawfully in the UK since
      his arrival in 2008 and that three years of that has been as a  minor,
      the proportionality of his  deportation  has  to  be  weighed  in  the
      context of his criminal conviction. Taking all of  the  above  factors
      into account I am driven to the conclusion that his deportation is not
      a disproportionate interference in his private and family life.

  20. Whilst I have sympathy for Mr  Mohamed,  sympathy  is  not  enough.  I
      dismiss his appeal on all grounds.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.
     [pic]
                                    Date 15th January 2018
          Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
