
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  RP/00183/2018
                                                               PA/12973/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 21 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                george dixon
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Greer, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Agnew, sent on 21 March 2019, dismissing his
         appeal on protection and human rights grounds.



Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone.  He entered the  UK  as
         far back as 1985, and  as  such  has  a  very  lengthy  immigration
         history.  This is set out in detail in the FTT's decision and it is
         only necessary for me to summarise it here.  In 1990 the  appellant
         was sentenced to ten years imprisonment for drug offences.  In 1995
         he was granted refugee status.   In 2001 he  was  imprisoned  again
         for dishonesty offences.  In 2008 he  was  given  an  indeterminate
         prison sentence with a minimum tariff of five  years,  having  been
         convicted of rape and sexual assault.

      3. In a decision dated 13 December  2013  the  respondent  decided  to
         deport the appellant and 'cease' his refugee status.  The appellant
         was released from custody in January 2018.

FTT decision

      4. The FTT declined to adjourn the appeal in order to obtain a copy of
         the January 2019 OASYS report concerning the  appellant.   The  FTT
         then dismissed the appeal on Refugee Convention  and  human  rights
         grounds having made the following findings:

          a) The appellant failed to rebut the presumption  that  he  is  a
             danger to the community and as such the certificate  under  s.
             72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ('the
             2002 Act') was upheld.

          b) There have been fundamental  and  durable  changes  in  Sierra
             Leone, and the appellant no longer faces any harm on the basis
             of his past activities there.

          c) The appellant's belated claim that he is a homosexual  is  not
             credible and he therefore faces no risk  in  Sierra  Leone  in
             that regard.

          d) The appellant has no family life in the UK,  and  in  all  the
             circumstances his deportation from the  UK  would  not  breach
             Article 8 of the ECHR.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      5. UT Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal to the UT on the  basis
         that it was  arguable  that  the  FTT  decision  not  to  grant  an
         adjournment was procedurally unfair.  The grounds focussed entirely
         upon the submission that it was unfair not to grant an  adjournment
         in order to obtain the January 2019 OASYS report, in the  light  of
         the procedural history before the Tribunal.

Hearing

      6.  At  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  Mr  Greer  applied  for   an
         adjournment.  He explained that the appellant had taken an overdose
         at court and had to be taken to hospital.  I declined to  grant  an
         adjournment  -  the  determination  of  whether  the  FTT  decision
         contains an error of law could properly and  fairly  be  determined
         without the appellant's presence at the hearing.

      7. Mr  Greer  was  understandably  shaken  by  what  had  taken  place
         immediately before the hearing being called on, and for that reason
         I acceded to his request to stand the matter down for 30 minutes.

      8. Upon the resumption of the hearing Mr Greer  candidly  acknowledged
         that the grounds of appeal focus entirely upon the failure to grant
         an adjournment without  challenging  in  any  way  the  substantive
         findings in relation to the appellant's risk  in  Sierra  Leone  or
         Article 8.  Mr Greer accepted that  unless  there  is  a  'Robinson
         obvious' error of law  in  those  findings,  the  decision  not  to
         continue with the hearing in the absence of the OASYS report  could
         not be properly challenged.  Mr Greer clarified  that  although  he
         was not instructed to concede an absence of  a  'Robinson  obvious'
         error, he was unable to identify any.

      9. Having heard these brief submissions, I did not need to  hear  from
         Mr Bates and indicated that I would be dismissing  the  appeal  for
         reasons that I now provide.

Error of law discussion

     10. The January 2019 OASYS report may have provided  more  up  to  date
         evidence regarding the appellant's dangerousness to society for the
         purposes of s. 72 of the 2002 Act.  However, even assuming that the
         s. 72 certificate was not  upheld,  the  appellant's  appeal  would
         inevitably fail given the un-appealed FTT's findings regarding  the
         absence of any risk in Sierra Leone for the appellant and the FTT's
         findings regarding Article 8.  Mr Greer clearly recognised that the
         appeal was bound to fail for this reason and as  such  acknowledged
         that the failure to grant an  adjournment  was  immaterial  to  the
         ultimate conclusions on the substantive issues.  This is sufficient
         to dispose of the appeal.

     11. I also note that when granting permission, Judge  Reeds  underlined
         the need to provide a copy of the report to the UT, yet no  updated
         OASYS report has been drawn to my attention.

     12. In any event, in my judgment the FTT  acted  fairly  in  proceeding
         with the appeal, notwithstanding the  source/s  of  blame  for  the
         absence  of  the  OASYS  report.   The  appellant  had  only   been
         relatively recently released from custody after a lengthy sentence,
         following a very serious offence, with a lengthy history of serious
         drugs  and  dishonesty  offending.   He  had  no  firm  significant
         protective factors such as family life.  The probation officer made
         it  clear  that  the  whole  OASYS  did  not  offer  much  on  risk
         assessment, save for one section.  A previous report dated  January
         2018 was available to the  FTT  and  carefully  considered  by  it.
         There was no cogent evidence, beyond the appellant's  release  from
         custody, to support  any  significant  reduction  in  risk  between
         January  2018  and  January  2019.   The  FTT  gave  the  appellant
         sufficient opportunity to outline what had  changed  to  lower  his
         risk during the hearing, and  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  he
         lacked insight into his risk factors.  It is very difficult to  see
         how an updated OASYS report would have made any material difference
         in those circumstances.

Decision

    24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2019
