
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00078/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2020                |On 7th September 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Eaton of Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although no anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the
FtT"), as the appeal raises matters  regarding  a  claim  for  international
protection and the interests of young children, it  is  appropriate  for  an
anonymity direction to be made.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Introduction


This is an appeal by the appellant, who was the respondent before the First-
tier Tribunal, and who I will refer to as the Secretary of State ("SSHD").
The respondent was the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, and to
avoid confusion, I will continue to refer to AB as the appellant in the
course of this decision.  The SSHD appeals against the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre ("the judge"), promulgated on 24th March 2020,
by which she allowed the appellant's appeal on the basis that the Secretary
of State's decision to revoke the appellant's status as a refugee under the
Refugee Convention breached the UK's obligations under the same convention,
that the appellant has rebutted the presumption under section 72(2) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that the deportation of
the appellant is contrary to the Immigration (European Economic Area)
Regulations 2016.


The hearing before me on 1st September 2020 took the form of a remote
hearing using skype for business. The hearing room and the building was
open to the public. The hearing and starting time were publicly listed. The
appellant was represented at the hearing by counsel and the respondent was
represented by a Senior Presenting Officer. I was addressed by the
representatives in exactly the same way as if we were together in the
hearing room.  Neither party objected to a remote hearing, and I was
satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance with
the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because of the
present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to
avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter
is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the
importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the
anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing
I was satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
proceedings.


Background


The appellant is a national of the Russian Federation.  He arrived in the
United Kingdom on 31 July 2002 and claimed asylum. The claim was refused by
the respondent but an appeal against that decision was allowed by Judge
McCarthy for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 11th August 2004.
 On 4th October 2004, the appellant was granted asylum and leave to remain
in the UK.


The appellant was convicted on 22nd March 2017 at Wolverhampton Crown Court
of two counts of acquiring/use/possession of criminal property. He was
sentenced to a three-year period of imprisonment on each count to run
concurrently.


On 18th March 2019 the SSHD made a decision under Article 1C(5) of the
Refugee Convention that the appellant has ceased to be a refugee. The SSHD
noted that the appellant had claimed asylum on the basis that he had been
arrested by the Russian authorities and accused of being involved in
terrorism. The respondent considered the background material now available
and observations made by the UNHCR in a letter dated 31st January 2018.
The SSHD considered whether the circumstances in which the appellant had
been granted refugee status had changed, and whether the appellant would be
at risk on return to Chechnya.  The SSHD did not accept the appellant would
be at risk upon return due to any activity or perceived activity in the
past, and considered that the background material demonstrates that even
those who were active in the first and second war in Chechnya would not
now, as a general rule, face any particular adverse attention from the
authorities.  The SSHD concluded that the appellant can no longer, because
the circumstances in connection with which he had been recognised as a
refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of the
protection of the Russian Federation.


On 25th July 2019, the SSHD made a decision to deport the appellant on the
grounds of public policy, public security or public health in accordance
with Regulation 23(6)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
Regulations 2016.  The respondent noted the appellant has been convicted of
an offence and has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
two years. The respondent certified that the appellant was presumed to have
been convicted by a final judgement of a particularly serious crime and to
constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.


It was the respondent's decision of 25 July 2019 that was the subject of
the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Plumptre's findings and
conclusions are set out at paragraphs [17] to [40] of her decision.  She
allowed the appeal.


The appeal before me


The SSHD advances four grounds of appeal. First, Judge Plumptre fails to
provide adequate reasons for her decision that the appellant remains at
risk upon return to the Russian Federation on Refugee Convention and/or
Article 3 grounds notwithstanding the respondent's claim that the security
landscape in the Russian Federation has improved fundamentally and durably
since the grant of refugee status to the appellant.  Second, Judge Plumptre
erred, at paragraph [38] of her decision, in finding that the appellant is
not a danger to the community, having found, at paragraph [35], that the
appellant's offending has caused serious harm.  The SSHD claims that in
reaching her decision, Judge Plumptre also failed to consider that the
appellant has only recently been released from prison and not shown any
remorse.  Third, in so far as Judge Plumptre considered the Article 8
rights of the appellant and his family, she failed to consider whether the
appellant can be separated from his family and whether it would be unduly
harsh for the appellant's partner and children to remain in the UK without
the appellant.  Fourth, Judge Plumptre failed to properly address whether
the deportation of the appellant would be contrary to the Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  In particular, Judge Plumptre
does not engage with the claim made by the SSHD that the appellant does not
benefit from enhanced protection under the Regulations, but simply
concluded that the SSHD has not discharged the test of serious grounds of
public policy.


Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Foudy on 17th May 2020.  The matter comes before me to determine
whether the decision of Judge Plumptre is vitiated by a material error of
law.


At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Eaton submitted that a rule 24
reply dated 11th June 2020 had been sent to the respondent and the
Tribunal.  As a copy was not in the papers before me and had not reached Mr
Clarke, Mr Eaton helpfully emailed a copy to the Tribunal and to Mr Clarke.
 I have carefully read the written response relied upon by the appellant.


During the course of the hearing before me, Mr Eaton candidly and quite
properly in my judgment, accepted that he cannot defend any of the findings
made by Judge Plumptre regarding the appeal under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  The focus of his submissions before me
related to the first ground of appeal and he properly accepted that if I am
satisfied that Judge Plumptre erred in her consideration of the issue of
'cessation', the appropriate course is to set aside the decision of Judge
Plumptre and remit the appeal to the FtT for hearing afresh with no
findings preserved.


At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties that I
am satisfied that the decision of Judge Plumptre is infected by material
errors of law and must be set aside.  In my judgment, this appeal should be
allowed and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
determination.  I now set out my reasons for that decision.


Discussion


I entirely agree with the submission made by Mr Clarke that the decision of
Judge Plumptre is not a decision that can easily be followed and it is
impossible to work out from what is said at paragraphs [17] to [40] of the
decision, the issue the judge was considering at any particular point, and
the test that she was applying.  The judge repeatedly conflates a number of
issues and by way of example only, I refer to what is said at paragraphs
[28] of the decision:


         "I am mindful that the sentencing judge considered it necessary to
         impose an immediate custodial sentence despite the adverse effect
         on the appellants family and that the courts have acknowledged that
         deportation of foreign criminals has an adverse impact on their
         families. I find the appellant's proposed removal is
         disproportionate for two main reasons, firstly that the appellant
         has an Estonian wife and four sons born on 3 December 2008, 23
         January 2011, 4 March 2014 and 3 November 2015... of whom at least
         two are qualifying children under s117D having lived in the UK for
         more than seven years and secondly because I accept that the
         situation in Chechnya remains volatile and the appellant would
         suffer article 3 ill-treatment on return.".


It is not clear whether the judge was in that paragraph addressing Article
8, the 2016 Regulations, or cessation of refugee status.  To the extent
that the judge appears to accept that the appellant would suffer Article 3
ill-treatment on return, it is difficult to discern from the reasons set
out at paragraphs [21] and [28] any rational basis upon which the judge
allowed the Article 3 claim beyond the bare assertion that she accepts that
the situation in Chechnya remains volatile.


Article 1A of the Refugee Convention defines the persons who qualify as a
"refugee" for the purposes of the Convention.  Where a person is recognised
as a refugee within the scope of the Refugee Convention, that status can
only be lost in accordance with the terms of the Refugee Convention, in
particular at Article 1C. Article 1C(5) provides:


         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling under
         the terms of section A if:


         ...


         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist,
         continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the
         country of his nationality; Provided that this paragraph shall not
         apply to a refugee falling under section A(1) of this article who
         is able to invoke compelling reasons arising out of previous
         persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the
         country of nationality; ..."


The Qualification Directive establishes a common framework for EU Member
States in applying the Refugee Convention. Article 11(1)(e) of the
Directive reflects Article 1C(5).


In SSHD -v- MA (Somali) Arden LJ made clear that there should be a symmetry
between the grant and cessation of refugee status. The proper approach to
the 'cessation' decision was held to be:


         "...A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision
         determining refugee status. By that I mean that the grounds for
         cessation do not go beyond verifying whether the grounds for
         recognition of refugee status continue to exist. Thus, the relevant
         question is whether there has been a significant and non-temporary
         change in circumstances so that the circumstances which caused the
         person to be a refugee have ceased to apply and there is no other
         basis on which he would be held to be a refugee...."

The Court of Appeal held that a State seeking to terminate a person's
status as a refugee did not have to investigate whether there would be a
violation of Article 3 if the refugee was returned to their country of
origin. All that is required, on a proper construction of Abdulla -v-
Germany (C-175/08), is for the circumstances leading to the grant of
refugee status to have ceased to exist such that it could be described as
'significant and non-temporary' within the terms of article 11(2) of the
Qualification Directive. At paragraph [47] Arden LJ stated:


         "....there is no necessary reason why refugee status should be
         continued beyond the time when the refugee is subject to the
         persecution which entitled him to refugee status or any other
         persecution which would result in him being a refugee, or why he
         should be entitled to further protection. There should simply be a
         requirement of symmetry between the grant and cessation of refugee
         status"




Judge Plumptre should have addressed the distinct issues that arise in the
appeal before her.  Insofar as cessation of refugee status is concerned, Mr
Eaton submits that what is said by the Judge at paragraphs [29] to [32] of
her decision must be read in the context of the claim for international
protection that had previously been made by the appellant.  He referred me
to the decision of Judge McCarthy promulgated on 11th August 2004 in which,
at paragraph [13], Judge McCarthy set out his conclusions:


         "13. ... I find that there is a real risk that the appellant would
         face persecution or other serious harm should he return to Russia
         at this time. This is because I accept that it is reasonably likely
         that the Russian security system maintains an adverse record about
         the appellant which would result in his arrest and detention on
         return. The evidence before me indicates that there is a real risk
         of serious human rights abuses being carried out on Chechens
         detained by the Russian authorities and that the appellant would
         have inadequate resource (sic) to any means of redress. Given that
         the appellant's record arose after he was arrested and detained
         because of his ethnicity, I find there is a refugee convention
         reason behind the likely actions of the Russian authorities."


Mr Eaton submits it was for the respondent to establish that there had been
a fundamental and durable change since those findings were made such that
the appellant is no longer at risk upon return. He submits the respondent
made the bold assertion in the respondent's decision that the situation in
the Russian Federation has changed but failed to engage with the
appellant's profile as someone that had been arrested by the Russian
authorities previously following an  incident in which a Russian armoured
vehicle was caught in an explosion near where the appellant worked.
Furthermore, the respondent had failed to consider the finding made by
Judge McCarthy that the Russian security system is likely to maintain an
adverse record about the appellant.


Mr Eaton submits that the use of the phrase "in finding the appellant's
removal to Chechnya disproportionate...", at paragraph [30] of Judge
Plumptre's decision is unfortunate, and the reference to proportionality is
clearly an error, but an error that is immaterial. He submits Judge
Plumptre was entitled to have regard to the opinion expressed by the UNHCR
that the current situation in the Russian Federation does not warrant the
application of Article 1(C)(5) on an individual or collective basis. He
submits the background material referred to by the UNHCR demonstrates that
those who are perceived to be separatists, are still targeted.  The
reference by Judge Plumptre, at paragraph [30] to the UNHCR's views as to
internal relocation, is in all the circumstances irrelevant, because the
risk to the appellant is from the state.  Mr Eaton submits that at
paragraph [29] of her decision, the judge directed herself correctly by
noting ".. the Home Office must demonstrate that there has been fundamental
and durable changes in the country of origin which can be assumed to have
removed the basis of the fear of persecution and that these guidelines echo
UNHCR's executive committee conclusion no. 69...".  He submits that there
is sufficient in what is said at paragraphs [29] to [32] to draw a
reasonable inference that Judge Plumptre concluded that the respondent has
failed to discharge the burden that rests upon her to establish that there
has been a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances, so that
the circumstances which caused the appellant to be a refugee have ceased to
apply.


Judge Plumptre was required to make relevant findings of fact on the basis
of the evidence available in order to decide for herself whether there had
been a sufficient change in the circumstances in connection with which the
appellant has been recognised as a refugee as to engage Article 1C(5), and
hence decide for herself whether the appellant's removal to the Russian
Federation would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the refugee
Convention. She was undoubtedly entitled to have regard to the opinion set
out in the letter from the UNHCR, but Judge Plumptre's finding at
paragraphs [28] and [30] that the appellant's removal to Chechnya is
disproportionate does not address the relevant question, with a proper
examination of the evidence before the Tribunal.  As Mr Eaton quite
properly accepted, Judge Plumptre does not in the paragraphs that follow,
make a finding that the respondent has failed establish that there has been
a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances, so that the
circumstances which caused the appellant to be a refugee, have ceased to
apply.


A party appearing before a Tribunal is entitled to know, either expressly
stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is to which the Tribunal is
addressing its mind. In some cases, it may be perfectly obvious without any
express reference to it by the Tribunal; in other cases, it may not.  Here,
the SSHD and the Upper Tribunal is entitled to know the test applied by the
Judge and the basis of fact on which the conclusions have been reached.
The question is not whether the appellant's removal to Chechnya is
disproportionate and given the overall structure of the decision, I am not
prepared to infer that Judge Plumptre properly directed herself and reached
a decision  that was open to her on the evidence, without an express
finding supported by reasons.


Whatever was in the mind of the judge when reaching her conclusions at
paragraph [29] to [32], I simply cannot be satisfied that the judge
addressed the question that arises when the respondent has made a cessation
of refugee status decision, or that she applied the correct test.   Mr
Eaton accepted that in the circumstances, the decision of Judge Plumptre
must be set aside.  That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal and I set
aside the decision of FtT Judge Plumptre without addressing the remaining
grounds of appeal.


The matter will need to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.   I
have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-
tier Tribunal, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the
appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will
be extensive.


The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
in due course.


Notice of Decision


The SSHD's appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Plumptre
promulgated on 24th March 2020 is set aside.


The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal with no
findings preserved.


I make an anonymity direction.





    Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         2nd September
    2020

             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
