
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00043/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 June 2019                      |On 05 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  (sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms S Walker, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant.

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gribble  promulgated  23  May  2018,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    27 November 2017 to cease  refugee  status,  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim, and to maintain the decision dated 9 September  2016  to  deport
    him pursuant to s32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  certifying  the
    protection claim under s72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. The effect of the latter, if upheld, is that the  certificate
    is regarded as conclusive that the claimant's removal from the UK  will
    not breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe refused permission to appeal  on  on
    21 June 2018. However, when the application was renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup granted permission  on  14
    May 2019.

 3. Thus the matter came before us sitting as a panel of the Upper Tribunal
    on 26 June 2019.

 4. At the outset of the hearing our attention was drawn to the  fact  that
    the Upper Tribunal President was in the process of conducting a  Somali
    Country Guidance case on the same or similar issues  as  arise  in  the
    present case. Mr Tufan made  no  application  for  adjournment  but  Ms
    Walker suggested that it would be appropriate to stay our error of  law
    decision behind the outcome of the Presidential case.  Effectively,  if
    we did not stay this case of our own volition she  was  asking  for  an
    adjournment. We bore in mind that the principle issue  in  the  present
    case is whether the judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in
    the approach to s72 certification and cessation of refugee  protection.
    We considered that on the basis of the current and binding decisions of
    the Court of Appeal there  was  no  practical  purpose  in  a  stay  or
    adjournment. We (later) agreed with the two representatives that if  an
    error of law was found the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade. By that time, any further Upper Tribunal Country
    Guidance would have been promulgated. If we  found  no  error  of  law,
    there would be no prejudice to the claimant. We concluded that  it  was
    in  the  interests  of  justice  and  consistent  with  the  overriding
    objectives of the Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly  to
    proceed with the error of law hearing.

 5. In the first instance we have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside. We heard  submissions  from  both  Mr
    Tufan and Ms Walker and had  the  advantage  of  Ms  Walker's  skeleton
    argument, which we have taken into account in reaching our findings. In
    addition, we were referred to a number of case authorities including:

      a) MOJ & Ors (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC);

      b) MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994;

      c) Said [2016] EWCA Civ 422;

      d) AMA (Article 1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia  [2019]
         UKUT 11 (IAC).

 6. For the reasons summarised below, we found material errors  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and set it aside to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be made afresh  in  accordance  with  the
    directions below.

 7. The grounds raise three primary issues alleged to  be  errors  of  law,
    each of which we shall address in turn.

 8. First, the Secretary of State challenges the judge's finding  that  the
    claimant had successfully rebutted the presumption under  s72  that  he
    has been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  constitutes  a
    danger to the community of the UK.

 9. It was not challenged that the offences for which the claimant had been
    convicted  constituted  a  'particularly  serious  crime.'  The   judge
    recognised at [37] that the claimant had been sentenced to a total term
    of five years' imprisonment for drug dealing offences involving Class A
    and B drugs (crack cocaine,  heroin,  and  cannabis)  and  went  on  to
    consider whether he poses a risk to community  of  the  UK.  The  judge
    noted the absence of previous convictions and took  into  account:  the
    OASys Report which suggest the  risk  was  so  low  that  a  full  risk
    assessment was  not  necessary;  the  fact  that  he  had  received  no
    reprimands  in  prison  and  had  undertaken  courses  addressing  drug
    offending; and the claimant's own evidence that he had been manipulated
    into drug dealing and had only been doing it a couple of months. He had
    also committed himself to avoiding further offending.

10. However, whilst the two sets of offending is referenced at [37] of  the
    decision, the judge does not appear to have placed any  weight  on  the
    fact that the claimant had been bailed after  being  arrested  for  the
    first set of offences and  was  caught  again  shortly  thereafter  for
    similar offences, which were committed whilst  on  bail,  suggesting  a
    disregard for the authority  of  the  courts  and  a  risk  of  further
    offending behaviour. Neither  did  the  judge  address  the  claimant's
    letter, copied in the Secretary of State's bundle at N1-6. On the third
    page of this letter, dated 11 May 2017,   he  said  that  he  had  been
    jailed with the same people that he worked for "and they made it  clear
    that upon my release they expect me  to  go  back  and  work  for  them
    without pay to get back their losses, so you will be helping me by  not
    releasing me." The letter was drafted in response  to  notification  of
    intention to cease refugee status and he stated at the beginning of the
    letter that he was willing to return to Somali  where  he  believed  he
    would be able to live in peace in  Mogadishu.  Paragraph  [28]  of  the
    decision indicates that he was asked some questions about  this  letter
    in cross-examination at the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing,  to
    which he said he  wrote  out  of  frustration  and  did  not  mean  his
    comments. It is not clear from the decision whether he was specifically
    asked about the statement that he would be obliged to  return  to  drug
    dealing on release but the letter was part of the documentary materials
    placed before the First-tier Tribunal and was, we find, highly relevant
    to the issue of risk. We acknowledge that there  was  a  later  letter,
    copied at K of the Secretary of State's bundle, in which  he  expressed
    regret for offending and committed himself to not getting into the same
    situation in the  future.  However,  on  its  face,  the  first  letter
    suggested that the claimant remained  a  danger  to  society  and  this
    evidence ought to have been addressed by  the  judge.  Considering  the
    decision as a whole, we find that the judge's reasoning for  concluding
    that the  s72  presumption  had  been  rebutted  was  insufficient  and
    unbalanced, amounting to an error of law.

11. On that conclusion, it is not strictly necessary for us to consider the
    findings on cessation of refugee status as if the claimant is  excluded
    by the operation of s72 the judge would not have been able to  consider
    cessation of refugee protection at all. However,  as  the  issues  were
    argued before us we turn to address them.

12. The second challenge of the  Secretary  of  State  is  to  the  judge's
    finding in the claimant's  favour  on  consideration  of  cessation  of
    refugee  status  pursuant  to  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Convention  and
    paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules.  Noting  that  the  claimant's
    refugee status was linked to that of his mother, who was recognised  as
    a refugee on the basis of her minority clan status,  the  Secretary  of
    State asserted that there had been a fundamental and durable change  in
    the security situation in Somalia, relying on MOJ, and  contended  that
    whilst there may be difficulties returning to  his  home  area  of  the
    Bajuni Islands, the claimant could safely  relocate  to  Mogadishu,  to
    where he would, in fact, be returned.

13. The judge correctly noted at [40] the need to be  satisfied  that  this
    was a significant and non-temporary change,  in  which  the  burden  of
    proof is on the Secretary of State. We agree that it  is  important  to
    ensure that no action is taken to prejudice the  status  of  a  refugee
    until it is clear that the protection for him  will  be  on  a  lasting
    basis. Clearly, such an assessment must be based on an  individual  and
    not merely a general evaluation of the  changed  conditions  and  risks
    arising in the country of return. The UNHCR  Cessation  Guidelines  and
    the House of Lords in R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Hoxha  [2005]  1
    WLR 1063, explain that a strict and restrictive approach  to  cessation
    is required. However, at [44], the judge appears to have dismissed  the
    "durable change" in circumstances in Somalia addressed in  MOJ  on  the
    basis that it was not a cessation case. That is inconsistent  with  the
    binding authority of the Court of Appeal in MA (Somali), promulgated  a
    few weeks before the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing in the  present
    case, in which Lady Justice Arden made it clear that there should be  a
    symmetry between the grant and cessation of refugee  status.  She  held
    that it was necessary to  simply  determine  whether  any  fear  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason  ceased  to  exist  such  that  it  could  be
    described as  'significant  and  non-temporary'  within  the  terms  of
    article 11(2) of the Qualification Directive. At [47] she said,  "There
    is no necessary reason why refugee status should  be  continued  beyond
    the time when the refugee is subject to  the  persecution  which  would
    entitle him to refugee status or  any  other  persecution  which  would
    result in him being a refugee, or why he should be entitled to  further
    protection."

14. Effectively rejecting any change in the security  situation  in  Somali
    addressed by MOJ, at [45] of the decision the judge  instead  preferred
    to place reliance on the more recent UNHCR report of  May  2016,  which
    suggested that the general situation  in  Mogadishu  and  elsewhere  in
    Somalia remains volatile  and  threats  from  Al  Shabaab  continue  in
    Mogadishu. However, the judge failed to recognise  that  UNHCR  reports
    are advisory only, not binding legal authority, and that the  level  of
    scrutiny and threshold applied by the UNHCR is not  the  same  as  that
    required of the tribunal.  It  follows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    conclusion at [46] that there had not  been  such  changes  in  Somalia
    generally as to remove  the  (claimant)  from  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention was  flawed,  contrary  to  binding  authority,  and
    cannot be sustained.

15. The third complaint of the Secretary of State is that the judge applied
    the wrong  test  to  the  cessation  of  refugee  protection  issue  by
    conflating it with humanitarian standards, the prospect of the claimant
    returning to live in an IDP camp, and in further finding that this  was
    sufficient to invoke article 3 ECHR. As Lady Justice Arden explained at
    [56] of MA (Somalia), "humanitarian standards are not the  test  for  a
    cessation decision." At  [61]  she  made  it  clear  that  a  cessation
    decision does not involve the  question  whether  article  3  would  be
    violated. It is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the  judge  did  not
    correctly consider whether the basis on which the claimant was  granted
    refugee protection remained valid.

16. In relation to the allowing of the appeal on  article  3  grounds,  the
    Court of Appeal in Said held that there is no violation of article 3 by
    reason only of a person being returned to a country which for  economic
    reasons cannot provide him with basic living  standards.  In  Said  the
    Upper  Tribunal  had  allowed  the  Somali  claimant's  appeal  against
    deportation following a sentence of five years for rape under Article 3
    (he being excluded from protection under the Refugee Convention and  on
    humanitarian protection grounds), finding that for the purposes of  MOJ
    he was vulnerable, had PTSD, and would be at risk  of  destitution  and
    thus likely to end up in an IDP camp.  The Court of Appeal held that to
    succeed in resisting removal on Article  3  grounds  on  the  basis  of
    suggested poverty/deprivation, which was not the responsibility of  the
    receiving  country,  whether  or  not  the   feared   deprivation   was
    contributed to by a medical condition, the person liable to deportation
    was required  to  show  circumstances  which  brought  him  within  the
    approach in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N  47 EHRR 885. In the  light
    of Said, the relevance of (ix) to (xii) of the Country Guidance of  MOJ
    to humanitarian protection or article 3 may be in some doubt.  However,
    it is clear that if a claimant is excluded from the protection  of  the
    Convention, he cannot defeat the cessation decision  or  bring  himself
    within article 3 ECHR to defeat deportation on grounds  of  a  risk  of
    deprivation or destitution on return. In  theory,  it  was  potentially
    open to the judge to make findings on humanitarian protection  grounds,
    there  having  been  no  certification  in  relation  to   humanitarian
    protection, but we find the considerations actually relied on were  not
    properly part of the cessation of refugee status consideration.

17. Further complain is made in the judge's finding that the claimant  fell
    "squarely within" (xii) of the  headnote  in  MOJ  on  the  basis  that
    "relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former
    links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan, family
    or social support is unlikely to be realistic as,  in  the  absence  of
    means to establish a home and some form of  ongoing  financial  support
    there will be a real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in
    makeshift accommodation within an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
    possibility of having to  live  in  conditions  that  will  fall  below
    acceptable humanitarian standards." Without supporting  reasoning,  the
    judge appears to have  discounted  the  possibility  of  any  financial
    support from the claimant's employed siblings in the  UK,  and  ignored
    the Assisted  Voluntary  Return  financial  assistance  that  would  be
    available to him. The judge mentioned some  positive  factors  at  [50]
    but, for example, did not take into account the finding at [351] of MOJ
    that returnees from the West may  have  an  advantage  since  they  are
    likely to be better educated and considered more resourceful.  We  also
    note that it is was for the claimant to explain why  he  would  not  be
    able to access the  improving  economic  situation  in  Mogadishu.  The
    decision does not explain that this was done.

18. Whilst the judge did very briefly address article 8 ECHR at [52] of the
    decision, the conclusion that the claimant would face very  significant
    obstacles to integration rested on the flawed cessation  of  protection
    considerations and cannot stand.

19. In all the circumstances, it is clear and we so find that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed and in error of law in respect of
    the several aspects explained above.

20. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate the findings of fact and the  conclusions  from  those
    facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the issues in
    the appeal.

21. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    we relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on
    the basis that this is a case which falls squarely  within  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     We set aside the decision.

                    We remit the appeal to be decided afresh in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

   1.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
      Birmingham;

   2. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

   3. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  with
      the exception of Judge Gribble and Judge O'Keeffe;

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated





