
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
RP/00104/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 January 2018                         | On 20 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between


                              MANZOOR SHINWARI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, instructed by Aman Solicitors Advocates
(London) Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Shinwari is a national of  Afghanistan.   He  was  recognised  as  a
    refugee following a judicial determination made  by  Judge  Herbert  in
    2010.  The basis of Judge Herbert's decision was that, although much of
    what the appellant said before him was  not  worthy  of  credit,  Judge
    Herbert took the view that he was, at  that  date,  under  the  age  of
    eighteen, and following the then authoritative country guidance of  the
    AIT in LQ [2008] UKAIT 0005 he was  entitled  to  be  recognised  as  a
    refugee as a young man under eighteen who would otherwise  be  returned
    to Afghanistan.

 2. The Secretary of State acted on that  determination,  granting  refugee
    status for a  time  which  was  certainly  going  to  last  beyond  the
    appellant's eighteenth birthday. At the  expiry  of  that  period,  the
    Secretary of State sought to discontinue  the  refugee  status  on  the
    grounds set out in article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention, that:

           "The circumstances in which he was recognised as a refugee  have
ceased to exist."

 3. There was an appeal against that decision and the appeal  was  allowed.
    The Secretary of State appealed to this Tribunal and in a determination
    which is conveniently referred to as MM v SSHD  and  other  cases  (not
    reported) this was one of the determinations set aside.

 4. In the case of this determination, the Tribunal's specific decision  on
    the occasion of setting it aside was  that  the  appeal  was  adjourned
    before the Upper Tribunal for further consideration.   The  reason  for
    that was set out in the determination as follows:

          "The question of  the  interpretation  of  Article  1C(5)  of  the
          Refugee  Convention  is  appropriate  for  determination  in  this
          Tribunal; we shall adjourn this appeal  for  that  purpose  before
          deciding what action to take under s 12.2(b) of the 2007 Act."

 5. The interpretation of article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention  is  not
    entirely straightforward. There are  no  specific  authorities  on  the
    question of whether a change in personal circumstances is sufficient of
    itself to cause article 1C(5) to be correctly invoked.

 6. The United Nations High Commission for Refugees in various publications
    and statements has clearly taken the view that, first of all, to  merit
    the application of article 1C(5)  a  change  must  be  fundamental  and
    durable; and secondly, that it must be a change in the circumstances of
    the country of which the applicant is a citizen, rather than  a  change
    in the circumstances of the applicant.

 7. Mr Ali, in arguing Mr Shinwari's case before us today, has asked us  to
    accept that interpretation of article  1C(5):  but  we  find  ourselves
    wholly unable to do so for a number of reasons.  The  first  reason  is
    that there is no hint in article 1C(5) itself, that any  circumstances,
    such as personal circumstances, should be excluded from  consideration.
    The second reason is that there would appear to be no reasons given  by
    the UNHCR for its view.  The third reason is that it appears,  frankly,
    contrary to common sense, particularly if one is  looking  for  durable
    changes.  In the present case there is nothing that could  be  imagined
    that is more durable than the increase in the applicant's age  from  an
    age which is under eighteen to an age which is certainly over  eighteen
    - the one thing that cannot be done is to put the clock back.  And yet,
    it seems to be accepted that a change in country circumstances,  albeit
    characterised  as  durable,  might  nevertheless  be  changeable:   for
    example, a revolution could not be ruled out.

 8. We have been referred to a number of authorities. The most  helpful  is
    probably the decision of the House of Lords in Hoxha  [2005]  UKHL  19,
    and in particular, the judgment of Lord Brown.  That is a case in which
    in the end it was found that article 1C(5) had no  application  because
    it applies only to those who have been recognised as refugees which the
    claimants in that case had not.  But there are a number of observations
    which make it perfectly clear  that  all  members  of  the  House  were
    treating article 1C(5) as identifying circumstances in which  a  person
    was no longer to be treated as falling within the definition in article
    1A(2).  In fact, the second paragraph of article 1C(5) itself  suggests
    the same by its particular provisions in relation  to  individuals  who
    fall within article 1A(1) and the omission therefore  of  those  within
    article  1A(2).   It  seems  to  us  that  article  1C(5)  is  properly
    interpreted  as  indicating  circumstances  which  would  prevent   the
    individual from being recognised as a refugee  if  he  applied  at  the
    present time.

 9. However, procedurally, something more is required.  Clearly  it  cannot
    be right that a person who has been granted refugee status should be at
    risk from day to day of a view being taken that the  circumstances,  as
    they are at any specific moment, do not merit  a  continuation  of  his
    status, even though, perhaps matters will have changed again next week.
     Hence the requirements for the change to be  durable  or  fundamental.
    But that, as we see it, is a procedural requirement which  arises  from
    the necessity for the Secretary of State, as the  person  invoking  the
    provision, to demonstrate its applicability.

10. In short, it appears to us that the Secretary of State will need,  when
    invoking article 1C(5), to demonstrate that the claimant would  not  be
    recognised as a refugee at the present time: and that the reason why he
    would not be recognised as a refugee at the present time  is  that  the
    circumstances on which status might have been based have now changed to
    the extent that the risk is removed.  We use  the  phrase  "might  have
    been based" because of the fact that grants of refugee status  made  by
    the Secretary of State, never indicate the  specific  reasons  for  the
    finding meriting the grant; and even grants following judgments of  the
    Tribunal or the Courts may not give a comprehensive indication of  what
    the reasons for the grant were.  In the present case for example, Judge
    Herbert made his decision on the basis of nationality and  age  without
    making  any  very  clear  findings  on  whether  there  had  been   any
    persecution in the past, or whether there was any risk  of  persecution
    for political reasons in the future.

11. The starting point in all of these cases is  that  the  individual  has
    been granted refugee status.  He has been granted refugee status  as  a
    person who, by reference to his country of  nationality,  falls  within
    article 1A(2).  That will have been based on some assessment which  led
    to a finding that there was a risk of persecution.  There may have been
    other risks which were not evaluated at the time because they  did  not
    need to be evaluated; the status was established by, as  it  were,  the
    story so far.

12. The Secretary of State proposes to remove the refugee status.  In order
    for the removal to be justified, it must be  shown  firstly,  that  the
    circumstances have changed to the  extent  that  the  applicant  is  no
    longer entitled to the benefits of the refugee  status  because  he  no
    longer falls within article 1A(2) and secondly,  that  the  change  has
    been of such a nature that it is right to make what can be envisaged as
    a permanent decision in the matter, that is to say that the  individual
    is no longer a refugee and is no longer to be treated as one.

13. For these reasons we reject the interpretation advanced by  Mr  Ali  on
    the  basis  of  the  UNHCR  materials.   We  accept  Mr  Ali's   second
    alternative proposition, which is that  all  circumstances  are  to  be
    looked at, and it is for the Secretary of State to establish that it is
    right in present circumstances not to recognise  the  individual  as  a
    refugee any more.

14. There have been submissions before us in relation to  the  standard  of
    proof.  Mr Ali's starting point was that it was for  the  Secretary  of
    State to establish the matters upon which she relied on the balance  of
    probabilities.  We do not think that that is  a  very  helpful  way  of
    putting it: indeed it may be that any  reference  to  the  standard  of
    proof is likely to be misleading.  The burden is on  the  Secretary  of
    State to establish the  matters  that  we  have  set  out.   That  will
    necessarily mean demonstrating that the applicant is not at real  risk,
    and demonstrating that the applicant  is  durably  not  at  real  risk.
    Further than that, we do not think it is very helpful  to  go.   It  is
    clear that the applicant's full circumstances will have to  be  decided
    on the facts as they now are, both in relation to his own circumstances
    and history, and the situation in Afghanistan and perhaps  particularly
    in areas of large population to which he might reasonably  be  expected
    to relocate.

15. For those reasons, we remit the applicant's appeal against the  article
    1C(5)  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  determination   in
    accordance with the guidance on the application of  article  1C(5)  set
    out in this judgment.



                                                                       [pic]



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 16 March 2018.

