
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00115/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr Y A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State.  For convenience we
will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal ("the
FTT").

The Secretary of State relied on the grounds of appeal, the thrust of which
is that the FTT did not consider whether the appellant had rebutted the
presumption under s.72 of the 2002 Act and should have done so
(notwithstanding the absence of a certificate) in accordance with Mugwagwa
s.72 - applying statutory presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00338.

The FTT heard the appeal in the absence of the appellant. The unrepresented
appellant told us that he did not receive notice of the hearing because the
Secretary of State had his wrong address.  The address should have been
Flat 73 not Flat 83. We note that the FTT sent the notice of hearing to
Flat 93. We are satisfied that the appellant did not receive notice of the
hearing.

Notice of Decision

The judge erred because he did not properly apply Mugwagwa. The judge was
required to consider the statutory presumption, and this is a matter that
the judge rehearing the appeal must turn his or her mind to within the
statutory framework set out in the 2002 Act. The judge may find assistance
in the case of Mugwagwa and the case of Essa (Revocation of protection
status appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244 (IAC).

We set aside the decision to allow the appeal. We remit this case to the
FTT for a fresh hearing before a different judge.  Both the Secretary of
State and the appellant wished this case to be reheard by the FTT. We
decided, having regard to paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of the IAC
of 25 September 2012, that this was appropriate.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            Lord Uist                      Date 2 May 2019


Lord Uist

