
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2016                   |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         BINYAM BEYENE GHEBREMEHARI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Respondent appeared in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent Mr Ghebremehari, to whom I shall refer hereafter as  the
    appellant, as he was before the First-tier Judge, appealed to  a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  21
    August 2015 to revoke his status of indefinite leave  to  remain.   The
    judge allowed  that  appeal  and  the  Secretary  of  State,  hereafter
    referred to as the respondent, as she was before the judge, was granted
    permission to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   At the hearing on 19 September 2016 before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley, Mr Tufan, who  also  appeared  on  that  occasion,  drew  the
    Tribunal's attention to the fact that the relevant  decision  had  been
    made after 6 April 2015 and as  a  consequence  of  changes  in  appeal
    rights and the Immigration Act 2014 there was no right  of  appeal  and
    the First-tier Judge had had no  jurisdiction.   The  appellant's  then
    representative said that he was completely taken by  surprise  by  this
    and needed time to consider the matter  and  undertake  research.   The
    hearing was accordingly adjourned.

3.   Subsequently the previous representative came  off  the  record  on  14
    October 2016 and Mr Ghebremehari appeared in person.

4.   I explained to him that the position was as had been  set  out  at  the
    earlier hearing, and the judge had erred in law in allowing his  appeal
    since he had no jurisdiction to decide the matter since in light of the
    Immigration Act 2014 there is no longer a right of appeal in respect of
    this kind of decision.  I understood from Mr Tufan that Mr Ghebremehari
    has now made a human rights application, and I explained to him that  I
    had  no  alternative  but  to  conclude  that  the  judge  had  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear his appeal and therefore the decision allowing  it
    had to be set aside, but that he would receive in due course a response
    from the Home Office to his human rights claim  and,  if  the  decision
    were adverse to him, would be able to appeal that decision.

5.   The judge did not have jurisdiction to decide an appeal  in  this  case
    since there  was  no  appeal  right  against  the  decision  and  as  a
    consequence the decision is set aside.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

