


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
RP/00079/2016

                                             RP/00080/2016

                                             RP/00081/2016

                                             RP/00082/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 June 2017                        |   On 4 July 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     A A
                                     A A
                                     A V
                                     M W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs T White, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal as the case  involves
minor Appellants. It  is  therefore  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The  First  Appellant  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal  Judge  Callow  promulgated  on  13  February  2017   ("the
       Decision") dismissing  the  First  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
       Secretary of State's decision  dated  31  March  2016  revoking  her
       refugee status. By [2] of the Decision, the Judge found  that  there
       were no valid appeals by the Second to Fourth Appellants who are the
       First  Appellant's  children  and  who   are   unaffected   by   the
       Respondent's decision  to  revoke  their  mother's  refugee  status.
       There is no challenge to that part of  the  Decision.   Accordingly,
       the remainder of this decision focusses on the position of the First
       Appellant only (hereafter referred to as "the Appellant").


    2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  Her identity  is  disputed
       by the Respondent and it is that fact which led to the  Respondent's
       decision and lies at the heart of her appeal.  Having  arrived,  she
       says, in November 2006, the First Appellant claimed  asylum  as  she
       said that she had suffered domestic violence at  the  hands  of  her
       husband in Pakistan.  She was recognised as a  refugee  following  a
       successful appeal and was granted leave to remain on 23 October 2009
       expiring on 22 October 2014.


    3. The Respondent's officials  carried  out  an  enforcement  visit  in
       February 2010.  The Appellant produced an ARC card showing that  she
       had been  granted  leave  as  a  refugee.   However,  the  officials
       searched her property and found a Pakistani  passport  and  identity
       card in the name of S M, also a Pakistani  national  with  the  same
       address as the Appellant gave for her residence  in  Pakistan.   The
       documents  bore  the  Appellant's  photograph.  According   to   the
       passport, it was used to gain entry to the UK as a family visitor on
       8 April 2006 (with a visa granted in February 2006), at a time  when
       the Appellant says that she was still in Pakistan and suffering harm
       from her husband.


    4. The Appellant protested (and continues to assert) that the documents
       do not belong to her and  must  have  been  used  by  the  agent  to
       facilitate her entry.  She claims that  she  found  the  contentious
       passport in her suitcase some months after claiming asylum  but  did
       not mention it  as  she  was  afraid.   It  is  her  case  that  her
       photograph was placed in the documents improperly by  tampering  and
       that the passport and ID card do not belong to her.


    5. As a result of  the  discoveries,  the  Respondent  gave  notice  of
       intention to revoke the Appellant's refugee status on  8  June  2010
       but then decided in May 2012 to take no  further  action.   However,
       according to the Respondent, the  documents  have  since  then  been
       examined by the National Document Fraud Unit ("NDFU") and have  been
       found to be genuine documents with the inference that  the  passport
       was genuinely issued to the Appellant and  that  this  is  her  true
       identity.  That would further undermine her asylum claim  since,  at
       the time when she claims to have been  in  Pakistan  suffering  harm
       from her husband, she was in fact in the UK as a visitor.


      The First-tier Tribunal Decision


    6. At the hearing before the Judge, the Respondent  failed  to  produce
       the NDFU  report,  despite  having  been  ordered  to  do  so.   The
       Respondent had written prior to the hearing to indicate that  "there
       is no DVR in  this  case."   That  led  to  the  following  recorded
       exchange at the start of the hearing under the  heading  "Withdrawal
       of the appeal":-
           "[7] At the outset Ms Burrell, noting that the respondent had
           not complied with the PHR direction of 10 October 2016 to file a
           Document Verification Report, informed the Tribunal that the
           respondent was not in a position to proceed with the hearing of
           the appeal.  Accordingly she had been instructed to withdraw the
           decision under appeal.  It was anticipated that the respondent
           would reconsider the decision.  In reply, making mention of some
           of the history recited above, Mr Richardson submitted that as
           there was no 'good reason' for the withdrawal, the appeal should
           not be treated as withdrawn.  In the event of the appeal
           proceeding to be heard the appellant would not be called to give
           evidence."


    7. Having directed himself as to Rule 17 of  The  Tribunal  (First-tier
       Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014,  the  Judge
       ruled as follows:-
            "[10]      The right to make a decision clearly lies within the
           exclusive domain of the respondent.  The same cannot be said  of
           the withdrawal of a decision under  appeal  in  the  absence  of
           'good  reason'.   In  my  opinion  no  good  reasons  have  been
           advanced.  It is clear that the  respondent  must  not  use  the
           withdrawal power as a tactical exercise in instances  where  she
           cannot produce evidence relied on in arriving at  her  decision.
           She must only use it if she is genuinely of the  view  that  she
           might change her mind.  It would be  a  wrongful  exercise,  and
           unfair to the appellant, if she were simply to  use  this  power
           because she wanted more time to locate the  NDFU  report  or  to
           obtain another one wherein she has no intention of changing  her
           mind: see and compare Glushkov (2008)  EWHC  2290.   A  decision
           should only be withdrawn where it is clear the decision needs to
           be reconsidered, and there is  a  realistic  prospect  that  the
           decision outcome would be  different.   In  the  present  appeal
           there is no need to reconsider the decision  of  31  March  2016
           wherein there is no prospect that the result will be different."


    8. Following that ruling, the Judge went  on  to  consider  the  appeal
       substantively.  He directed himself that the burden of showing  that
       refugee status should be revoked lay with the Respondent ([14]).  He
       left out of account the NDFU report ([16]).  However, he also  noted
       that there was no dispute that the  contentious  passport  had  been
       found at the Appellant's residence and bore her  photograph  ([13]).
       As noted above, the Appellant's representative did not call  her  to
       give evidence.  The Judge therefore considered  the  case  including
       her evidence by reference to her statement at [17] of  the  Decision
       as follows:-
            "[17]      The uncontroverted evidence is that the appellant at
           the time of the enforcement visit  on  19  February  2010,  some
           three years after her claimed arrival in the UK  on  1  November
           2006, was found in possession of the passport and ID card of  [S
           M] and who has  accepted  that  it  is  her  photograph  in  the
           contentious passport.  It is the appellant's evidence that after
           entering the UK she found the passport in her luggage.  It  must
           have been, for unexplained reasons, put in her  luggage  at  the
           airport by the agent who assisted her to gain entry into the UK.
            If it was not her passport as with the ID card  no  explanation
           has been given as to why she retained these  documents  if  they
           were not hers.  In all of her  protestations  since  her  former
           solicitor's letter of 23  June  2010  she  has  not  raised  the
           possibility that her passport has been tampered  with,  but  has
           repeatedly sought to identify herself as [ A A].  As to being [A
           A] it could reasonably have been expected of her to  obtain  and
           produce her  Pakistani  birth  certificate,  ID  card,  marriage
           certificate or any other document issued in Pakistan  describing
           her as [A A] born on 17 April 1980.  Her failure to do so in the
           context of her claim counts against her.  As does  the  evidence
           that when an application was made in Pakistan for the  issue  of
           visa in 2006 the same address as that on the passport of  [S  M]
           was used and which was supported by the appellant's  photograph.
           It is inconceivable that an agent would  obtain  a  passport  in
           2001 when it was only in 2006 that the appellant was a victim of
           persecution at the hands of  her  husband.   Furthermore  it  is
           highly improbable that  the  agent  gave  the  passport  to  the
           appellant by putting it in her luggage  without  her  knowledge.
           In the event it has not been explained by the appellant why  she
           retained not only the passport of [S M], but  also  [S  M]'s  ID
           card if her true identity is [M A] (sic). If she is [M A]  (sic)
           she would have long ago destroyed or thrown these  incriminating
           documents away.  She would not have retained them for over three
           years subsequent to her entry into the UK if they were  not  her
           property.  Of greater weight is that the agent  who  facilitated
           her entry into the UK would have retained the documents if  they
           had been unlawfully obtained.  They were not  according  to  the
           appellant her documents and which in the  circumstances  of  the
           appellant's explanation as to how and when she gained entry into
           the UK would have been retained by the agent.   To  this  extent
           they were his property and which in  the  circumstances  of  the
           appellant's claimed entry into the UK would  be  of  no  further
           interest to the appellant.  She was not [S M].  As the documents
           had served their purpose they would, in the ordinary  course  of
           events, have been retained by the agent.  As  she  was  [  M  A]
           (sic) they were of no further interest to the appellant.   False
           passports and  ID  cards  are  the  tools  of  trade  of  agents
           facilitating the entry of illegal immigrants into the  UK.   Had
           the documents not been those of  the  appellant  he  would  have
           retained them for future use."


    9. Having reasoned thus, the  Judge  analysed  the  legal  position  as
       follows:-
             "[18]       In  the  foregoing  circumstances  the   spotlight
           switches to the appellant to discharge the evidential burden  of
           raising an innocent explanation, namely  an  account  satisfying
           the   minimum   level   of   plausibility.    The    appellant's
           circumstances described above do not raise an explanation worthy
           of any belief.  Her explanation, despite the lack of a  NDFU/DVR
           report,  is  implausible.   The  evidence  is  such   that   the
           conclusion  is  reached  on  a  balance  of  probabilities   the
           appellant lawfully arrived in the UK as [S M] on  6  April  2006
           for a six month family visit,  but  overstayed  leading  to  her
           false  asylum  claim  made  on  3  November  2006   founded   on
           allegations of domestic violence and threats  of  death  as  the
           member of a particular social group.   The  particulars  of  her
           asylum claim were such that the events complained of in Pakistan
           occurred when she was already in the UK.  Her claim was  founded
           on false circumstances.  The respondent's failure to produce the
           NDFU/DVR report has not proved fatal to her case.
            [19] It therefore follows that the Respondent  has  established
           on the balance of probabilities that the appellant's prima facie
           innocent explanation falls  to  be  rejected.   The  appellant's
           application to be recognised as a refugee in 2006 was tainted by
           deception.  Accordingly her appeal addressing revocation of  her
           refugee  status  fails.   Based  on  the   findings   made   the
           inescapable conclusion is that the appellant is [S M] and not [A
           A]."


      Grounds and Submissions


   10. The Appellant appeals the Decision on  three  grounds.   First,  she
       says that the Judge failed to properly  direct  himself  as  to  the
       implications for the Respondent's case of being  unable  to  produce
       the NDFU report.  The Appellant says that this was at the  heart  of
       the Respondent's decision and the Respondent herself  recognised  at
       the hearing that the effect of not being able to produce that report
       was that she was unable to proceed.  She says that the Judge  failed
       to recognise that in order to meet the evidential burden  placed  on
       her, the Respondent needed to make out her case that the passport is
       a genuine one and since she could not do so the  Judge  should  have
       found that she had not discharged her evidential burden  and  should
       have allowed the appeal.


   11. The second ground is a similar argument in relation to the  evidence
       adduced by the Appellant.  It starts with an  assertion  that  there
       was no evidential burden on the Appellant as  the  Respondent  could
       not satisfy the evidential burden on  her  and  is  to  that  extent
       simply a repetition of ground one.   It  continues  however  with  a
       submission that the Appellant did not accept that the  passport  was
       genuine and that the use of the Appellant's photograph  and  address
       in Pakistan was equally suggestive of a forgery.  The Appellant also
       submits that the Judge's finding that the agent would have taken the
       passport back if it was forged is speculative.


   12. The third ground takes issue with  the  basis  on  which  the  Judge
       continued to decide the case substantively,  the  Respondent  having
       effectively conceded that she could not make out  her  case  without
       the NDFU report.  To that extent, this ground is also  a  repetition
       of the first ground.  The Appellant also asserts here that the Judge
       went beyond the Respondent's case when deciding that the  Respondent
       had met the evidential burden on her and  relied  on  reasons  which
       were not relied upon by the Respondent without the Appellant  having
       the opportunity to address those reasons.


   13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
       Huchison on 18 May 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


            "[2] It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected  himself  in
           not permitting  the  Respondent  to  withdraw  the  decision  as
           requested on her behalf by the Home Office Presenting Officer on
           the day of the hearing because  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
           discharge the initial evidential burden by failing to produce  a
           claimed report from the National Document Fraud Unit  which  had
           led to the decision to revoke the first  Appellant's  status  in
           2016.  As such this could have made a material difference to the
           outcome or the fairness of the proceedings."


   14. By a Rule 24 statement dated 2 June 2017, the  Respondent  partially
       conceded the error  of  law  in  the  following  terms  (so  far  as
       material):-
            "[2] The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
           for permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal  to  determine
           the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing  to  consider
           whether the tribunal  had  jurisdiction  to  continue  with  the
           appeal given the Respondent  had  withdrawn  the  basis  of  the
           appeal namely the decision letters and notices."


   15. At the outset  of  the  hearing,  Ms  White  who  appeared  for  the
       Appellant indicated that she wished to  withdraw  the  appeal.   She
       said that, having discussed the  matter  with  Mr  Melvin,  she  was
       reassured  that  the  Respondent  was  acting  in  good   faith   in
       withdrawing the decision under appeal and offering to reconsider and
       that this was not a ploy to buy time to find the  NDFU  report.   It
       was though clear from her submission that the Appellant  would  only
       withdraw the appeal if the Decision were  set  aside.   I  therefore
       heard from her in that regard.


    Error of Law Decision and Reasons


   16. I indicated at the end of the hearing that the Judge  had  erred  in
       law particularly when considering the issue of the fairness  of  the
       proceedings below. Once the Judge indicated that he would not  treat
       the appeal as withdrawn, the Appellant may  have  been  misled  into
       thinking that the Judge would simply allow  the  appeal.   For  that
       reason, the Appellant was not called to give evidence which may have
       affected her ability to properly defend the case.  It was  therefore
       incumbent on the Judge to put to the Appellant the points  which  he
       considered were reasons  why  the  Respondent's  case  continued  to
       discharge the evidential burden notwithstanding the absence  of  the
       NDFU report. I indicated that I would provide my decision in writing
       which I now turn to do shortly.


   17. First, although I consider it ill-behoves the Appellant to  complain
       that the Judge did not simply allow the appeal to  be  withdrawn  in
       circumstances where the Appellant's legal representative objected to
       that course, there is an  error  in  the  way  in  which  the  Judge
       approached this.


   18. Rule 17 of the Procedure Rules provides as follows:-
            "Withdrawal
            17.-(1)    A party may give notice of the withdrawal  of  their
       appeal -
             (a)   by  providing  to  the  Tribunal  a  written  notice  of
                 withdrawal of the appeal; or
                 (b)   orally at a hearing,
                 and in either case  must  specify  the  reasons  for  that
       withdrawal.
           (2) The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an appeal  as
           withdrawn if the respondent notifies the Tribunal and each other
           party that the decision (or, where the appeal  relates  to  more
           than one decision, all of the decisions)  to  which  the  appeal
           relates has been withdrawn and specifies  the  reasons  for  the
           withdrawal of the decision..."


   19.  As Rule 17(2) makes clear, the usual course  where  the  Respondent
       withdraws the decision under challenge is that the  Tribunal  should
       generally treat the appeal as withdrawn unless there is good  reason
       not to do so.  In this case, the Judge misdirected  himself  in  two
       ways in his approach.  The first is that he appears to have  thought
       that what he was considering was whether the  Respondent  should  be
       allowed to withdraw her decision (see in particular second  sentence
       of [10] cited at [7] above).  The Rule is concerned with whether the
       Judge should treat  the  appeal  as  withdrawn  notwithstanding  the
       Respondent's withdrawal of the decision under challenge not  whether
       he should permit the Respondent to withdraw  her  decision.  Second,
       the Judge then appears to have looked for good reason to  allow  the
       decision  to  be  withdrawn.   However,  that  also   reverses   the
       presumption inherent in Rule 17(2).  Whilst it may  well  have  been
       open to the Judge to  refuse  to  treat  the  appeal  as  withdrawn,
       applying  the  test  whether  there  was  good  reason  to   proceed
       notwithstanding the withdrawal of the decision under challenge,  for
       the foregoing reasons I am persuaded that he erred in  his  approach
       to that issue.


   20. The second reason I find an error of law  is  that  the  Appellant's
       representative appears to have read the Respondent's  withdrawal  of
       the decision as being a concession that she could  not  succeed  and
       therefore appears to have presumed that the natural course would  be
       for the appeal to be allowed.  I do not know precisely what was said
       to the Judge but what is recorded at [7] of the  Decision  does  not
       read as an express concession by the Respondent that she  could  not
       succeed in the absence of the NDFU report.


   21. However, I  am  persuaded  that  there  was  an  unfairness  to  the
       Appellant caused by the Judge's consideration  of  the  evidence  at
       [17] of the Decision.  As I put to Ms White during  the  hearing,  a
       Judge could still find the evidential burden to be met by  the  fact
       that the Appellant had in her possession  a  passport  and  ID  card
       including her photograph with a different  identity  even  if  those
       documents were in fact forged.  However, as Ms  White  pointed  out,
       that was not the basis of the Respondent's  decision.   Accordingly,
       the Judge raised those reasons and it appears from what is said that
       those  points  were  not  put  to  the  Appellant   or   her   legal
       representative.   There  is   therefore   an   unfairness   in   the
       proceedings.


   22. For those reasons, the Decision  does  disclose  errors  of  law  in
       relation to the determination of the First Appellant's appeal and  I
       set the Decision aside (save in relation  to  [2]  of  the  Decision
       which deals with the appeals of the Second to Fourth Appellants).





Withdrawal

   23.  The Appellant having indicated via  Ms  White  that,  provided  the
       Decision were set aside, she then wished to withdraw the appeal  and
       the Respondent having indicated by her Rule 24  statement  that  the
       Judge erred by  not  treating  the  appeal  as  withdrawn  at  first
       instance, I consent to the Appellant's withdrawal of her appeal.

      DECISION
    The appeals of the Second and Fourth Appellants were found  not  to  be
    valid by [2] of the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow.
    There having been no challenge  to  that  part  of  the  decision,  the
    decision that they have no valid appeals is upheld.
    I am satisfied that the Decision (other than  paragraph  [2])  contains
    material errors of law.  The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow promulgated on 13 February 2017 is set aside.
    The First Appellant  having  indicated  via  her  legal  representative
    orally at the hearing before me that she wished to withdraw her  appeal
    thereafter (in light of the Respondent's  withdrawal  of  the  decision
    under challenge) and the Respondent not objecting  to  that  course,  I
    consent to the  First  Appellant's  withdrawal  of  her  appeal.   This
    amounts to a final disposal of her appeal.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 3 July 2017

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
