
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00171/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2021                          |On 8th March 2021             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AAS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Secretary of  State  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anthony, who  allowed  an  appeal  by  AAS  against  the
    decision to revoke his protection status and to refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 11 September 2018.  For ease I continue to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with
    AAS as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 3. An error of law was found by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in  a  decision
    dated 24 June 2020 and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  set
    aside to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal, with no  specific  preserved
    findings of fact.

 4. The further hearing for re-making of this appeal was originally  listed
    for 20 October 2020, but converted to a case management hearing the day
    before following an indication from  the  Appellant's  then  solicitors
    that despite numerous attempts by different means, they had not had any
    response or instructions from the Appellant for some time.  At the case
    management hearing, the Appellant's then solicitors indicated that they
    had had a telephone call the afternoon before the  hearing  (after  the
    conversion to a CMR) from which it was clear that the Appellant knew of
    the listing but he had lost his phone and did  not  leave  any  further
    contact details in the alternative for them to return the call.

 5. I issued directions on 20 October 2020 for this hearing to be  relisted
    for a remote video hearing and  for  the  parties  to  provide  contact
    details for a Skype hearing within 14 days.  In addition, (i)  that  by
    10 November 2020 the Appellant was to make contact with his  solicitors
    and/or the Upper Tribunal to confirm that he wished to proceed with his
    appeal; (ii) any further evidence to be relied upon  to  be  filed  and
    served no later than 14 days before the hearing; (iii) the Appellant to
    file and serve a composite bundle for the hearing; and (iv) the parties
    to file and serve a skeleton argument no later than 7 days  before  the
    hearing.

 6. The directions included a warning to the Appellant that if he failed to
    make contact with his then solicitors or the Upper Tribunal  or  failed
    to comply with the directions for the hearing; no  further  adjournment
    of the appeal was likely and his appeal may  be  determined  without  a
    further  hearing  under  rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 or a further hearing may proceed  in  his  absence
    under rule 38 of the same.  These directions were sent directly to  the
    Appellant and his then solicitors.  A notice of hearing followed on  23
    December 2020, again sent directly to the  Appellant  as  well  as  his
    solicitors.

 7. On 22 January 2021, the Appellant's  then  solicitors  applied  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing on the  basis  that  they  remained  without
    instructions and had not had any further  contact  with  the  Appellant
    since the day before the case management hearing.  The application  was
    refused on the same date by Mr Hussain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant's then solicitors subsequently came off the record and are no
    longer representing the Appellant.

 8. As at the start of the hearing on 25 January 2021, the  Upper  Tribunal
    had not had any contact at all from the Appellant, either  in  relation
    to the hearing or in the form of any further evidence or the  composite
    bundle required.  The directions and listing notice were sent  directly
    to the Appellant (as well as his then solicitors who have made  efforts
    to contact him) and to the same address as the previous listing  notice
    which we know the Appellant had received from his very limited  contact
    with his then solicitors on 19 October 2020 when he  indicated  he  was
    aware of the listing for 20 October 2020.

 9. I am satisfied that the Appellant has been served with  the  directions
    and notice of listing, as well as having been  contacted  by  his  then
    solicitors in relation  to  the  hearing  and  the  warnings  contained
    therein about the likelihood of it proceeding if he  failed  to  comply
    with directions in relation to it.  The Appellant has  failed  to  make
    any substantive contact with his solicitors in relation to this  appeal
    for a significant period of time (including prior to the hearing listed
    in October 2020) and has failed to make any contact  at  all  with  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Whilst it is understood that in the past the Appellant
    has had some mental health problems (with limited medical  evidence  of
    this for the  period  around  2016  to  2018  and  only  references  to
    depression and anxiety predating this period), there is no up  to  date
    medical evidence (or any evidence at all) of any  current  difficulties
    or indication that the Appellant's failure to engage with his appeal is
    due to this; nor that there has been any specific adverse impact of the
    Covid-19 pandemic on the Appellant in relation to his  engagement  with
    his own appeal.  There is little before the Upper Tribunal to  indicate
    that the  Appellant  wishes  to  pursue  this  appeal  at  all  and  no
    indication if he does, as to why he has not engaged to  date  with  the
    directions or listing or as to when he may be able to do so.

10. In all of the circumstances, particularly without any information as to
    when this appeal could proceed with the Appellant's involvement, if  at
    all, it is not in the interests of justice to delay the hearing of this
    appeal  any  longer  by   adjourning   it.    The   hearing   proceeded
    substantively on 25 January 2021 on the basis of the evidence that  had
    previously been submitted by the Appellant to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and submissions made on his behalf to date and with oral submissions on
    behalf of the Respondent.  I have taken into account when assessing the
    evidence that the Appellant did not  appear  before  me  to  give  oral
    evidence, such that his evidence was not tested; however, that does not
    significantly reduce the weight to be given to  his  evidence  for  two
    main reasons.  First, the Appellant did attend the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on which occasion he gave evidence and  was  cross-
    examined.  Secondly, the factual background is largely undisputed (save
    as where indicated in submissions on behalf of the Respondent  set  out
    below).  Further, although there were no formal preserved  findings  of
    fact from the First-tier Tribunal, the decision contains findings which
    are uncontroversial as to the Appellant's background and  circumstances
    and which I adopt in this decision.

11. The issues in this appeal are as to (i) the Respondent's revocation  of
    the Appellant's refugee status; (ii)  humanitarian  protection  (albeit
    not expressly raised by the Appellant); (iii) Article 3 of the European
    Convention on  Human  Rights;  and  (iv)  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on  Human  Rights/private  and  family  life  exceptions  to
    deportation.

Immigration Law and Rules Relevant to the Appellant


12. In accordance with section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971,  a  person
    who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation if the  Secretary
    of State deems it to be conducive to the public good.  For the purposes
    of this appeal, this includes cases in which a person is considered  to
    be a persistent offender.


13. The Upper Tribunal considered the meaning of "persistent  offender"  in
    Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT  187  (IAC),  which  was
    endorsed by the Supreme Court in SC (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 4474.  The  Upper  Tribunal  found  as
    follows:

         "50.  What,  therefore,  is  the  natural  meaning  of  the  phrase
         "persistent offender" in this specific statutory  context?  It  can
         certainly be said,  without  unnecessarily  straining  the  natural
         meaning of the word that an  "offender"  acquires  that  status  by
         virtue of committing a crime, and having once offended he does  not
         lose that status even if he never commits another crime.  In  other
         words,  once  an  offender,  always  an  offender.  The  fact  that
         Parliament has deliberately legislated to  remove  the  concept  of
         spent convictions in this context also lends force to the view that
         "offender" means someone who has offended in the past however  long
         ago that may have been.

         51. However, Parliament did not use the phrase "repeat offender" or
         "serial offender". It used the phrase  "persistent  offender",  and
         persistence, by its very nature, requires some continuation of  the
         behaviour concerned, although it need not  be  continuous or  even
         regular.  There  may  be  circumstances  in  which  it   would   be
         inappropriate  to  describe  someone  with  a   past   history   of
         criminality as being a "persistent offender" even if  there  was  a
         time when that description would have been an accurate one.


         52. Take, for example, the case of an individual who in  his  youth
         had committed a series of offences between the ages of  14  and  17
         which led to a string of minor convictions, but  in  adulthood  had
         led a blameless existence for 20 years. Whilst it would be accurate
         to describe him  as  an  offender,  the  natural  response  to  the
         question whether he is now a persistent offender would be no.  It
         would still be no if at  the  end  of  that  long  period  of  good
         behaviour he committed another minor  criminal  offence,  even  one
         involving proof of intention or recklessness.  That  is  why,  both
         logically and as a matter of the natural meaning of  the  language,
         Mr Malik's proposition that "persistent offender"  is  a  permanent
         status cannot be correct.


         53. Put simply, a "persistent offender" is  someone  who  keeps  on
         breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to  keep
         on offending until the date of the relevant decision  or  up  to  a
         certain time before it, or that the  continuity  of  the  offending
         cannot be broken. Whilst  we  do  not  accept  Mr  Malik's  primary
         submission that a "persistent offender" is a permanent status  that
         can never be lost once it is acquired, we do accept his  submission
         that an individual can be regarded as a "persistent  offender"  for
         the purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though  he  may  not
         have offended for some time. Someone can be fairly described  as  a
         person who keeps breaking the law  even  if  he  is  not  currently
         offending. The question  whether  he  fits  that  description  will
         depend on the overall picture and pattern of his offending over his
         entire offending history up to that date. Each case  will  turn  on
         its own facts.


         54. Plainly, a  persistent  offender  is  not  simply  someone  who
         offends more than once. There has to be repeat offending  but  that
         repetition,  in  and  of  itself,  will  not  be  enough  to   show
         persistence. There has to be a history of repeated criminal conduct
         carried out over a sufficiently long period to  indicate  that  the
         person concerned is someone who  keeps  on  re-offending.  However,
         determining whether the offending  is  persistent  is  not  just  a
         mathematical exercise. How long a period and how many offences will
         be enough will depend very much on the facts of the particular case
         and the nature and circumstances of  the  offending.  The  criminal
         offences need not be the same, or even of  the  same  character  as
         each other. Persistence may be shown by  the  fact  that  a  person
         keeps committing the same type of offence, but it  may  equally  be
         shown by the fact that he has committed a wide variety of different
         offences over a period of time.


         ...


         57. In order to answer the question whether someone is a persistent
         offender, the decision-maker (be it the Tribunal or  the  Secretary
         of State) must consider the whole history of  the  individual  from
         the commission of the first offence up to the date of the  decision
         and ask themselves whether he can properly be described as  someone
         who keeps on committing criminal offences. Factors to be taken into
         account  will  include  the  overall  pattern  of  offending,   the
         frequency of the offences, their nature, their number,  the  period
         or periods over which they are committed, and (where relevant)  any
         reasons underlying the  offending,  such  as  an  alcohol  or  drug
         dependency or association with other criminals.  This  is  in  line
         with  the   guidance   given   in   the   Immigration   Directorate
         Instructions, Chapter 13, version 5.0 (dated 28 July 2014) to which
         Mr Malik referred, which states that a persistent  offender  is  "a
         repeat offender who shows a pattern of offending over a  period  of
         time". The guidance goes on to say  "this  can  mean  a  series  of
         offences committed in a fairly short timeframe, or  which  escalate
         in seriousness over time, or a long history of minor offences."


         58. If  the  person  concerned  has  been  out  of  trouble  for  a
         significant period or  periods  within  the  overall  period  under
         consideration, then the length of such periods and the reasons  for
         his keeping out of trouble may be important considerations,  though
         of course the decision maker is entitled to bear in mind  that  the
         mere fact that someone has not been convicted for  some  time  does
         not necessarily signify that he has seen the error of his ways.  It
         may simply mean that he has paused in  his  offending.  It  is  the
         overall picture of his behaviour that matters.


         59. If during those periods of apparent good behaviour  the  person
         concerned was serving the custodial part of a  short  sentence,  or
         was too unwell to go out and commit the kinds  of  offences  he  is
         generally prone to commit, there may  be  an  explanation  for  the
         hiatus in offending  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  being
         properly regarded as a persistent offender. Likewise, it he  had  a
         very strong incentive not to commit further offences, such as being
         subject to a community order, or a suspended sentence, or he is  on
         bail, or he has been served with a notice of deportation, the  fact
         that he has committed no further offences during that period may be
         of little significance in deciding whether, looking at his  history
         as a whole, he fits the description.


         60. On the other hand, we  agree  with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Whalan that  an  established  period  of  rehabilitation may lead
         properly to the conclusion  that  an  individual  is  no  longer  a
         persistent  offender.  Depending  on  the  particular   facts   and
         circumstances, a former drug addict who has ceased  shoplifting  to
         feed his habit after a period in rehabilitation, and who  has  been
         out of trouble for a significant period of time  thereafter,  might
         not be capable of being termed a "persistent offender" because when
         his history is looked at in the round, it can  no  longer  be  said
         that he is someone who keeps on offending."


14. The Respondent may not make a deportation order where deportation would
    be contrary to the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention or the Human Rights Convention.

Refugee Convention & cessation

 1. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 2. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 3. Article 1C of the Refugee Convention provides that the Convention shall
    cease to apply to any person falling under the terms of  section  A  if
    "(5) He can no longer, because the  circumstances  in  connection  with
    which he has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
    continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of
    his nationality; Provided that this paragraph shall   not  apply  to  a
    refugee falling under section A(1) of  this  article  who  is  able  to
    invoke compelling reasons  arising  out  of  previous  persecution  for
    refusing  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of
    nationality."

 4. Finally, paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules also deals  with  this
    issue in (v) as follows:

         "(v) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of nationality."

 5. Paragraph 339A goes on to state that, "In considering (v) and (vi), the
    Secretary  of  State  shall  have  regard  to  whether  the  change  of
    circumstances is of such a significant and  non-temporary  nature  that
    the refugee's fear of persecution can no  long  be  regarded  as  well-
    founded."


 6. The Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  MA
    (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994, further to the CJEU decision  in  Joined
    Cases C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08, C-179/08, Aydin Salahadin  Abdulla,
    Kamil  Hasan,  Ahmed  Adem,  Hamrin  Mosa  Rashi   &   Dier   Jamal   v
    Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 2 March 2010, concluded that: "A  cessation
    decision is the mirror image of a decision determining refugee  status.
    By that I mean  that  the  grounds  for  cessation  do  not  go  beyond
    verifying  whether  the  grounds  for  recognition  of  refugee  status
    continue to exist.  Thus, the relevant question is  whether  there  has
    been a significant and non-temporary change in  circumstances  so  that
    the circumstances which caused the person to be a refugee  have  ceased
    to apply and there is no other basis on which he would be held to be  a
    refugee.  The recognising  state  does  not  in  addition  have  to  be
    satisfied that the country of origin has a system of government  or  an
    effective legal system for protecting basic human  rights,  though  the
    absence of such systems may of course lead to  the  conclusion  that  a
    significant  and  non-temporary  change  in   circumstances   has   not
    occurred." [paragraph 2(1)].


 7. Although in MS (Art 1C(5) Mogadishu (Somalia) [2018] UKUT 196 (IAC) the
    Upper Tribunal found that the Respondent is not  entitled  to  cease  a
    person's refugee status  pursuant  to  article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention solely on the basis of a change of circumstances in one part
    of the country of  proposed  return;  this  was  before  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Somalia) referring to the symmetry  between  a
    decision determining refugee status and  cessation.   In  AMA  (Article
    15(c) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia [2019]  UKUT  11  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal found that changes in a refugee's country of  origin
    affecting only part of the country may, in principle, lead to cessation
    of refugee status, albeit it  is  difficult  to  see  how  in  practice
    protection could be said to be sufficiently fundamental and durable  in
    such circumstances.

Country Guidance

15. The Country Guidance in MOJ & Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) is applicable to the present appeal and neither
    party expressly sought any departure from it.  The key findings for the
    purposes of this appeal as summarised in the headnote, with  additional
    cross-referencing to the original paragraphs numbers in the  main  body
    of the decision given in square brackets for ease of cross  referencing
    to relevant paragraphs in later decisions below:

        i) The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.

       ii) Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
           will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in  a
           European location for a period of  time  of  being  viewed  with
           suspicion either by the authorities as a possible  supporter  of
           Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
           Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
           country. [paragraph 407(a)]

      iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the  Al  Shabaab
           withdrawal from Mogadishu is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
           prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That  was
           not the case at the time of the country guidance  given  by  the
           Tribunal in AMM. [paragraph 407(b)]

       iv)  The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding   non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabaab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk. [paragraph 407(c)]

        v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further
           still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral  damage"
           in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted
           at him by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are  clearly
           identifiable as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable for him to do so.  [paragraph 407(d)]

       vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for
           civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees
           from the West.  [paragraph 407(e)]

      vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming from majority clan members, as minority
           clans may have little to offer.  [paragraph 407(f)]

     viii) The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially, social  support  mechanisms  and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of   a
           protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias
           in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan-based discriminatory
           treatment, even for minority clan members.  [paragraph 407(g)]

       ix) If it is accepted that a person facing return to Mogadishu after
           a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives  in
           the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
           there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all   the
           circumstances.  These considerations will include, but  are  not
           limited to:


           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure:
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self-employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial  support  on  return.
             [paragraph 407(h)]

        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have  never  been  away.
           [paragraph 407(h)]

       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.  [paragraph 408]

      xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing  a  real  risk  of  destitution.   On  the  other   hand,
           relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with  no
           formal links to the city, no access to funds and no  other  form
           of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to  be  realistic
           as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form of
           ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of having no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is  a  real  prospect  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions  that  will  fall   below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards.  [paragraphs 424 and 425]

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights

16. In terms of the Article 3 threshold to be applied, the present case  is
    not a "paradigm" case as in MSS v Belgium &  Greece  53  EHRR  28.   As
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Said [2016] EWCA  Civ  442,  Article  3  was  intended  to
    protect persons from violations of their civil  and  political  rights,
    not their social and economic rights.  The return of a person  who  was
    not at risk of harm because of armed conflict or violence would not  in
    the  case  of  economic  deprivation  violate  Article  3  unless   the
    circumstances were such as those  in  N  v  UK  [2005]  2  AC  296  (as
    summarised by Lady Justice Arden in paragraph  34  of  MA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  994).   The
    main conclusion on this point in Said is at paragraph 18  which  states
    as follows:

         "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal  on
         article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or  deprivation
         on return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country
         or others in the sense described in para  282  of  Sufi  and  Elmi,
         whether or not the feared deprivation is contributed to by  medical
         condition, the person liable to deportation must show circumstances
         which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in  the
         D and N cases."

17. There is some concern expressed by the Court of Appeal in  Said  as  to
    possible conflation between  factors  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    internal relocation, humanitarian protection  and  Article  3  in  MOJ,
    which need to be set out in full.  The discussion is at  paragraphs  26
    to 31 which states as follows:

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are directed to the issue that  arises
         under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Sub-paragraphs
         (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
         Mogadishu, and the current absence of  risk  from  belonging  to  a
         minority clan.  Sub-paragraph (h) and paragraph 408 are  concerned,
         in broad terms, with the ability of a returning Somali national  to
         support himself.  The conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises
         the possibility of a person's circumstances failing below what  "is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".  It is, with respect,
         unclear whether that is a  reference  back  to  the  definition  of
         "humanitarian  protection"  arising  from   article   15   of   the
         Qualification Directive.  These factors do not  go  to  inform  any
         question under article 15(c).   Nor  does  it  chime  with  article
         15(b), which draws on the language of article 3 of the  Convention,
         because the fact that a person might be returned to  very  deprived
         living conditions, could not (save in  extreme  cases)  lead  to  a
         conclusion that removal would violate article 3.

         ...

         28. In view of the reference in the paragraph immediately preceding
         para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras 407(h) and 408
         are likely to have been  introduced  in  connection  with  internal
         flight  or  internal  relocation  arguments,  which  was  a  factor
         identified in para 1 setting out the scope  of  the  issues  before
         UTIAC.  Whilst they may have some relevance in a search for whether
         a removal to Somalia would give rise to a violation of article 3 of
         the Convention, they cannot be understood as  a  surrogate  for  an
         examination of the circumstances to determine whether such a breach
         would occur.  I am unable to accept that if a Somali national  were
         able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he would  have
         established that his removal to Somalia would breach article  3  of
         the Convention.  Such an approach would be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and  Convention  jurisprudence  which  at  para  34  UTIAC
         expressly understood itself to be following.

         29. Having set out its guidance,  UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
         IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.   It
         recognised that  the  label  was  problematic  because  there  were
         individuals who are considered as internally displaced persons  who
         have settled in a new part of Somalia in "a reasonable standard  of
         accommodation" and with access to food, remittances from abroad  or
         an independent livelihood.   UTIAC  considered  that  the  position
         would be different for someone obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the
         conditions  of  some  of  which  "are  appalling",  para  411.   It
         continued by quoting from evidence of armed attacks on  IDP  camps,
         of  sexual  and  other  gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible
         recruitment of internally displaced children into violence,  albeit
         that it  did  not  accept  the  evidence  it  quoted.   UTIAC  also
         mentioned overcrowding, poor  health  conditions  and  (ironically)
         that  the  economic  improvements  in  Mogadishu  were  leading  to
         evictions from IDP camps in urban centres with  vulnerable  victims
         being unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         30.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that  the  discussion  of  this
         evidence, which  is  culled  from  expert  reports,  understandably
         touches on concerns about violence, which in article 3 terms  would
         be analysed by reference to the approach in MSS and Sufi  and  Elmi
         cases, and aspects of  destitution,  which  would  be  analysed  by
         reference to the approach in the N and  D  cases.   The  conflation
         continues in para 412:

             "Given what we have  seen,  and  described  above,  about  the
             extremely harsh living  conditions,  and  the  risk  of  being
             subjected to a range of human rights abuses, such a person  is
             likely to found to be living  at  a  level  that  falls  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards."

         Having further discussed the contradictory evidence about how  many
         people lived in IDP camps, UTIAC concluded that "many thousands  of
         people are reduced  to  living  in  circumstances  of  destitution"
         albeit that there was no reliable figure of how many  people  lived
         in such destitution in IDP camps.  The determination continued:

             "420. Whilst it is likely that those who  do  find  themselves
             living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in  an  IDP  camp
             will be experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to
             engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR, we do not  see
             that it gives rise to an enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since
             there  is  an  insufficient  nexus  with  the   indiscriminate
             violence which, in any event, we have found not to be at  such
             a high level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm.  Nor does the evidence support  the  claim  that
             there is an enhanced risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
             for those in the IDP camps or  that  such  a  person  is  more
             likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack ...

             421. Other  than  those  with  no  alternative  to  living  in
             makeshift accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp,  the  humanitarian
             position in Mogadishu  has  continued  to  improve  since  the
             country guidance in AMM was published.  The famine is confined
             to  history  ...  The  "economic  boom"  has  generated   more
             opportunity for employment and ... self-employment.  For  many
             returnees remittances will be important ...

             422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to
             civilian returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that  no  Somali
             national can succeed in a refugee or  humanitarian  protection
             or article 3 claim.  Each case will fall to be decided on  its
             own facts.  As we have observed,  there  will  need  to  be  a
             careful assessment of all the circumstances  of  a  particular
             individual."

         31. I entirely accept that some of the  observations  made  in  the
         course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that
         if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3.  Yet such a stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts.  In my judgement the position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered.  An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
          Impoverished conditions which were the direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

18. Paragraph 422 of MOJ stated:

         "The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a real  risk
         of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to  civilians  or
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no  Somali  national  can
         succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection or Article 3 claim.
          Each case will fall to be decided on its own facts.   As  we  have
         observed, there will need to be a careful  assessment  of  all  the
         circumstances of a particular individual."

19. The question of whether the risk of deprivation on return would lead to
    a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
    revisited in MA (Somalia).  Lady Justice  Arden,  being  bound  by  the
    decision in Said, confirmed that there is no violation of Article 3  by
    reason of a person being returned  to  a  country  which  for  economic
    reasons  can  not  provide  him  with  basic  living  standards.    The
    Respondent in MA contended that the situation in  Somalia  was  brought
    about by conflict, which is recognised by the European Court  of  Human
    Rights as an exception to the analysis.   Lady  Justice  Arden  however
    concluded at paragraph 63 that:

         "... It is true that there has historically been severe conflict in
         Somalia, but, on the basis of MOJ, that would  not  necessarily  be
         the cause of deprivation if the respondent were returned to Somalia
         now.  The evidence is that there is no present reason why a person,
         with support from his family and/or prospects of employment, should
         face unacceptable living standards."

20. This test has been expressly endorsed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MI
    (Palestine) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1782 and by the Upper  Tribunal  in  SB  (refugee  revocation;  IDP
    camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00358 (IAC).

21. It is well established that in Article 3 cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual is not from treatment emanating from intentionally inflicted
    acts of the public authorities in the receiving state or from those  of
    non-State bodies in that country when the authorities there are  unable
    to afford him appropriate protection; it is only  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances that there would  be  a  violation  of  Article  3.   The
    principles are summarised by the European Court of Human Rights in N as
    follows:

         "42. Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.

         43.  The court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling.  However, it considers that it should maintain the high
         threshold set in D v UK ... and applied in its subsequent case law,
         which it regards as correct in principle, given that in such  cases
         the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
         or omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies, but instead
         from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.

         44.  ... Advances in medical  science,  together  with  social  and
         economic differences between countries, entail that  the  level  of
         treatment available in the Contracting State  and  the  country  of
         origin may vary considerably.  While it  is  necessary,  given  the
         fundamental importance of Article 3 in the Convention  system,  for
         the Court to retain a degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in
         very exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an  obligation  on
         the Contracting State to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the
         provision of free and unlimited healthcare to all aliens without  a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction.  A finding to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."

Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

22. The requirements where a person claims that their deportation would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
    European convention on Human rights in so far as they are  set  out  in
    the Immigration Rules and relate to this appeal are:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

          a) ...
          b) ...; or
          c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing
             that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies
             and, if it does not, the public interest in  deportation  will
             only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399.     ...

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
if -

          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and
          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

23. By virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Part V of that Act applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

24. Section 117B applies to the public interest considerations in all cases
    and section 117C applies additional considerations to  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  So far as relevant to  this  appeal,  section  117B
    sets out factors to be considered  in  all  cases  and  the  additional
    consideration in cases involving foreign criminals provides as follows:

    "117C. Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving  foreign
    criminals

      1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.
      4) Exception 1 applies where -
          a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,
          b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
      5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."



The Appellant's immigration and criminal history

25. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 7 June 1973,  who  fled
    Somalia in 1992/1993 to Kenya and from there came to the United Kingdom
    on 22 August 1998, claiming asylum on arrival on the basis that he  was
    at risk of persecution in Somalia as a member of a minority  clan,  the
    Barwani clan (also known as Bravanese and a sub-clan of the  Benadiri).
    The Appellant was recognised as a refugee on 6 June  2000  and  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

26. On 22 June 2017, the Appellant was fined 60 following  his  conviction
    of 2 counts of theft.

27. On 6 July 2017, the Appellant was convicted of possessing an  offensive
    weapon in a public place and failing to surrender to custody, for which
    he was sentenced to a community  order  with  rehabilitation  activity,
    ordered to pay a victim surcharge and a 10 fine.

28. On 6  November  2017,  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment following his conviction for having  a  blade  or  sharply
    pointed article in a public place, possessing an offensive weapon in  a
    public place (broken glass bottle) and failing without reasonable cause
    to surrender to custody in breach of a community order.  The  Appellant
    was also ordered to pay a victim surcharge.

29. On 17 November 2017, the Respondent indicated an  intention  to  deport
    the Appellant and on 10 May 2018, the intention to revoke  his  refugee
    status.  The Appellant did not make any representations in response  to
    either letter.

30. The Respondent notified the  UNHCR  of  the  intention  to  revoke  the
    Appellant's refugee status on 1 June 2018, to which they  responded  on
    29 June 2018.  First, it was noted that the trigger  for  consideration
    of cessation of status was the Appellant's criminal convictions,  which
    in the UNHCR's opinion, was not  appropriate.   Secondly,  it  was  not
    agreed that the situation currently pertaining in Somalia warranted the
    application of Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention on an individual
    or collective basis.  The UNHCR did not consider that the situation  in
    Somalia has fundamentally changed such  as  to  apply  this  provision.
    Thirdly it was not accepted that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof on her with evidence  that  demonstrated  the  specific
    fundamental  changes  needed  for  cessation,  together  with  adequate
    consideration  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  the   Appellant.
    Background  evidence  was  referred  to   which   recorded   continuing
    persecution of minority clans, in particular in  southern  and  central
    Somalia.  A recommendation was made for a thorough  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case, including a thorough  assessment  of  any  continuing
    clan and family ties and their capacity to support him; as well  as  an
    assessment of relevant improvements since the Appellant was  recognised
    as a refugee the purposes of Article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention
    and of the current human rights situation in Somalia.



The Respondent's decision

31. The Respondent revoked the Appellant's refugee status  under  paragraph
    339A(v) of the Immigration Rules and Article  1(C)(5)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention because he  no  longer,  because  of  the  circumstances  in
    connection with which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased
    to exist, can continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection  of
    his country of nationality.  In the  decision  letter,  the  Respondent
    responds  to  the  points  raised  by  the  UNHCR  about  the  proposed
    revocation and relied upon the country guidance in MOJ  to  the  effect
    that the Appellant would no longer be at risk on return on the basis of
    minority  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu;  which  is  consistent  with
    information contained  in  the  Respondent's  Country  Information  and
    Policy Note in relation to Somalia.

32. The Respondent considered that the  Appellant  was  an  adult  male  in
    reasonable health who would  not  face  any  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration on return to Somalia and would still be able to  converse
    in his first language and would be familiar enough with Somali  culture
    to re-assimilate, adapt and form a private life there.  By reference to
    MOJ, the Respondent also relied on enhanced  employment  prospects  for
    returnees and  the  availability  of  financial  assistance  under  the
    Facilitated Returns Scheme to  help  with  re-establishing  himself  on
    return.  The Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant  would  face
    any  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances  falling  below  what   is
    acceptable in humanitarian protection  terms  and  there  would  be  no
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

33. Separate consideration was given to the Appellant's health and  Article
    3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and generally in  relation
    to the Appellant's asthma but it was considered that this did not  meet
    the high threshold for such cases.

34. The Respondent then considered the Appellant's rights under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights in the context of paragraphs
    398 and following of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had not made
    any claim to have established family life in the  United  Kingdom,  nor
    did he respond to the Respondent as to any private life developed here.
     However, it was accepted that the  Appellant  would  have  established
    private life in the United  Kingdom  having  spent  some  twenty  years
    living here.

35. The Appellant was identified as a persistent offender  having  received
    three convictions for six offences  between  June  and  November  2017,
    whose presence in the United Kingdom was not desirable and it was noted
    that the offending included possession of offensive weapons which  pose
    a risk  of  harm  to  the  public.   The  Appellant's  deportation  was
    therefore required unless one of the exceptions applied.  The Appellant
    was unable to meet the private life exception in paragraph  399A(i)  of
    the Immigration Rules as he had  not  been  lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for most of his life, only twenty out of his  forty-five
    years; the majority having  been  spent  in  Somalia  and  Kenya.   The
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant may be socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom for the purposes of paragraph 399A(ii)
    of the Immigration Rules, but that there was a lack of evidence of  any
    positive contribution to the  community,  including  of  work  and  his
    criminal  offending  counted  against  the  conclusion.   Finally,  the
    Respondent did not accept that paragraph 399A(iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules was satisfied as the Appellant would not  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration in Somalia, as he  would  be  familiar  with
    culture, customs and language spoken there and would be able to use any
    training, education and employment experience from the  United  Kingdom
    to re-establish himself.  The Appellant may also have extended  family,
    friends or other ties remaining but could  in  any  event  establish  a
    private life without any such assistance.

36.  Finally,  the  Respondent  considered  whether  there  were  any  very
    compelling  circumstances  to   outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.  The Respondent stated that  there  is  significant  pubic
    interest in deportation given the Appellant is  a  persistent  offender
    who had three convictions for six offences in a short  period  in  2017
    and as the Appellant's indefinite leave to remain  would  be  cancelled
    following the making of a deportation order.   The  Appellant  had  not
    identified a strong private life claim over and above the exceptions to
    outweigh the significant public interest.

37. A deportation order was signed on 22 October 2018.

The Appellant's claim

38. In a written statement signed and dated 20 June 2019 (prepared for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing), the Appellant sets  out  his  history  in
    Somalia and circumstances in the United Kingdom.  In Somalia he studied
    up to college in a private institution but did not go further to obtain
    a degree or other equivalent  qualification.   The  Appellant's  father
    passed away many years ago and the rest of his family comprise  of  his
    mother, four sisters and two brothers.  The last contact the  Appellant
    had with family was with one of his sisters in 2014.  He  presumes  his
    mother currently resides in Somalia  but  would  be  very  elderly  and
    frail.

39. The Appellant is a member  of  the  minority  Barwani  tribe  who  were
    attacked by the militia around 1990, during which  the  Appellant  lost
    his home and his brother was killed.  The Appellant moved to  Kenya  to
    live with his uncle in or around 1993 and stayed there for four or five
    years (without any legal status) before his uncle  found  an  agent  to
    assist him travelling to the United Kingdom.  He arrived in the  United
    Kingdom  on  29  August  1998,  claimed  asylum  and  was  subsequently
    recognised as a refugee and granted indefinite leave to remain in  June
    2000.

40. The Appellant moved to Birmingham in 2003 where he studied  and  sought
    employment.  The Appellant obtained a forklift licence in 2016 and then
    worked in a warehouse as an operations operative whilst looking  for  a
    job as a forklift driver.

41. In September 2016 the Appellant was attacked in  a  park,  leaving  him
    unconscious with a head  injury  causing  a  brain  haemorrhage  and  a
    stroke, causing left-side paralysis.  As a  result  the  Appellant  had
    physiotherapy  but  was  left  unemployable  and  incapacitated.    The
    Appellant turned to alcohol whilst not being  able  to  work  and  with
    increasing symptoms of stress and depression.

42.  The  Appellant  set  out  his  criminal  offences.   In  relation   to
    shoplifting, the Appellant was stealing alcohol.  In  relation  to  the
    failure to surrender, he  stated  that  he  messed  up  the  dates  and
    attended on the wrong date.  In relation  to  the  broken  bottle,  the
    Appellant stated that he was under the influence of alcohol and had  an
    argument with someone, who insulted him, he broke a bottle  and  warned
    the other person that he was ready,  but  never  tried  to  assault  or
    injure anyone with it.  The Appellant had been chased by someone with a
    knife on two occasions around November 2017  and  was  scared  for  his
    safety, such that he kept a knife for self-defence, particularly as  he
    had difficulties walking and wanted some protection.

43. On 2 February 2018, the Appellant was released from prison and  had  by
    then stopped drinking alcohol.  He completed his probationary period in
    February 2019.  Following the Appellant's release, he has been  seeking
    employment and planning on starting a course  related  to  construction
    work; overall trying to change his  life  and  move  away  from  a  bad
    situation stemming  from  his  attack  and  injury  which  led  to  his
    downfall.

44. The Appellant's offences were all relatively minor  and  he  is  not  a
    threat to anyone in the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  is  a  quiet
    person who keeps himself to himself, although he is  seen  as  an  easy
    target.  The Appellant  stated  that  there  are  no  excuses  for  his
    criminal offences but that he is  not  a  prolific  offender,  he  made
    mistakes during a turbulent and difficult time but he is now completely
    rehabilitated and in a better place.  The Appellant highlights that  he
    had been in the United Kingdom lawfully for over nineteen years  before
    getting into any trouble and describes himself as a lonely person  with
    few friends.

45. In his written statement, the Appellant makes a number of references to
    having suffered from anxiety and depression and that he  was,  at  that
    time, receiving support for managing his depression.

46. The Appellant states that he has no connections back in Somalia and  no
    contact with family members there, who he does not even  know  if  they
    are alive or where they are.  He states that he has no means to survive
    in Somali and would be  destitute  and  homeless  on  return  there,  a
    country which he has not been in since 1993 and which is now completely
    alien to him.  The Appellant believes that he would  struggle  to  cope
    with life in Somalia and would still be  at  risk  there  as  it  is  a
    terrible place with people suffering.

47. The appeal file includes a typed record of proceedings from the  First-
    tier Tribunal which sets out the oral evidence of  the  Appellant.   He
    confirmed on that occasion that he last had contact with his mother  in
    Somalia four to five years ago and his sister  around  the  same  time.
    When asked why contact  had  ceased,  the  Appellant  referred  to  his
    assault and injuries  in  2016,  his  rehabilitation  and  alcohol  and
    dealing with his mental health and that since he had been  in  hospital
    the phone number didn't work anymore.  The Appellant confirmed  he  had
    no family in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had not been to Somalia
    in more than 25 years, he would not know where to go on return and  has
    no home there.  On arrival in the United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant  had
    someone who helped him for the first year  with  learning  English  and
    taking care of himself.

48. Mr Ismail Mohammad Ali also prepared a written statement in support  of
    the Appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal and attended  the
    oral hearing to give evidence on his  behalf.   Mr  Ali  is  a  support
    manager based at the Appellant's address and has known him since 1  May
    2017, seeing him every day  (save  for  his  period  of  imprisonment),
    offering him advice and  assistance  as  well  as  breakfast.   Mr  Ali
    believes that the Appellant has  learned  from  his  lessons  from  his
    criminal convictions  and  will  not  repeat  his  past  mistakes.   He
    describes him as a polite gentlemen who always tries to co-operate with
    others and has never been seen to be rude or violent.  The Appellant is
    quite lonely and has only a  few  friends.   Mr  Ali  states  that  the
    Appellant has given up alcohol, showing will power and determination.

49. The typed record of proceedings includes Mr Ali's oral evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  To the best of his knowledge, Mr Ali did  not
    know of any family in Somalia of the Appellant and he had not talked to
    him about his family.  Mr Ali saw the Appellant most days and  had  not
    seen him drinking or drunk, nor were there any traces of alcohol  (such
    as bottles or cans) on unscheduled weekly room checks.

50. The other documentary evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (and
    therefore before me) was a doctors' certificate that the Appellant  was
    not fit for work during the period 2 February 2018 to 2 March 2018  due
    to an intracerebral haemorrhage and a letter dated 19 May 2019 inviting
    him to a Wellbeing Group  with  Birmingham  Health  Minds  following  a
    recent assessment.

51. The background country  evidence  relied  upon  and  extracted  in  the
    skeleton argument on behalf of  the  Appellant  included  articles  and
    reports from the Voice of America News, the UNHCR, Human Rights  Watch,
    Freedom in the World, US Country Report, UK Foreign Office, the UN  and
    the Respondent's Country  Information  and  Policy  Notes;  all  dating
    between 2016 and 2019.

52. In the  absence  of  the  Appellant  attending  the  hearing,  nor  any
    representative on record or having made submissions on  his  behalf;  I
    take into account the skeleton argument submitted on his behalf for the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  This set out  the  relevant  factual  and
    legal background to the appeal, highlighting  the  Appellant's  lengthy
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom since 1998  and  that  he  could
    have secured British nationality some time  ago.   On  the  Appellant's
    behalf, it is accepted that he can not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for an  exception  to  deportation  (not  having  any
    family in the United Kingdom and not having lived more than half of his
    life in the United Kingdom) and it was submitted that his  case  should
    be considered on Article 8 grounds outside of the Immigration Rules.

53. On the Appellant's behalf, specific reliance is placed  on  him  having
    spent two thirds of his life in the United Kingdom and having  no  ties
    to  his  country  of  birth;  that  he  has  responded  well   to   the
    rehabilitation programme and is  unlikely  to  reoffend,  managing  the
    problems he had in the past with alcohol.  Further  the  Appellant  has
    worked in the United Kingdom and is fluent in English.  He has spent  a
    considerable period of time lawfully in the United  Kingdom  with  only
    very recent criminal convictions and only one custodial sentence of six
    months.  The Appellant is not a threat to the public and is  integrated
    in the United Kingdom.

54. In relation to risk on return to Somalia, the Appellant relies  on  the
    representations from the  UNHCR  in  relation  to  his  case  and  with
    reference to  the  background  country  material,  submitted  that  the
    security situation in Somalia remains volatile, complex  and  difficult
    to predict with ongoing risk from Al-Shabaab  particularly  in  central
    and southern Somalia, with attacks on Mogadishu; as well as  continuing
    clan based violence and discrimination; and adverse impact  of  climate
    change and drought.  It was submitted that the Appellant has no  family
    and no support mechanism in Mogadishu  who  could  assist  him  in  re-
    establishing himself, which is a serious impediment to him  being  able
    to re-adjust.

55. Although specific to the Respondent's appeal and issue of whether there
    was an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I have  also
    taken into account the written  submissions  made  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf in response to the grounds of appeal by the Respondent.

The hearing

56. As set out above, the Appellant did not attend the hearing, nor was  he
    represented.  Mr Lindsay did not have all of the Appellant's bundle  or
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal available  to  him  at
    the hearing and therefore some time  was  spent  running  through  that
    evidence and the factual findings by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (albeit
    not formally preserved) to identify any factual matters not in  dispute
    and those which were.  Mr Lindsay confirmed that most of the facts  are
    uncontroversial and not in  dispute,  save  for  three  matters;  first
    whether the Appellant is likely to continue to offend (on the basis  of
    the earlier decisions of the Respondent and First-tier  Tribunal  based
    on the Appellant being a persistent offender); secondly, the weight  to
    be attached to the UNHCR letter and the relevance of MOJ; and  finally,
    in relation to the Appellant's contact with his family in  Somalia  and
    the lack of evidence of any serious effort to re-establish contact with
    them.

57. In relation to the revocation of refugee status, Mr Lindsay relied upon
    the country guidance in MOJ to show  a  significant  and  non-temporary
    change in the circumstances in Mogadishu and that the Appellant was  no
    longer at risk on return to Mogadishu on the basis of his minority clan
    membership nor for any other reason.

58. In relation to Article 3, Mr Lindsay submitted that the Supreme Court's
    decision in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2020] UKSC 17 had no material bearing on the standard to be applied in
    the present case.  First, because this appeal is not on health  grounds
    (there being no up to date medical evidence  available)  and  secondly,
    even on a slightly lower standard, the very high threshold has not been
    met by the Appellant.  The Appellant has not shown that there is a real
    risk of him ending up in an IDP camp and in  particular  has  not  show
    MOJ.  Mr Lindsay submitted that there is no reason  why  the  Appellant
    could not re-establish contact with his family or at least obtain  some
    basic  support.   The  Appellant   has   some   education,   vocational
    qualifications and employment experience and there is  no  evidence  of
    any current health problems hindering is ability  to  find  employment.
    The Appellant left his home area of Mogadishu as an  adult  and  should
    have retained knowledge of language and culture there to assist him  on
    return.   Further,  the  Appellant  is  eligible  to  apply   for   the
    Facilitated Assistance Scheme with up to 500 available on departure to
    help him re-establish himself on return.  In these circumstances, there
    is no real risk of the Appellant ending up in an IDP camp and no breach
    of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

59. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, Mr
    Lindsay submitted that the Appellant is a persistent  offender  and  in
    any event there is a strong public interest in  his  deportation.   The
    Appellant's criminal offences were of a serious nature evidenced by his
    sentence of six months' imprisonment and  there  was  repeat  offending
    over a short period of time.  On the Appellant's side of  the  balance,
    there is very little, consisting of some private  life  but  no  family
    life and his offending detracts from the  quality  and  weight  of  his
    private life.  There was no evidence of  any  further  offending  since
    late 2017 and no up to date PNC available.  Mr Lindsay  submitted  that
    the  absence  of  offending  is  however   not   strong   evidence   of
    rehabilitation given that during this period the Appellant was  subject
    to the threat of deportation.   On  balance,  the  public  interest  in
    deportation outweighs the Appellant's right to respect for his  private
    life.   The  requirement  for  very  exceptional  circumstances  is   a
    stringent test which is not met on the facts of this case.

Findings and reasons

Revocation of refugee status

 8. The Upper Tribunal found in MOJ that there was, in 2014, no longer  any
    real risk to a minority clan member in Mogadishu.  Clans  were  instead
    significant for social and economic support rather than protection  and
    the country guidance concluded that there  were  no  clan  militias  in
    Mogadishu, no clan violence and no clan based discriminatory treatment,
    even for minority clan members.  That showed a significant change  from
    the previous country guidance and conditions in Mogadishu.

 9. In the course of this appeal has  there  been  not  been  any  specific
    submission on behalf of the Appellant that there should be a  departure
    from the country guidance in MOJ, albeit  a  range  of  material  post-
    dating it has been relied upon to show continuing problems for minority
    clans and in relation to the general  security  situation  in  Somalia.
    However, the material highlighted on behalf of the Appellant  does  not
    specifically refer to any deterioration of the situation in  Mogadishu,
    and to the contrary the January 2019  Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note 'Somalia: Majority clans and minority grounds in South and Central
    Somali' expressly quoted and relied upon by the  Appellant,  refers  to
    continuing improvements in Mogadishu in  terms  of  representation  for
    most clans, including minority groups, and well-established communities
    and businesses for some minority clans.  There  is  a  lack  of  cogent
    evidence to support a departure from the country guidance on this point
    in relation to  this  Appellant's  home  area  to  which  he  would  be
    returned, namely Mogadishu.  I therefore apply the country guidance  in
    MOJ.

10. I have taken into account the detailed representations from  the  UNHCR
    and background evidence referred to therein  but  also  find  that  the
    contents therein, even taken cumulatively with the material relied upon
    by the  Appellant  does  not  provide  cogent  evidence  to  support  a
    departure from the country guidance.

11. In circumstances where by the time of the decision  in  MOJ  there  had
    already been a significant change in the situation for  minority  clans
    such that they were no longer at risk as such in  Mogadishu  and  where
    there is a lack of  cogent  evidence  of  any  worsening  or  different
    situation in many years since then; I  find  that  the  Respondent  has
    established that there has been a significant and non-temporary  change
    of circumstances in Mogadishu since the Appellant was  granted  refugee
    status such that he would no longer be at risk  on  the  basis  of  his
    minority clan membership.

12. The Appellant has not specifically relied upon any  other  reasons  for
    fearing a real risk of persecution on return to Mogadishu and I do  not
    find that there is any other basis for  him  to  do  so.   The  country
    guidance  in  MOJ  also  concludes  that  there  is  no  real  risk  of
    persecution to a  civilian  from  Al-Shabaab,  which  applies  to  this
    Appellant who would return as an ordinary civilian.

13. The Appellant's appeal against the revocation of his refugee status  is
    therefore dismissed, the Respondent has established that the conditions
    in Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention and paragraph  339A(V)  of
    the Immigration Rules are met on the facts of this case.

14. For the same reasons as set  out  above  and  in  accordance  with  the
    country guidance in MOJ, the Appellant does not face any Article  15(c)
    risk.

Article 3

15. Although the Appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum and humanitarian
    protection grounds for the reasons set out above, his appeal must still
    be considered under Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  As set out above, MOJ includes country  guidance  on  this  as
    well, albeit this has to be read in light  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Said and MA.

16. The relevant facts in this  appeal  are  that  the  Appellant  will  be
    returning to Mogadishu for the first time since 1992/1993 when he  fled
    following clan violence.  The Appellant most recently had contact  with
    any family in Somalia in 2014 and states that he  was  unable  to  make
    contact since around 2016 due to his circumstances  at  that  time  and
    that a contact telephone number stopped  working.   There  is,  as  the
    Respondent notes, no evidence of any serious or more recent attempts by
    the Appellant to re-establish contact with family members.  Even if the
    Appellant were able to  re-establish  contact,  there  is  no  evidence
    either way as to whether they are  in  a  position  to  offer  him  any
    material support on return.  There is no  dispute  that  the  Appellant
    does not have any other continuing connections with extended family  or
    friends in Somalia and in  accordance  with  MOJ,  he  is  unlikely  to
    receive any assistance re-establishing himself from clan members  given
    he is from a minority clan who have little to offer.

17.  There  is  little  information  available  as   to   the   Appellant's
    circumstances in Mogadishu prior to his departure, other than  that  he
    had been in education and lived there as a young adult; fleeing  during
    a time of clan violence and conflict.   The Appellant's journey to  the
    United Kingdom was funded by his uncle in Kenya in 1998  and  there  is
    nothing to suggest any ongoing contact or further support available  to
    the Appellant from his uncle.

18. There is also fairly scant information available as to the  Appellant's
    circumstances in the United Kingdom or how  he  has  supported  himself
    here; with limited references to  education  and  employment  but  very
    little detail and no information as to whether this was sufficient  for
    the Appellant to support himself.  It is entirely unknown as to whether
    the Appellant has any current access to any financial resources (he was
    found not to be in employment at the date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in June 2019) or financial support in the United Kingdom but  I
    do find there is no evidence that he would be financially supported  by
    anyone in the United Kingdom on return to Mogadishu.  He may however be
    entitled  to  financial  assistance  from  the  Respondent  under   the
    Facilitated Returns Scheme which would provide at least initial support
    for him to re-establish himself.

19. The question then is, in accordance with the findings in  MOJ,  whether
    the Appellant would be able to access the economic  opportunities  that
    have been produced by the economic boom in Mogadishu.   It  is  unknown
    whether the Appellant still speaks a local language in  Mogadishu,  but
    he is fluent in English and would  be  able  to  communicate  and  seek
    employment in that language, which is commonly spoken in Mogadishu  and
    an advantage for employment.  Although there is limited information  as
    to his education, qualifications and employment, there is some to  show
    that the Appellant completed his education in Mogadishu, studied in the
    United Kingdom, obtained vocational  qualifications  (with  a  forklift
    licence) and has at least some employment history.  The  Appellant  has
    not given any reasons as to why he would be unable to obtain employment
    on return with this background and there is no information  at  all  to
    suggest he is unable to work due to the injuries he sustained in  2016.
    To the contrary,  the  little  evidence  that  is  available  from  the
    Appellant in the course of this appeal refers  to  undertaking  further
    training and actively seeking employment.

20. In the absence of the Appellant and only very  limited  evidence  being
    available from him before the First-tier Tribunal;  the  assessment  of
    whether his return to Mogadishu would be a breach of Article 3 is  more
    difficult than it could have been if the Appellant had engaged with his
    appeal.  However, on the basis of the information  that  is  available,
    even though the  Appellant  would  be  returning  after  a  significant
    absence from Mogadishu, without any significant likelihood of  material
    support on return from family, clan members or anyone else; there is in
    this case  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  seek
    accommodation and employment  on  return  to  re-establish  himself  in
    Mogadishu, particularly with the assistance of the Facilitated  Returns
    Scheme.  He speaks English (and is likely to continue to have at  least
    some familiarity with one other local language in Mogadishu, even if no
    longer as fluent as he once was) and has some education (in Somalia and
    in the United Kingdom), training and employment  which  he  could  use.
    There is  nothing  to  establish  any  current  ill-health,  mental  or
    physical impairment to employment.  In these circumstances, there is no
    real risk of the Appellant ending up in an IDP camp and even  if  there
    was, this would be for economic rather than conflict reasons such  that
    the higher threshold applies and that can not be satisfied on the facts
    of this case.  The Appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed on Article
    3 grounds.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights & deportation

21. The first question in  relation  to  this  Appellant's  deportation  is
    whether he meets the criteria for deportation at all.  The Appellant is
    not subject to automatic deportation, instead  the  Respondent  asserts
    that the Appellant is a  persistent  offender  on  the  basis  that  he
    committed six offences in a short period  in  2017,  such  that  he  is
    liable to deportation.  The Appellant disputed this.  The parties  were
    invited to make more detailed submissions on this point  following  the
    hearing, but none were received.

22. In accordance with the  guidance  given  in  Chege  on  this  issue,  I
    consider the following factors as to whether the Appellant is currently
    a persistent offender.  First, I take into account that  the  Appellant
    was in the United Kingdom for  almost  19  years  before  any  criminal
    offences were committed.

23. Secondly, the Appellant's convictions, as  set  out  above,  were  only
    between  June  and  November  2017,  with  only  the  last  offence  of
    possessing a blade or sharply  pointed  article  carrying  a  custodial
    sentence.   There  were  a  number  of  offences  committed  within   a
    relatively short period of time, the first  of  which  were  relatively
    minor but there was an escalation in seriousness in the  last  offence.
    The Appellant has explained his circumstances in 2017, that he had been
    mis-using alcohol following being the victim of a serious  assault  the
    previous year which had left him with physical injuries and a need  for
    rehabilitation, combined  with  symptoms  of  depression  and  anxiety;
    including a fear of further attack exacerbated by having been  followed
    twice in 2017.  The early offences where theft of alcohol and the later
    offence, although not excused,  explained  at  least  in  part  by  the
    Appellant's ongoing fear of attack.   The  Appellant  states  that  his
    failure to surrender to custody was simply a mix up of the dates.

24. The underlying reasons  for  the  Appellant's  offending  were  clearly
    linked to his assault in 2016 and his mis-use of alcohol following  it.
    The Appellant states that his circumstances  have  changed  and  he  is
    turning his life around following this difficult period  in  his  life.
    The Appellant had not (at least at the time of the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing) drunk alcohol since his imprisonment.   There  was  supporting
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal from  the  Appellant's  housing
    manager that the Appellant had not been seen drinking  (or  drunk)  and
    there was no evidence of alcohol in  his  room  which  was  subject  to
    weekly unscheduled inspections; since his release from  prison.   I  am
    satisfied that the primary underlying reason leading to the Appellant's
    offending, namely alcohol mis-use, has been addressed.  Taking  all  of
    the circumstances already outlined into  account,  including  the  very
    lengthy period that the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom before
    he committed any offences; I find that the Appellant is at a  very  low
    risk of reoffending.

25. Thirdly, I take into account that the Appellant's last  conviction  was
    in November 2017; over three years ago.  In considering that period,  I
    take into account that the Appellant was in custody  until  2  February
    2018 and subject to probation until February 2019;  and  throughout  he
    has been subject to deportation proceedings by the Respondent.   Whilst
    these factors are likely to objectively have  a  bearing  on  a  person
    keeping out of trouble; I find that  the  Appellant  stopping  drinking
    alcohol is likely to be a more important factor in his case and  it  is
    more likely than not in his case that he has reformed having  seen  the
    error of his ways during a difficult period in his life in 2016/2017.

26. Overall, I do not find that the Appellant  is  currently  a  persistent
    offender, nor  do  I  find  that  he  poses  any  significant  risk  of
    reoffending, nor any significant risk to the public.  As the  Appellant
    is not a persistent offender, his  deportation  is  not  deemed  to  be
    conducive to the public good and he is not  be  liable  to  deportation
    under section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 or paragraph 398 of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In these circumstances, the outcome of the  Article
    8 balancing exercise must fall in the Appellant's favour as  there  can
    be no legal basis or public interest in his deportation and I allow his
    appeal on human rights grounds for that reason alone.

27. The Appellant accepted before the First-tier Tribunal that he could not
    meet either of the exceptions to deportation on the basis of private or
    family life.  However, this is a case where, even if there was a  legal
    basis  for  deportation,  I  would  in  any  event  have  allowed   the
    Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds on the basis  that  there  were
    very compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation for the following reasons.

28. First, as above, the nature of the Appellant's offending was for a very
    brief period and  the  majority  of  which  were  very  minor  offences
    resulting in a fine, or a fine and rehabilitation order;  were  in  the
    context of the Appellant mis-using alcohol following being  the  victim
    of an assault which caused him significant injury and where I find that
    there is a very low risk of reoffending.  The Appellant has been in the
    United Kingdom lawfully since 1998 without any convictions in the first
    18 years and without any further convictions following his release from
    custody in February 2018.  Whilst I am required to give weight  to  the
    public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  pursuant  to
    section 117C(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (even assuming that the Appellant were a persistent offender liable  to
    deportation), the public interest in deporting him  is  relatively  low
    given the nature of his offending and overall circumstances.  The  more
    serious the offence committed,  the  greater  the  public  interest  in
    deportation pursuant to section 117C(2) but conversely, the Appellant's
    offences were very far from the higher end of seriousness  -  they  did
    not involve drugs or violence, and only one  resulted  in  a  custodial
    sentence which was significantly less than the threshold for  automatic
    deportation.

29. Secondly, although the Appellant has no family life established in  the
    United Kingdom and there is a lack of evidence of  significant  private
    life; it is accepted that he has lived in the United  Kingdom  lawfully
    now for over 21 years and during that time has studied and worked  such
    that he has inevitably built up private life during that  period,  with
    social and other contacts.  The Appellant speaks English,  although  it
    seems unlikely that he is financially independent (at  least  that  was
    the finding in mid-2019 by the First-tier Tribunal and there is lack of
    evidence to update the position since then).

30. Thirdly, although the Appellant's circumstances on return to  Mogadishu
    would not breach Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,
    I find that there would, for the reasons already given above,  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration on return there  considering
    the factors set out by the Court of Appeal in  Kamara  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 81.  The  Appellant  left
    Somalia in 1992/93; some 27 or 28 years ago when he was a  young  adult
    and the country was in the grip of civil  war.   He  has  not  had  any
    contact with any family members there  since  2016  and  has  no  other
    connections with the country; nor could he expect any  family  or  clan
    support on return.  Whilst there is no particular reason that he  would
    not be able to obtain accommodation and employment to sustain  himself;
    I do not find that he would be enough of  an  insider  in  all  of  the
    circumstances to be able to reintegrate in society within a  reasonable
    period of time.

31. Overall, whilst the Appellant's side of the  scales  in  the  balancing
    exercise is not heavily weighted, I find that it would be,  in  all  of
    the  circumstances  found,  enough  to  amount   to   very   compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the relatively low level of  public  interest
    in deportation of this Appellant, even if he was a persistent  offender
    liable to deportation in the first place.

Conclusion

32. In accordance with sections 82 and 84 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum  Act  2002,  the  Appellant  can  only  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to revoke his protection status and to refuse his
    protection and human rights  claim  dated  11  September  2018  on  the
    grounds that the removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
    its obligations  to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection; and/or that the removal of the Appellant would be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

33. For the reasons given above, the Appellant's appeal on the  basis  that
    his removal would breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention and its obligations to persons eligible for a  grant
    of humanitarian protection is dismissed.

34. The Appellant's appeal is allowed on the basis that his  removal  would
    breach Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (and
    therefore unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act);  primarily
    because the Respondent has not established  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender to deem his deportation  conducive  to  the  public
    good and in any event, because there are very compelling  circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

35. I have no power to make any directions to the Respondent further to  my
    findings on this  appeal  and  it  is  a  matter  for  her  as  to  the
    appropriate implementation of the decision.  However, I end  by  noting
    that in circumstances where I have found that the  Respondent  has  not
    established the basis  for  deportation  as  the  Appellant  is  not  a
    persistent offender, the concerns raised by the UNHCR as to the reasons
    for  the  Respondent's  review  of  the  Appellant's   Refugee   Status
    (deportation action following a criminal offence) have more significant
    force.  There is nothing to indicate that there  would  have  been  any
    review of the Appellant's Refugee Status in the absence of  a  criminal
    conviction and deportation action being pursued  and  in  circumstances
    where the Appellant can not be deported, there is perhaps a basis  upon
    which the Respondent should  consider  whether  revocation  of  Refugee
    Status remains appropriate, even where the appeal has been dismissed on
    protection grounds.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb found  that  the  making  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  a  material
error of law and as such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
follows:

The appeal against revocation of  refugee  status,  on  asylum  grounds,  is
dismissed.
The appeal on humanitarian protection grounds is dismissed.
The appeal on human rights grounds is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson              Date         27th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

