
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP 00073 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |on 03 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                              THE HON LADY RAE
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               L--- T--- M---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. We make this order because, although we  are  unimpressed  by
       the arguments, the respondent claims  that  he  cannot  be  returned
       safely to Zimbabwe and there is always a risk in cases of this  kind
       that publicity will itself create a threat  to  a  person's  safety.
       Further, although we recognise that there may be a legitimate public
       interest in the reasons for the respondent wanting to remain in  the
       United Kingdom and our findings on how the law applies  to  them  we
       see no strong legitimate public interest in knowing his name.

    2. This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
       decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
       respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", against a  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State on 10 May 2016 to revoke his status as a  refugee
       and a decision dated 23 May 2016 (served on 9 June 2016), to  refuse
       him leave to remain on human rights grounds after deciding  that  he
       is subject to deportation by reason  of  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal said:

  "The appellant's appeal against revocation  of  his  refugee  status  and
  against deportation is allowed

  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."

    4. The  claimant  appealed  the  decisions  on  the  grounds  that  the
       decisions were contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
       the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  under  the  Refugee
       Convention and therefore that by reason of section 33(2) of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007 he was not subject to "automatic deportation" under
       section 32 of that Act.

    5. Lest there be any room for confusion we make it plain that  this  is
       not a case where it is said that the claimant is, by reason  of  his
       bad behaviour or otherwise,  disentitled  to  protection  under  the
       Refugee Convention.  The decision to cease his status was  based  on
       the Secretary of State's view that he no longer needed protection.

    6. We have found the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  hard  to
       follow.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal because  it  was
       satisfied that claimant still needed international protection.   The
       main reasons are given in paragraphs 23, 24 and 25 of the First-tier
       Tribunal's decision and reasons.  We set them out below:

  "23.   The respondent has concluded that the appellant has refugee status
  as he was given leave to enter the UK as the dependant of his father  who
  had been granted refugee status himself.  The respondent  has  sought  to
  establish that the cessation provisions of the Refugee Convention applied
  to the appellant's circumstances.  The respondent wrote to UNHCR inviting
  their response to their intention.  The respondents  indicated  that  the
  country  situation  in  Zimbabwe  had  improved  significantly  and  that
  political violence had decreased as had the general violence.  There were
  MDC strongholds and the appellant could safely return and live in one  of
  the same.

  24.         I find it noteworthy that the respondent did not address  the
  UNHCR concerns in their response letter despite  having  requested  them.
  These concerns are not addressed in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.   I
  find it noteworthy  that  despite  the  appellant's  father  of  his  own
  volition returning to Zimbabwe while a refugee, that when he returned  to
  the UK and this factor  became  known  that  he  was  handed  his  travel
  document back and no action was taken against him  to  seek  to  use  the
  cessation provisions against him.  It  would  appear  perverse  that  the
  respondent would conclude that the appellant's father still faced a well-
  founded fear  of  persecution  upon  return  to  Zimbabwe  but  that  the
  appellant would not.

  25.         The appellant was not granted refugee status under the  Rules
  and so reliance on the provisions in the Rules in  respect  of  cessation
  would appear to be flawed.  Reverting to the UNHCR  issues,  their  views
  were that there  has  not  been  a  fundamental  and  durable  change  in
  Zimbabwe.  The appellant's father was accepted as  having  a  significant
  political profile in Zimbabwe and so despite his actions in returning, he
  states that he suffered problems upon return and  was  advised  to  leave
  immediately by a family member, but the appellant was still to be at risk
  based on imputed political opinion.  In those circumstances  I  find  the
  respondent's attempt to enforce  the  cessation  provisions  against  the
  appellant's refugee status to be wrong in the circumstances.  I find that
  the  appellant  remains  entitled  to  refugee  status  and   allow   the
  appellant's appeal in this respect.  As the appellant remains  a  refugee
  he cannot be deported from the UK.  I  therefore  allow  the  appellant's
  appeal on deportation grounds."

    7. We note that "deportation grounds" are not  one  of  the  permitted,
       statutory, grounds of appeal and so are not a proper reason to allow
       an appeal.

    8. Ms Radford drew our attention to the decision of the Court of Appeal
       in SSHD v Mosira [2017] EWCA Civ 407.  This appears to have been  in
       the judge's mind when he prepared paragraph 25 of the  Decision  and
       Reasons. The case turns on the cessation provisions of article 1C(5)
       of the Refugee Convention and is embodiment in rule 339A of HC  395.
       The  cessation   provisions   operate   (inter   alia)   when   "the
       circumstances in connection with which they have been recognised  as
       a refugee have ceased to exist".  In  this  case  the  claimant  was
       granted refugee status because he was his father's son  and  because
       he was a minor. He is still his father's son  and  his  becoming  an
       adult has not been relied upon as a reason to revoke his status.

    9. Nevertheless we do not find the decision in Mosira helpful.  It  was
       an appeal dealing with the  cessation  of  refugee  status  and  was
       brought at a time when such a decision could be appealed because  it
       was "not in accordance with the law". In Mosira it  was  found  that
       the reasons for revoking refugee status were unlawful.  We  are  not
       concerned with the lawfulness of the reasons  for  revoking  refugee
       status.  We have an appeal against a revocation decision and against
       a refusal to give leave on human rights grounds  and  these  appeals
       can only raise statutory grounds.

   10. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are set  out  in  a
       section headed "Human Rights Decision". It is asserted there that :

  "To remove the appellant from the UK would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8
  ECHR".

   11. Under the section "Revocation  of  Protection  Status  Decision"  it
       says:

  "The appellant's  father  was  an  active  high  profile  member  of  the
  opposition.  The objective evidence relied on by the respondent does  not
  engage with the particular circumstances that feed the appellant's father
  to flee at which point he cannot return today."

   12. Neither of these  are  permissible  grounds  of  appeal.   The  only
       relevant permissible ground of appeal  dealing  with  revocation  of
       refugee status since 20 October 2014 is under Section 84(1)(3)(a) of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and is:  "that  the
       decision to  revoke  the  appellant's  status  breaches  the  United
       Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention".  There  is  a
       similar  ground  of  appeal  dealing  with  people  who  might  need
       humanitarian protection but that is not relevant here. There  is  no
       obligation under the Refugee Convention to reunite families. That is
       something that the United Kingdom choses to do.

   13.  Clearly  a  person  who  risked  persecution  in  his  country   of
       nationality would, prima facie, be able to argue  that  his  refugee
       status  should  not  have  been  revoked  because  he  still  needed
       protection but he could not argue in an appeal that the decision  to
       revoke his status was unlawful. If he wanted to take that  point  he
       could seek judicial review.

   14. The plain fact is the  claimant  is  not  recognised  as  a  refugee
       because the Secretary of State has decided to  withdraw  his  status
       but even if he were a refugee that would  not  necessarily  mean  he
       could not be removed.  The obligation under the  Refugee  Convention
       is  to  offer  international   protection   to   people   who   need
       international protection.  His case before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       is that he is such a person and that is what the First-tier Tribunal
       decided but did not explain. The fact that he was  recognised  as  a
       refugee solely because he was his father's son is  not  relevant  to
       the appeal before us.

   15. At all material times it has been the Secretary of State's case that
       the claimant would not risk persecution in Zimbabwe.

   16. We are satisfied that when considering the appeal against revocation
       it is for the Secretary of State to prove that the claimant does not
       need  protection.  This  follows  a  decision  of  the  Asylum   and
       Immigration Tribunal in  in  RD  (Cessation  -  burden  of  proof  -
       procedure) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 00066. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
       appears to have misdirected himself by saying  that  the  burden  of
       proof is on the claimant (see paragraph 22 of the decision.

   17. Nevertheless the First-tier Tribunal  clearly  recognised  that  the
       Secretary of State took the view that the claimant no longer  needed
       protection  and  clearly  decided  that  the   claimant   did   need
       protection. However we are satisfied that the reasons given for that
       conclusion are so inadequate that they are unlawful.

   18. It follows that we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       that the claimant remains  a  refugee  and  that  the  Secretary  of
       State's appeal should be allowed on that basis.

   19. Paragraph 23  of  the  judge's  Decision  and  Reasons  records  the
       Secretary of State's reasons for deciding that the claimant does not
       need protection. The claimant was told in a letter dated 10 May 2016
       that his refugee status had ceased because his fear  of  persecution
       was no longer  well  founded  because  of  a  fundamental  and  non-
       transitory change in Zimbabwe.

   20. There are two reasons advanced at paragraph 24 for deciding that the
       Secretary of State had not shown that the claimant no longer  needed
       protection.

   21. One alleged reason, namely  that  the  claimant's  father  has  been
       allowed to keep his refugee status, is no reason at all.   The  fact
       that the claimant's father's status has  not  changed  might  prompt
       inquiry but it does no more than raise  a  question  the  answer  to
       which might be illuminating. It is not evidence  that  the  claimant
       still needs protection. There are many reasons why the Secretary  of
       State might not have interfered with  the  father's  refugee  status
       including inertia but even if he still needs protection it does  not
       follow that his son, the claimant, is at risk  throughout  Zimbabwe.
       We do not know the reasons of the  father's  status  continuing  and
       neither did the First-tier Tribunal.

   22. The high point of the judge's reasoning appears to be the acceptance
       of the claimant's father's evidence that the claimant  would  be  at
       risk.  That  is  not  enough.  The  claimant's  father  returned  to
       Zimbabwe for a brief period and  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom.
       Although it is conceivable that he experienced something  then  that
       would illuminate the fate of his son this is not explained.

   23. In fact, in his  statement  dated  2  January  2015  at  P3  in  the
       Respondent's bundle, the claimant's father, MM, stated that  he  had
       been elected as a councillor when he was an MDC  activist,  that  he
       had been arrested and had been shown a "thick file with my  name  on
       it" and the interviewing officer referred to it to identify the name
       of his children. This is evidence that MM believed that the claimant
       would be at  risk  because  of  MM's  profile.  That  might  be  his
       subjective view but it does not explain why the claimant would be at
       risk throughout Zimbabwe.

   24. We do not agree that the opinion of UNHCR in  this  case  is  strong
       evidence that the appellant remains a refugee.  Much of  the  letter
       is concerned with whether the claimant is disqualified from  refugee
       protection but that is not an issue in this case. The letter  refers
       to continuing examples of persecution of opponents of the government
       and/or ZANU-PF and cautioned the Secretary of State to be  satisfied
       that the claimant could be excepted to turn to  the  authorities  in
       Zimbabwe for protection.

   25. The UNHCR letter did  not  say  that  the  claimant  should  not  be
       returned.

   26. It is clear from that letter that the claimant told  UNHCR  that  he
       had not been active politically when he was a child in  Zimbabwe  or
       in the United Kingdom. His professed fear was based on his being his
       father's son.

   27. Ms Radford had produced a Rule 24 notice.  With respect we  find  it
       difficult to distil from Ms Radford's Rule 24 notice the  First-tier
       Tribunal's reasons  for  finding  that  the  claimant  was  still  a
       refugee.  In her oral submissions she said it was for the  Secretary
       of State to show there had been changes and the judge  was  entitled
       to be less than persuaded by  that  evidence.   We  agree  that  the
       burden is on the Secretary of State to show that the  claimant  does
       not face a real risk of persecution but  the  judge  has  not  given
       proper reasons for reaching that  conclusion  in  the  Decision  and
       Reasons.

   28. Taken at its very highest the First-tier Tribunal Judge  might  have
       decided, permissibly, that the  claimant's  father's  evidence  show
       that the claimant cannot return to the home area.  The decision does
       not begin to deal with the  possibility  of  relocation  to  an  MDC
       stronghold area which is what the Secretary of State contemplated.

   29. Although Ms Radford did all that could be expected we do not  accept
       that the decision that the claimant cannot relocate is right in law.
        The explanation is inadequate.

   30. We therefore set aside the decision allowing the appeal against  the
       revocation of refugee status.

   31. There is very little consideration of the  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

   32. The applicant cannot satisfy the requirements of the  Rules  because
       he is the subject of a deportation order and therefore excluded by S-
       LTR.1.2.

   33. As this is an appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  against  a  person
       subject to deportation we are obliged to consider  Part  5A  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   This  claimant  is
       someone who has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  one
       year or more but not four years or more.  It follows that the public
       interest is in his  deportation  unless  certain  exceptions  apply.
       Exception 2 applies where there are relationships with a  qualifying
       partner or parent and neither is  alleged  here.  It  cannot  apply.
       Exception 1 applies where the claimant has been lawfully resident in
       the United Kingdom  for  most  of  his  life  and  is  socially  and
       culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and  "there  would  be
       very significant obstacles" to that person's  integration  into  the
       country to which he would be deported.

   34. The claimant was born in October 1993. He will be 25 years old  this
       year. He entered the United Kingdom in May  2007.  He  was  then  13
       years old He does not qualify for consideration  under  exception  1
       because he has not lived over half his life in the United Kingdom.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  said  "I  consider  that  whilst  the
       appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of section 117C  Part  5A,
       that nonetheless his case  exhibits  very  compelling  circumstances
       such a(sic) deportation  would  be  disproportionate  under  Article
       8(2)." In other words that Judge found that the claimant's appeal on
       human rights  grounds  could  not  succeed  under  Part  5A  of  the
       Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but he went on to  allow
       the appeal. In the absence of a full explanation identifying  lawful
       reasons this is clearly  wrong  and  we  set  aside  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal on "human rights grounds".

   36. We see no need for a further hearing to remedy these errors.

   37. In so far  as  the  appeal  concerns  the  decision  to  revoke  the
       claimant's refugee status we accept that the claimant's father is  a
       refugee, that he was an MDC councillor and that he was told by state
       interrogators that they knew the names of  his  family  members.  We
       accept to that following a brief (and possibly ill considered) brief
       visit to Zimbabwe he remained concerned for his family.

   38. We direct ourselves that he burden is on the Secretary of  State  to
       show that  the  decision  to  revoke  does  not  breach  the  United
       Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention. This means  that
       the Secretary of State must show that  there  is  no  real  risk  of
       persecution  in  a  part  of  Zimbabwe  where  the  claimant   could
       reasonably be expected to live.

   39. The claimant might be at risk for his perceived  political  opinions
       and he might be at risk as a member of a  particular  social  group,
       namely member of his father's family. Given the claimant's  father's
       concerns, which might be justified objectively,  we  do  not  accept
       that the Secretary of State has shown that there is no relevant risk
       in the part of Zimbabwe where he lived as a child.

   40. It has never been the Secretary  of  State's  expectation  that  the
       claimant would return there to live.

   41. The Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the  Country  Information  and
       Guidance  Note-Zimbabwe:  Political  Opposition  to  Zanu-PF   dated
       October 2014. This recognised an improving situation  and  concluded
       that there is no risk of a failed asylum seeker with no  significant
       profile being required to show loyalty to the  government,  even  in
       the more "Zanu-PF" leaning poorer areas of Harare.

   42. Few people will  know  about  his  father's  profile.  There  is  no
       evidence that the state authorities throughout Zimbabwe might assume
       that this claimant is an MDC supporter or would otherwise  ill-treat
       him on return.

   43. We have reminded ourselves of the points raised by UNHCR.

   44. We agree that we must approach  the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
       claimant's  father  was  severely  ill  treated  and   still   needs
       protection. We note that UNHCR does not draw our  attention  to  any
       evidence that the claimant  would  be  at  risk  now  on  return  to
       Zimbabwe or that he could not establish himself in a  safe  part  of
       the country.

   45. We have considered  the  country  information  and  policy  note  on
       Zimbabwe dated January 2017.  Regrettably there are  still  credible
       reports of people being harassed and marginalised because  of  their
       membership of the MDC.  This is not to say that a person would be at
       risk of persecution simply by reason of being a member  of  the  MDC
       but there would be a real risk of  that  person's  allegiance  being
       noted  and  that  possibly  leading  to  difficulties   that   would
       ordinarily be rather less than persecutory. However we have not been
       able to find any evidence to suggest  that  the  family  members  of
       people who previously have been persecuted for MDC activities are at
       risk throughout the country.  The necessary  evidence  is  just  not
       before us. There is not, for example, any reason to fear that if the
       claimant was stopped on his return and if his relationship with  his
       rather was noted, that this would lead to a real risk of persecution
       by the authorities on arrival. We suspect that is because  there  is
       no such evidence because people like the claimant are not at risk of
       persecution now.

   46. Neither is there any reason  to  fear  ill  treatment  amounting  to
       persecution by government  supporters  throughout  Zimbabwe.  Whilst
       that might be a risk in parts of the country there is no  persuasive
       evidence that it might be a risk in MDC dominated areas.

   47. We are quite satisfied that the Secretary of State has  proved  that
       the claimant is not a refugee.

   48. Given the clear requirements of section 117C  we  must  dismiss  the
       appeal on human rights grounds.

   49. There are facts that might assist him if he was able to rely on  the
       statutory exceptions.

   50. Here we remind ourselves of the requirements of  paragraph  117B  of
       the 2002 Act.  This reminds us that  the  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control is in the public interest  but  also  identifies
       factors that might help this appellant.  The claimant speaks English
       and that is significant.  We accept that he would be able to work if
       that were permissible.  He  has  shown  himself  willing  to  commit
       criminal offences but he is not idle and we understand  has  studied
       to degree level.  He does not rely on close  personal  relationships
       and his private life cannot be given  much  weight  because  of  its
       precarious nature.

   51. We agree with the Secretary of State that he would  have  advantages
       in Zimbabwe.  His education and knowledge of English must  help  him
       get work although we do not for a moment suggest that it will be  an
       easy task.  Zimbabwe remains a difficult country emerging  from  the
       financial disaster associated with the  Mugabe  years.   Life  there
       will not be easy but we do not accept  he  could  not  cope  at  all
       unless he remains a refugee.

   52. We acknowledge the evidence that he has learned from his experiences
       in prison.  The learning is imperfect because he has been in trouble
       for drinking too much although we accept  that  is  a  significantly
       less serious offence than the matters that have got him into trouble
       but it does not show  that  the  claimant  is  someone  who  is  now
       completely at ease with himself in the United Kingdom.  However  the
       detrimental effect of the further conviction  is  extremely  modest.
       His difficulty is not that he has committed a further offence.   His
       difficulty is that he is a foreign criminal  who  has  committed  an
       offence of robbery which has led to his being sent to prison.

   53. This offence is now rather old.

   54. We find it undesirable that  the  Secretary  of  State  allowed  the
       claimant (or any  other  prisoner  likely  to  be  deported)  to  be
       released  without  a  clear  warning  that  deportation  was   being
       considered but that is not a reason to allow the appeal.

   55. However the main cause of the delay has been the claimant exercising
       rights of appeal.  He is perfectly entitled to do that but it is not
       a case of  the  Secretary  of  State  going  to  sleep  and  somehow
       acquiescing in delay with the result  that  there  is  a  basis  for
       saying the public interest has  diminished  and  the  need  to  take
       appeals seriously and give  then  proper  consideration  should  not
       lightly be elevated into  a  reason  for  remaining  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   56. It will be recognised that the appellant's  deportation  will  be  a
       significant blow to him as he struggles to establish  himself  in  a
       difficult country of which he has only childhood memories and a blow
       to his family who would like him to remain  with  them.   We  remind
       ourselves that deportation is a  savage  sanction.   It  does  break
       relationships and does make it very difficult for a foreign criminal
       but Parliament has decided that, subject to certain exceptions,  the
       public interest requires the deportation of  foreign  criminals  who
       have served more than a year in prison. The alternative is that  the
       person is treated as he is in fact a British citizen and he  is  not
       and probably could not be because of his criminality.

   57. We find that the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to say removal
       pursuant to a deportation order was a disproportionate  interference
       with his private and family life.  Rather it is plainly a normal and
       consequent interference.

   58. It follows that we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       and substitute a decision dismissing the appeal against the decision
       of the Secretary of State.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 September 2018              |



