

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00132/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 28th September 2018                        |On 8th November 2018         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     MS

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Royston     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni      (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which it made on  17 July 2017
following a hearing of 26 May 2017; whereupon it dismissed his appeal from
a decision of the Secretary of State, of 16 September 2016, to deport him.


2.    For the reasons which I have set out below, I have concluded that  the
decision of the tribunal involved the making of material errors of  law  and
that, accordingly, that decision shall be set aside  (see  section 12(2)(a)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).  I have also decided to
remit the case to the tribunal for reconsideration (section 12(2)(b)(i)).

3.    The tribunal decided to make an anonymity direction  with  respect  to
the claimant.  I have decided to continue the  grant  of  anonymity  because
the claimant asserts (rightly or wrongly may have to be decided  in  future)
that he would be at  risk  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to  Zimbabwe  and
identifying him in a public document might (I do not say will)  enhance  any
such risk if there is any.

4.    Shorn of all but the essentials, the background circumstances  are  as
follows:  the claimant is  a  national  of  Zimbabwe  and  he  was  born  on
24 March 1989.  As I understand it his family lived in Lobengula West which
I think is either close to or a part of Bulawayo (see paragraph 16  of  the
determination of Adjudicator Pugh (as she then was)  which  promulgated  on
7 August 2002).  On 12 March 2002, whilst he was still a child, his mother
arrived in the United Kingdom (UK) and claimed asylum, stating that she was
at risk because of her support for and involvement  with  the  Movement  for
Democratic Change (MDC).  Although her claim was initially refused that  was
overturned  on  appeal  (the  decision   of   Adjudicator Pugh)   and   on
13 September 2002 she was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK as a
refugee.  The claimant applied to come to  the  UK  for  settlement  as  the
child of a refugee, seeking to bring himself within the terms of  rule 352D
of the Immigration Rules.  That application was successful and  he  entered
on 21 February 2004.  He went on to commit criminal offences culminating in
an offence of robbery in respect of which he received a  sentence  of  eight
years imprisonment on 28 September 2012.  He unsuccessfully  attempted  to
appeal the length of his sentence.

5.    The Secretary of State communicated with the claimant  concerning  his
conviction for  robbery  and  the  relevance  that  conviction  had  to  his
immigration status.  On 19 November 2012 he was informed, in writing, that
he was liable to  what  is  known  as  "automatic  deportation".   His  then
representatives wrote to the Home Office stating why it was  considered  he
should not be deported.   Eventually,  the  claimant  was  sent  a  document
(which is in the form of a letter) headed "Notice of Decision"  and  bearing
a further heading "Decision to Deport, Cessation of Refugee Status,  and  to
Refuse Human Rights Claim" which is dated 16 August 2016. I  pause  here  to
observe that the Secretary of State has, throughout, proceeded on the  basis
that the claimant is in fact, in consequence of the basis upon which he  was
permitted to enter and remain in  the  UK,  a  refugee  himself.   That  was
something which was raised by the tribunal but the Secretary  of  State  did
not change his stance. I say no more about it.  A  part  of  the  letter  of
16 August 2016 was given over to an explanation as to why the Secretary of
State had concluded that the claimant's refugee  status  had  "ceased".   It
was said that the circumstances in connection with which  the  claimant  had
been recognised as a refugee had ceased to  exist  such  that  he  could  no
longer continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the  country
of his nationality.  Thus, and on that basis, the Secretary  of  State  said
it had been decided to revoke his  grant  of  asylum.   In  connection  with
that,  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon   paragraph 339A   of   the
Immigration Rules and, in particular,  339A(v).   The  provisions  in  that
Immigration Rule mirror those within Article 1C(5)  of  the  1951 Refugee
Convention.  (I shall, from now on, call this  the  "cessation  aspect").  A
part of the letter was given over to explaining why the Secretary  of  State
was also revoking refugee status in consequence of the claimant's  offending
and what could be concluded from it.  Here, the Secretary of  State  had  in
mind Article 33 of the 1951 Refugee Convention which lays  down  a  general
rule that a refugee should not be returned to a place where he would  be  at
risk on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
particular social group or political opinion but  says  that  amongst  other
things that such protection cannot be claimed by a refugee who, having  been
convicted by a final judgment of a particular serious crime,  constitutes  a
danger to the community of the country where he  seeks  or  has  been  given
refugee status. That provision is reflected in rule 339A(ix) and (x) of the
Immigration  Rules.   Also  relevant  is  section 72  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  (I  shall  from  now  on  call  this  the
"revocation aspect").

6.    The significance of the above was that, according to the Secretary  of
State, the claimant was no longer  able  to  claim  the  protection  of  the
Refugee Convention in seeking to resist deportation.  So, that is  why  the
Secretary of State went on to make the deportation  order  of  16  September
2016 referred to above.

7.    As already indicated, the claimant's appeal to the tribunal was  heard
on 26 May 2017.  Essentially, he argued that  he  could  not  be  deported
because  he  remained  a  refugee.   The  tribunal  did  not   accept   that
contention.  As to the cessation aspect, it decided that there  had  been  a
significant change in Zimbabwe  such  that  the  basis  upon  which  refugee
status had been  granted  no  longer  existed.   It  linked  the  claimant's
immigration status to that of his mother (the person who had  actually  been
granted asylum) and noted that she had succeeded on the basis  that  it  had
been  accepted,  at  the  material  time,  that  even  very  low-level   MDC
supporters were likely to be at risk (see paragraph 85  of  the  tribunal's
written reasons of 17 July 2017).  But the tribunal, in explaining why  it
thought  there  had  been,  as  it  put  it,  "a   significant   change   in
circumstances in Zimbabwe"  (see  paragraph 97  of  the  written  reasons),
thought it important that immediately after his  mother  had  fled  Zimbabwe
the claimant and his father had remained there; that there was  no  evidence
that either had suffered harm in consequence of doing so; that the  claimant
had returned to Zimbabwe in 2012 for a funeral and that whilst he had  faced
some aggression from airport staff  and had then had to pay money  in  order
to pass through road blocks nothing worse  had  occurred  even  on  his  own
account; and that any  ill-treatment  he  had  received  did  not  pass  the
discrimination threshold.  The tribunal concluded by saying of the above:

      "     99.  That seemed to  me  to  be  compelling  evidence  that  the
      appellant would not be at risk of persecution or serious harm  in  the
      event that he  will  return  to  Zimbabwe.   He  therefore  no  longer
      requires protection."

8.    As to the revocation aspect, the tribunal spent some time  noting  the
claimant's offending history and the evidence  concerning  the  question  of
whether or not he posed a risk to the UK community.  It  noted  the  judge's
sentencing remarks which made the seriousness of  the  claimant's  offending
undeniably clear.  It noted the content of an  OASys  assessment  which  had
recorded him as posing a "low risk in  community"  and  contained  the  view
that he posed a low risk of causing serious harm.   It  noted  that  he  had
become "an enhanced prisoner" during  his  time  in  custody,  that  he  had
gained some qualifications whilst in custody and that between  the  date  of
his release and his appearance before the tribunal (some nine months)  there
had been no further offending.  But the tribunal had its concerns  and  said
this:

      "     131. The appellant has a good record whilst in prison and  there
      are many positive features highlighted in the OASys report.   However,
      in that report, there was reference to the need for a proven period in
      the community.  The appellant has been on bail for approximately  nine
      months and there is no suggestion of any further offending.   However,
      I do find it troubling that he attempts to distance himself  from  the
      offence and minimise his involvement which is not consistent with  the
      sentence he received.  That sentence was a long one which reflects the
      seriousness of the offence and which means  that  the  appellant  must
      produce significant evidence if he is to remit the presumption.  I  am
      not satisfied that such evidence has been produced."

9.    The minimisation aspect was probably a  reference  to  the  claimant's
assertions, as noted at paragraph 111 of the written reasons,  that  he  had
believed he and his accomplice were  only  going  to  the  house  where  the
offence took place in order to purchase cannabis  and  had  not  anticipated
his accomplice would instigate a robbery. So,  the  tribunal  decided  that,
since the claimant had received a sentence of at least two years (of  course
well in excess of that) and since he remained a risk to  the  community,  he
fell within the terms of Article 33(2) and section 72(2) of the  2002 Act
such that he no longer had the protection of the Refugee Convention.

10.   The rest of the  tribunal's  written  reasons  was  given  over  to  a
consideration  as  to  whether  there  was   entitlement   to   humanitarian
protection or protection on human rights grounds  under  Article 3  of  the
European Convention on Human  Rights  (ECHR),  with  a  negative  conclusion
(from the claimant's perspective) as to each, and a  consideration,  with  a
similarly negative result, as to whether or not the  claimant  was  able  to
rely upon the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR, as  incorporated  within
the Immigration Rules which relate to  deportation,  for  the  purposes  of
resisting such deportation.  So, the claimant's appeal was dismissed.

11.   That was not the end of the matter because the claimant,  through  his
representatives, sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper Tribunal.   The
written  grounds  advanced  were  refreshingly  concise.   There  were  four
grounds.  The first two related to what I have called the cessation  aspect.
 The remainder  related  to  what  I  have  called  the  revocation  aspect.
Ground 1 was effectively a contention that the tribunal had not  considered
whether  any  change  to  country  conditions  in  Zimbabwe  was  "durable".
Ground 2 was a contention that the tribunal had given irrational weight  to
the claimant's own experiences in Zimbabwe, and that of his relatives,  when
considering whether there had been any change in country conditions such  as
to justify the cessation of refugee status.  Ground 3 was a contention that
the tribunal had misdirected itself when  stating  that  only  "significant"
evidence could be relied  upon  under  section 72(6)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to rebut the statutory  presumption  as  to
danger to the community.  Ground 4 was a contention that the  tribunal  had
inadequately reasoned out its conclusion that, in the face  of  all  of  the
evidence some  of  which  was  favourable  to  the  claimant,  the  claimant
continued to constitute a danger to the  community.   Permission  to  appeal
was originally refused by a  Judge  of  the  First tier Tribunal  but,  as
indicated above, it was granted by a  Judge  of  the  Upper Tribunal.   The
grant was not limited though it is fair  to  say  that  the  granting  judge
appeared to favour the latter two grounds over the first two.

12.   Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided whether the tribunal
had erred in law and, if so, what should  flow  from  that.   Representation
was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to  each  representative.   As  I
indicated to the parties at the end of the hearing, I  have  concluded  that
the tribunal, despite its very thorough evaluation of  the  evidence  before
it and the legal provisions which it had to consider, did err  in  law  such
that its decision has to be set  aside.   Having  heard  the  views  of  the
parties as to disposal, I have also decided to remit for reconsideration  (a
rehearing).  I shall now explain why.

13.   I shall start, logically I suppose, with Ground 1.   The  real  point
here, as argued by Mr Royston before me, amounts to a contention  that  the
tribunal only considered whether the change in country  conditions  Zimbabwe
was significant rather  than  whether  it  was  both  significant  and  non-
temporary my underlining).  Article 1C(5) of the  1951 Refugee Convention
indicates that both are required.  The tribunal was aware of the content  of
Article 1C(5) and that what was required was a consideration as to both, as
is apparent from what it had to say at paragraph 82 of its written reasons.
 But Mr Royston says, in effect, that it lost sight of that at paragraph 97
of its written reasons when it simply  said  that  it  was  "satisfied  that
there has been a significant change in the circumstances  in  Zimbabwe"  and
then went on to explain why  it  thought  that  was  so.   But  the  written
reasons do have to be read as a whole and, in my judgment, the tribunal  did
enough to demonstrate that it was aware of the true and full nature  of  the
test it was required to apply.  So, I have concluded that that ground,  when
taken in isolation, is not made out.  However,  it  does  connect,  to  some
extent, with Ground 2 which relates to the matter of weight  given  by  the
tribunal to the claimant  and  his  relatives  experiences  in  Zimbabwe  as
highlighted above.

14.     Generally speaking, of course, it is a matter for  the  tribunal  to
decide what weight it should give to particular components of  the  evidence
which is before it.  I approach matters from that starting  point.   But  it
is apparent from the way  the  written  reasons  are  structured,  that  the
tribunal was effectively deciding the question of  whether  there  had  been
substantial and durable change largely if not wholly on the basis  of  those
experiences. It is true that the tribunal carried out a  careful  assessment
as to changes that there had been in Zimbabwe since  the  claimant's  mother
had come to the UK as reflected, perhaps  most  notably,  in  the  important
Country Guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in CM (EM Country Guidance:
 Disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59  (IAC)  and  in  other  background
country material to which it referred.  But having gone through all of  that
it did  not  draw  any  conclusions  from  it,  at  least  with  respect  to
durability of change,  and  its  conclusion  with  respect  to  "significant
change" was not actually explained or reasoned.  In  the  circumstances  and
in light of  the  Country Guidance  decision  and  the  background  country
material to which it referred, it might well have been permissible for  only
a brief explanation to have been given but, in my judgment, there had to  be
something.  So, the conclusions regarding that significant  change  (if  one
was reached) and regarding durable change  rested  almost  exclusively  upon
the lack  of  difficulties  amounting  to  persecution  experienced  by  the
claimant and his family in the immediate times after his  mother  had  left,
the brief visit into Zimbabwe made by the claimant in 2012 and  visits  made
by his siblings in 2015.  I am not sure whether Mr Royston was going so far
as to suggest that those experiences were  entirely  irrelevant.   If  so  I
would disagree.  It does seem to  me  that  such  experiences,  particularly
those concerning later visits to Zimbabwe, can have relevance but  they  are
far from being determinative.  In my judgment that evidence was, of  itself,
insufficiently strong to wholly bear the conclusions which the tribunal  had
reached concerning either significant change or durability.  So,  in  effect
I suppose, I am concluding that a combination of  Ground 1  and  Ground 2,
when taken together, is made  out  such  that  the  tribunal  did  err  with
respect to its consideration of the cessation issue.

15.   As to Ground 3, the complaint relates to what the tribunal had to say
at paragraph 131 of  its  written  reasons  when  it  was  considering  the
question of whether or not the  claimant  had  succeeded  in  rebutting  the
presumption which followed  from  his  conviction  and  the  length  of  his
sentence, regarding  the  question  of  whether  he  was  a  danger  to  the
community section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
Having noted certain matters which weighed in his favour the  tribunal  then
expressed the view, as already noted, that it  was  troubling  that  he  had
sought to minimise his involvement.  It then observed that the sentence  was
a long one which reflected the seriousness of the offence  and  which  meant
that the claimant had to "produce significant evidence if  he  is  to  rebut
the presumption" (my underlining).  Mr Royston  argues  that  that  is,  in
fact, putting "a gloss" upon the test  which  has  to  be  applied.   I  can
certainly see what Mr Royston is getting at.  Really, there simply  has  to
be enough evidence to rebut  the  presumption.   But  I  think  perhaps  the
ground owes something to over-analyses.  All that the  tribunal  was  really
seeking to say in context,  in  my  view,  was  that  trivial,  trifling  or
unpersuasive evidence would not do.  I  do  not  think  it  was  seeking  to
elevate the strength or quality  of  the  evidence  required  to  rebut  the
presumption and I do  not  think  it  was  really  doing  anything,  despite
perhaps very slight loose wording, other than to ask  itself  whether  there
was enough evidence to rebut the presumption in this case.  So, I  have  not
found that ground to be persuasive but I understand why it was raised.

16.   As to Ground 4, again this involves what the tribunal had to  say  at
paragraph 131 of the written reasons.  But prior to  that,  as  noted,  the
tribunal had set out certain evidence which it  was  reasonable  to  suppose
might, at least from one view, assist the claimant in demonstrating that  he
might not still constitute a danger to the community.   As  I  have  already
drawn attention to, there was a relevant  OASys  report,  the  claimant  had
obtained enhanced prisoner  status,  he  had  obtained  some  qualifications
whilst in prison and he had not offended  having  been  released.   None  of
that necessarily meant that he did not  still  represent  a  danger  to  the
community at all.  But it was evidence capable of suggesting that  he  might
not.  In my judgment, against that background, in order to comply  with  the
requirement to provide adequate reasons, the tribunal was  required  to  say
more than it did as to why, despite that evidence, it  was  concluding  that
he did remain a danger to the community.  The tribunal's view (which may  be
correct) that the claimant had sought to minimise his degree of  involvement
in the offence was not sufficient of itself to  bear  that  conclusion  and,
therefore, something further by way of  explanation  was  required.   So,  I
conclude that Ground 4 is made out.

17.   It was the above which  underpinned  my  decision  to  set  aside  the
tribunal's decision.  As to remittal, that was the course  of  action  urged
upon me by both representatives.  Another option would have been for  me  to
retain the case in the Upper Tribunal and to direct a  further  hearing  in
that forum.  But I have attached weight to the views of each  representative
and concluded that, since  I  am  setting  aside  the  tribunal's  decision,
starting afresh is the better course  and  that  can  best  be  achieved  by
remittal.  So, the appeal will be reheard afresh by the tribunal.

18.   Prior to setting out some brief directions  for  the  rehearing  (they
are brief because I do not wish to unnecessarily tread on the  toes  of  the
First-tier Tribunal) I would wish to offer a few  non-binding  observations
which may assist the tribunal when it comes to consider the  appeal  by  way
of a rehearing.

19.   The starting point for the tribunal will  be  the  claimant's  current
possession of refugee status.  Unless that status  is,  in  some  way,  lost
then he cannot be deported.  So, if the Secretary of State  is  to  succeed,
he must demonstrate that either one or other of the  bases  he  relies  upon
for effectively depriving the claimant of his refugee  status  applies.   If
the Secretary of State succeeds on what I have called the  cessation  aspect
and if the claimant cannot otherwise demonstrate risk of  persecution,  risk
of serious harm  such  as  to  give  rise  to  entitlement  to  humanitarian
protection or risk of Article 3 ECHR  ill-treatment,  then  the  case  will
effectively translate into an ordinary deportation one  with  matters  being
considered under the Immigration Rules  with  respect  to  deportation  and
Article 8 of the ECHR. If, however, the Secretary of State does not succeed
on the cessation issue  but  does  succeed  on  the  revocation  issue  with
reference to Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, then he will not be a
refugee but it will  still  have  to  be  considered  whether  there  would,
otherwise,  be  risk  consequent  upon  his  return  in   the   context   of
humanitarian protection (though it may be argued his offending  would  cause
him to lose entitlement to such a ground too) and Article 3  of  the  ECHR.
If he cannot show such risk, then again matters would have to be  considered
under ordinary deportation/Article 8 grounds.  At least that is how  I  see
it.  But I do not intend to be prescriptive and the tribunal  might  see  it
differently.



Directions for the rehearing

      A.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside,
           there will be a rehearing of the  appeal  before  a  differently
           constituted First-tier Tribunal.  That rehearing shall take the
           form of an oral hearing.

      B.    The  rehearing  shall  take  place  at  the  Birmingham  Hearing
           Centre, that location being the most suitable for the  claimant.



      C.    Matters such as the time estimate for the  hearing,  interpreter
           needs  and  any  related  issues  shall  be   for   the   First-
           tier Tribunal.

      D.    These directions may be supplemented or amended at any  time  by
           any salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the Immigration
           and Asylum Chamber.

Decision

The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.   The  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The case is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for reconsideration by a differently constituted tribunal.


Signed:                Date: 1 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

The claimant was previously granted anonymity by  the  First-tier Tribunal.
I continue that grant  under  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.  This  applies  both  to  the  claimant  and  to  the
respondent.  No report of these proceedings shall identify the  claimant  or
any member of his family.  Failure to  comply  may  result  in  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:                Dated: 1 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                Date: 1 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
