
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00047/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 18 December 2018           |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                patience [c]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an extempore decision given at the end of the hearing.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E M
    M Smith issued on 20 August 2018.  The decision of Judge Smith  allowed
    the appeal of Ms [C] against a decision dated 11  March  2018  revoking
    her refugee status and seeking to deport her.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 10  September
    2018 by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. For the purposes of the hearing and this decision it is  convenient  to
    refer to Ms [C] as "the appellant" and the Secretary of State  as  "the
    respondent" reflecting their positions before the First-tier  Tribunal.



 5. The background to the matter is that, having come to the UK in 2002, Ms
    [C] was  granted  refugee  status  following  a  successful  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal in 2009.  An application in 2014 for  indefinite  leave
    to remain after 5 years' leave as a refugee was not granted but Ms  [C]
    was granted further discretionary leave until 21 April 2018.

 6. However, alongside that immigration history, Ms [C]  was  convicted  of
    two criminal offences. The first was in  2011  for  use  of  fraudulent
    documents for which she  received  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  8
    months.  The more serious matter and what can be  referred  to  as  the
    index offence was for dangerous driving for which she was convicted  on
    10 May 2016 and on 24 May 2016 sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.

 7. For the purposes of this decision it is not necessary to  go  into  the
    details of the index offence and the personal  consequences,  both  for
    the victim of the road accident and for Ms [C] and her family. What  is
    relevant is that the index offence gave the Secretary of State cause to
    look at her refugee status and in the decision  of  11  March  2018  to
    revoke that status and make a decision to deport Ms [C].

 8. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal required, firstly, a decision
    on whether the revocation of refugee status  was  correct  in  law  and
    then, if it was not, whether the decision to deport  could  stand.  The
    First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal, finding that  the  decision  to
    revoke  refugee  status  was  not  correct  and  that,  as  a   result,
    deportation was not lawful.

 9. The Secretary of State's ground of challenge is  straightforward.   The
    argument is that when finding that refugee status should not have  been
    revoked, the judge applied the wrong legal test, failing to follow  the
    guidance of the Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994.

10. In MA, the Court of Appeal interpreted the findings  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in the joint  cases  of  Aydin  Salahadin
    Abdulla, Kamil Hasan, Ahmed Adem, Hamrin Mosa  Rashi  &  Dier  Jamal  v
    Bundesrepublik Deutschland C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08, C0179/08 which
    we refer to as "Abdulla".

11. In paragraph 2 of MA the Court of Appeal set  out  its  conclusion,  in
    light of Abdulla, that:

         "A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision determining
         refugee status.  By that I mean that the grounds  of  cessation  do
         not go beyond verifying  whether  the  grounds  of  recognition  of
         refugee status continues to exist, the relevant question is whether
         there  has  been  a  significant  and   non-temporary   change   in
         circumstances so that the circumstances which caused the person  to
         be a refugee have ceased to apply and there is no  other  basis  on
         which she would be held to be a  refugee.   The  recognising  state
         does not in addition have to  be  satisfied  that  the  country  of
         origin has a system of Government or an effective legal system  for
         protecting basic human rights, though the absence of  such  systems
         may have caused the lead to the conclusion that a  significant  and
         non-temporary change in circumstances has not occurred.

12. That was the test that had to be applied  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    here. Nothing in the decision shows that the correct test  set  out  in
    Abdulla and approved in MA, was applied in form or substance.   On  the
    contrary, in paragraph 32 the judge says, "I must  assess  whether  the
    revocation of the appellant's status is conducive to the public  good".
    That was clearly the wrong legal test for assessing  whether  Ms  [C]'s
    refugee status should be revoked. The judge sets out the same incorrect
    approach in paragraph 36 of the decision:

         "I do not regard this appellant as a danger to the security or  the
         interests of the UK by the commission of  these  two  offences  and
         therefore I do not accept upon the basis of these convictions it is
         conducive to the public interest to revoke of her refugee  status".



13. In our view, this was a clear and material misdirection  of  law  on  a
    material matter,  whether  the  appellant's  refugee  status  could  be
    revoked and, in turn, whether she could be deported. That error of  law
    is such that the decision must be set aside to be re-made  afresh.  All
    issues are at large, including fact finding, and this  is  therefore  a
    case where remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  appropriate
    disposal.

Decision

14. The decision of First-tier Tribunal discloses a  material  error  on  a
    point of law and is set aside to be re-made.

15. The appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  11   December
    2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
