
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
RP/00104/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2019                           |On 30 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     ms
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269)  I  continue  the  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no  report
of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  original  appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. This decision is a remaking of the appeal of  MS  brought  against  the
    respondent's decisions of 4 and 10 August 2016 to  revoke  his  refugee
    status and to refuse his Article 3 and  Article  8  ECHR  human  rights
    claim.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department as  the  respondent  and  to  MS  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1990.   He
    came to the UK on 28 November 2008 and claimed  asylum  on  1  December
    2008.  His application was refused by  the  respondent  in  a  decision
    dated 12 November 2009.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he was the son of  a
    Hizb-e-Islami commander who was shot and killed by the Afghan  military
    forces, and who refused to join the Taliban when they asked him to join
    them to avenge his father's death.  The appellant maintained a fear  of
    both the Taliban and the Afghan authorities.  The  respondent  did  not
    find the appellant's claim to be at risk from  the  Afghan  authorities
    and the Taliban to be credible.

 5. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal also did not find the appellant's account of a threat from the
    Taliban or the Afghan authorities  to  be  credible.  However,  it  was
    accepted that his father had been killed in a  violent  incident  which
    the appellant had witnessed. Further,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that as the appellant was a minor, he was  a  member  of  a  particular
    social  group  and  following  the   case   of   LQ   (Age:   Immutable
    Characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 0005, concluded that he was at
    risk on return on that basis.

 6. Having been successful in his appeal, the appellant was  granted  leave
    to remain as a refugee on 17 February  2010,  valid  until  27  January
    2015.

 7. On 7 January 2015 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    (ILR).  On 4 August 2016 the respondent refused  that  application,  in
    addition revoking the appellant's refugee status and on 10 August  2016
    refusing his human rights claim.

 8. In the decision of 4 August  2016,  revoking  the  appellant's  refugee
    status, the respondent applied Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Convention and
    paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules.   The  respondent  found  that
    there  had  been  a  significant  and  non-temporary  change   in   the
    appellant's personal circumstances, specifically that he  was  by  that
    time age over 18 and no longer a minor.  It was not accepted  that,  as
    an adult, the appellant would be at any risk on return to  Afghanistan.



 9. In the decision refusing the appellant's human rights  claim  dated  10
    August 2016, the respondent noted that the appellant had no family life
    in the UK for the purposes of  Article  8  ECHR  and,  as  regards  his
    private life claim, concluded that he could not show  that  there  were
    very significant obstacles to re-integration  in  Afghanistan  or  that
    there were exceptional circumstances that  could  justify  a  grant  of
    leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

10. The appellant appealed against the decisions of 4 August  2016  and  10
    August 2016.  His appeal was initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid who allowed the appeal in  a  decision  dated  13  February
    2017.  That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in a  decision
    dated 20 March 2018.

11. The appeal was then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de
    novo.  It came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on  16  August
    2018.  Judge Frankish accepted only that  the  appellant's  father  had
    been killed in a violent incident which the  appellant  had  witnessed.
    She also found that the appellant  had  been  sent  to  the  UK  as  an
    economic migrant rather than there being an ongoing  risk  from  either
    the Taliban or the  Afghan  authorities.   The  appellant's  protection
    claim was refused.

12. Judge Frankish went on to  consider  the  appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    claim.  She  found  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration  in  Kabul  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    uneducated and would find  it  difficult  to  find  employment  without
    family or tribal connections.  The appeal was allowed under  Article  8
    ECHR.

13. The First-tier Tribunal also concluded that, in reality, the  appellant
    would leave Kabul to join his family in Peshawar in Pakistan  where  he
    would be in difficulty as his marriage to another Afghan  national  had
    been conducted on the basis that his  in-laws  thought  that  he  would
    obtain settled status in the UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish
    went on to allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds on the basis that
    there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in
    Kabul.

14. The respondent challenged the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish and that challenge came before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  on
    8 February 2019.  The error of  law  in  the  reasoning  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Frankish on the Article 8 ECHR claim was acknowledged on
    behalf of the appellant, in particular the reliance on  the  immaterial
    matter of whether the appellant would choose to relocate  to  Peshawar.
    There was also a concern that the judge had failed to consider evidence
    concerning the appellant's mental health which had been put before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15. In a decision dated 12 February 2019 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  set
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on  Article  8
    ECHR and reserved the remaking of that part of the appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal for a future hearing. The appeal was  not  remade  immediately
    because of the concern about the evidence  on  the  appellant's  mental
    health.

16. Thus, the Article 8 ECHR appeal  only  was  listed  for  hearing  on  9
    September 2019.  There was a delay  in  listing  the  remaking  of  the
    appeal where the current  country  guidance  case  on  Afghanistan,  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT  00118  (IAC)  was  being
    challenged in the Court of  Appeal  in  what  was  then  issued  as  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873.  As set out in the  direction
    dated 18 July 2019, the ratio of the decision in the  Court  of  Appeal
    did not interfere with the findings of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance case of AS (Afghanistan) in a way that had a  material  impact
    on the assessment of the appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim.

17. As above, the remaking of the appeal was limited to a consideration  of
    Article 8 ECHR and, specifically, whether the appellant's profile meant
    that he would face  very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in
    Kabul, applying paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    guidance  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  which  remains  extant  following  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 873 is relevant to that assessment:


         "Internal relocation to Kabul


         (ii) Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it  will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.


         (iii)    However, the particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above.


         (iv) A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return."

18. It is undisputed that MS does not have any  connections  or  a  support
    network in Kabul. He is from a different part of  Afghanistan  and  has
    never lived in the capital.  In addition, he maintains that his  mental
    health issues mean that he would be vulnerable on return such  that  he
    would have very significant difficulty in reintegrating.

19. The appellant relied on a psychiatric report  of  Dr  Foster  dated  15
    March 2019.  There was no dispute concerning Dr Foster's  status  as  a
    Psychiatric Consultant. Dr Foster was  provided  with  medical  records
    from the Belmont Health Centre for the dates 1 June 2018  to  3  August
    2018.  These  showed  that  the  appellant  had  reported  experiencing
    flashbacks of his father's  death,  thoughts  of  self-harm,  had  been
    unable to work as a result and had been prescribed Zopiclone.   He  had
    later also reported low mood, headaches,  difficulty  in  sleeping  and
    further thoughts of self-harm and was also prescribed Mirtazapine.  The
    GP notes went on to indicate that towards the end of June 2018  the  GP
    diagnosed moderately severe depression and severe anxiety and  referred
    the appellant  for  counselling.   His  suicidal  thoughts,  depressive
    symptoms and sleep difficulty continued through August 2018.  Dr Foster
    concludes in paragraph 51 of his report that the notes  available  from
    the GP were "consistent with the diagnosis of  PTSD  and  a  depressive
    episode".  Dr Foster goes on to state:

         "The scales reported [by the GP] on 29  June  indicate  significant
         levels of anxiety and depression."

20. In his meeting with Dr Foster, the appellant described similar symptoms
    to those he had reported to the GP, in  particular  flashbacks  of  the
    traumatic experience of the death  of  his  father,  fatigue,  lack  of
    energy,  hypervigilance,   headaches,   poor   appetite,   intermittent
    hopelessness  with  thoughts  of  his  ending   his   life   and   poor
    concentration.

21. Dr Foster's summary was as follows:

         "63. [SM] experienced a catastrophic and terrifying  trauma  whilst
             he was still a child, namely the murder  of  his  father.   He
             heard his father being shot and saw his  mutilated  dead  body
             outside their home.

         64.  Following this he was taken from his home and kidnapped by the
             Taliban who indoctrinated and groomed him to become a  suicide
             bomber.

         65.  He escaped from Afghanistan and endured  a  long  and  arduous
             journey over the to  the  UK  lasting  several  months  before
             arriving in the UK in a lorry.

         66.  He has now been living in the UK for some eleven years, all of
             his adult life.  He has some friends and contacts  in  the  UK
             and has been able to engage in some part-time work.

         67.  He has never seen his younger son and misses  his  wife,  both
             his sons and his sister, telephoning them on a daily basis.

         68.  As a result of his traumatic experiences he has developed Post-
             Traumatic Stress Disorder and  clinical  depression.   He  has
             experienced suicidal thoughts and threats.

         69.   He  requires  specialist  psychological  and  pharmacological
             treatment for his mental health difficulties.

         70.  He is concerned that if was forced to return to Afghanistan he
             would be killed by the authorities, the Taliban or Daesh.

         71.  His lack of status in the UK and the threat he experiences  in
             relation to the thought of living  back  in  Afghanistan  have
             exacerbated his mental health difficulties."

22. SM also relied on a letter dated 15 March 2019 from the Belmont Medical
    Centre stating that he had first presented with symptoms of depression,
    anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder in  2018.   A  review  on  25
    February 2019  and  15  March  2019  established  that  he  was  "still
    suffering with distressing symptoms of post-traumatic stress  disorder"
    and a referral had been made to the mental health team.

23. The appellant also relied on a further letter from the  Belmont  Health
    Centre dated 14 August 2019.  The GP reports the  appellant  presenting
    in 2018 with mental health problems and goes on to state:

         "Unfortunately, over this time his symptoms  seem  to  have  become
         worse.  He presented to the practice on 25  February  2019  due  to
         night terrors and panic attacks as well  as  feeling  of  life  not
         being worth living.  At  this  time  his  PHQ  9  score  was  24/27
         suggesting severe depression.  At this time he was referred to  the
         single point of access mental health team for urgent review.  I can
         share this assessment with you if it is required  and  the  patient
         gives permission.  He has subsequently been seen weekly by a member
         of the mental health team to offer support.

         Despite taking his medication  and  engaging  in  the  services  he
         continues to struggle with low mood.  I feel that this  is  largely
         situational as his wife and children are living in Pakistan and  he
         has no way of seeing them at present.  He feels the only way he can
         get better is to be reunited with his family.  In the  meantime  we
         will continue to monitor in the practice."

24. The appellant also relied  on  a  letter  dated  15  August  2019  from
    Paiwand, an  Afghan  medical  organisation.  The  counsellor  from  the
    organisation who had been seeing SM stated:

         "Our evaluation  forms  indicated  that  MS  is  showing  signs  of
         moderately severe depression and anxiety.  MS has spoken about  his
         poor  and  disturbed  sleep,  vivid   nightmares,   numbing,   poor
         concentration and memory.  He also shared that he was  feeling  low
         moods, negative and intrusive thoughts and  suffers  from  frequent
         anxiety attacks, which has been much of the focus of  our  sessions
         and ways on managing this.  MS has also shown signs of dissociation
         and depersonalisation which may be due  to  significant  levels  of
         anxiety and depression.

         I see MS as a vulnerable person  who  is  currently  struggling  to
         function due to his deteriorating mental  health.   He  is  current
         prescribed antidepressants by his GP and we will be continuing with
         the counselling as I feel additional sessions are needed  in  order
         to support him through the difficult time that he is facing."

25. The appellant also relied on a report from Dr Giustozzi dated 25  March
    2019.  Dr Giustozzi is a well-known and  respected  expert  witness  on
    Afghanistan.  Dr Giustozzi  comments  on  the  availability  of  mental
    healthcare in Afghanistan.  In paragraph 7 he sets out that outside  of
    the main cities "the provision of mental healthcare in  Afghanistan  is
    almost non-existent."  He goes on to state:

         "7.  ... The country's only mental health hospital  (Kabul)  is  in
             bad condition due to war damage and lack of maintenance.   ...
             In 2012 the Kabul Mental Health Hospital  still  has  only  60
             places, although the number of psychiatrists  operating  there
             has  gone  up  six  (from  two  in  2010).   Plans  to  expand
             facilities with the  building  of  new  hospitals  were  never
             implemented.  There is a problem of understaffing, as many  of
             the already limited number of trained mental professional have
             left the country.  ...  It should also be  noted  that  to  be
             admitted to this hospital in Kabul,  it  is  necessary  to  be
             accompanied by a relative all the time.   In  early  2010  the
             National Health Strategy was revised to  give  more  space  to
             mental healthcare, the focus being on training health staff in
             mental  healthcare  awareness   and   informing   psychosocial
             counsellors.  However, the limited training imparted in mental
             healthcare is resulting in the abuse  of  psychotropic  drugs,
             with an estimated 30% of the population taking such drugs  and
             abusing them (see below) in 2010.

         8.   If we consider that according to the World Health Organisation
             as of 2010 about 60% of Afghans suffer from various  forms  of
             mental health problems, it is  obvious  that  the  chances  of
             having access to care for  the  average  Afghan  patient  with
             mental health conditions are slim indeed.   The  opportunities
             for  psychosocial  support   are   almost   non-existence   in
             Afghanistan, mainly because of the extreme shortage of trained
             mental health professionals.  Although the government had made
             mental health one of the priorities in the  reconstruction  of
             the health system in 2003, in practise little was  done,  even
             in terms of starting training  programmes  for  mental  health
             specialists."

26. In paragraphs 9 and 10 of his report Dr Giustozzi describes efforts  by
    the European Union and a Greek NGO to support mental health  provision,
    the European Union effort leading to a construction of a  new  building
    in the Kabul Hospital, albeit the  bed  number  remained  at  60.   His
    opinion was that "Even in Kabul  they  are  few  and  far  between  and
    attending them could seriously disrupt or render impossible,  attending
    school or presence as  the  job  place."  The  Greek  NGO  intervention
    concerned setting up training courses, translating training manuals and
    renovating facilities but "the impact has so far been limited".

27. In  paragraph  13  Dr  Giustozzi  identifies  that  efforts  to  create
    psychosocial  centres  around   the   country   had   been   relatively
    unsuccessful such  that  "even  for  this  type  of  patient  receiving
    consistent support is very difficult". Dr Giustozzi goes on to  comment
    in paragraph 14 that even if MS was able  to  seek  healthcare  "It  is
    unlikely that he would then receive more than cursory attention by  the
    medical staff  at  the  country's  only  mental  health  hospital."  Dr
    Giustozzi states in paragraph 15 that the appellant would  be  unlikely
    to be able to compete for appropriate  care  and  treatment  given  his
    inability to find work, appropriate accommodation and  the  absence  of
    any family support. In paragraph 17 Dr Giustozzi identifies that  there
    is stigmatisation of those with mental health problems  and  that  this
    could lead to additional  difficulties  in  finding  accommodation  and
    work.  The appellant's  medication  of  Mirtazapine  is  identified  in
    paragraph 18 as being available in Afghanistan but at high cost  for  a
    proper prescription and:

         "More importantly only the Pakistani copies of these medicines were
         found  in  the  pharmacies.   These  are   often   unreliable   and
         manufactured without licence."

28. Dr Giustozzi's conclusion is set out in paragraph 19:

         "MS will therefore have very limited access  to  mental  healthcare
         (compared to the UK) if he relocated to Afghanistan,  including  in
         Kabul.  He will struggle to access mental healthcare there  without
         family support: the system is simply not designed for  taking  care
         of lone, unhealthy individuals".

29. When assessing the evidence on the appellant's mental  health  problems
    and how this might affect him on return to Kabul, I bore in  mind  that
    the opinion of Dr  Foster  was  based,  in  part,  on  the  appellant's
    continuing  submission  that  he  was  kidnapped  by  the  Taliban  and
    mistreated and has a future fear from them, the authorities  and  Daesh
    on return.  This part of his claim has not been found  to  be  credible
    and so is not objectively well-founded and, to an extent,  reduces  the
    force of the comments made by Dr Foster.

30. It remains undisputed, however, that  the  appellant  has  a  diagnosed
    trauma from observing the violent assassination of his father  when  he
    was still a child. His GP and Dr Foster confirm that he  has  a  severe
    depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder for which he  is
    receiving pharmacological and psychological treatment.

31. It is my conclusion, having considered carefully  the  headnote  of  AS
    (Afghanistan) that this appellant without having  access  any  kind  of
    support in Kabul, the appellant is, as a result of the  degree  of  his
    mental illness, particularly vulnerable. He is not a single adult  male
    in good health who can, in general, be expected to relocate  to  Kabul.
    In addition, he has been absent  from  Afghanistan  for  eleven  years,
    albeit he is now an adult, has no family in the country at all, has had
    a limited education and  has  no  vocational  skills.  It  is  my  view
    conclusion that his particular profile is such that he would face  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration in Kabul.   He  therefore  meets
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

32. Ms Easty identified at the hearing that  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 873 the Court of Appeal noted in paragraph 82 that when
    reconsidering country guidance on Afghanistan, the Upper Tribunal would
    wish to take into account the  new  evidence  contained  in  the  UNHCR
    "Further Guidelines on Returns  to  Afghanistan"  from  2018.  In  that
    report, UNHCR recommend that "given the current security, human  rights
    and humanitarian situation  in  Kabul,  an  IFA/IRA  is  generally  not
    available in the city." This  put  the  risk  for  returnees  to  Kabul
    materially higher than earlier reports that had been considered by  the
    Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan). In the context of  the  deterioration  of
    conditions in Kabul identified by UNCHR, this appellant would obviously
    face even more significant obstacles to reintegration.

33. For these reasons, it is my conclusion that the appellant's  Article  8
    ECHR claim should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

34. The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  27  September
    2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





