
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00028/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2019               |On 20th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                  ROBLE [G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J Holt, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
LLP (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Juss ("the judge") promulgated on 28th May 2019.


 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia. He arrived in the United
    Kingdom in November 2002 and claimed asylum. The claim was refused by
    the respondent but following a successful appeal, the appellant was
    granted refugee status and indefinite leave to remain in January 2005.


 3. On 15 April 2016 the appellant was convicted of robbery and possession
    of a firearm with intent to cause fear of violence at Leicester Crown
    Court. He was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment.


 4. The respondent made a deportation decision under s32(5) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 on the grounds that the appellant is a foreign
    national who has been convicted in the UK of an offence and has been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months. The
    respondent concluded that the exceptions set out in s33 of the Act did
    not apply, and the appellant's deportation was considered to be
    conducive to the public good.


 5. The respondent also certified the matter under s.72(2) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') on the
    basis that the appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious
    crime and constitutes danger to the community of the United Kingdom.
    The respondent claims that the consequence of this decision is that the
    appellant's refugee status no longer prevents his return to Somalia in
    the light of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.


 6. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss
    for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 28th May 2019.
    The appellant advanced three grounds of appeal.  First, the judge
    erroneously conflates two different tests that are relevant to the
    appeal.  At paragraph [20] when considering the certification under s72
    of the 2002 Act, the Judge appears to proceed upon the basis that the
    issue is whether there has been a "fundamental and durable change" in
    the appellant.  The issue for the tribunal when considering the
    certification, was whether the appellant constitutes a danger to the
    community of the UK. The test of whether there has been a "fundamental
    and durable change" was relevant to a cessation decision.  Second, the
    Judge failed to consider cessation and third, the Judge failed to
    consider whether the removal of the appellant would be in breach of his
    Article 3 rights.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Froom on the third ground
    (the failure to consider Article 3) on 21 June 2019. The appellant
    renewed the application for permission to rely upon the other grounds,
    and permission was granted on all grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Rintoul on 18th July 2019.


 8. In a rule 24 reply dated 9th July 2019, the respondent conceded that
    having upheld the s72 certificate, the judge was bound to consider
    whether the appellant's return to Mogadishu would be in breach of his
    Article 3 rights. The respondent accepted that the judge had failed to
    consider Article 3.  At the hearing before me, Mr Mills now accepts
    that the FtT judge appears to conflate the test relevant to
    'certification' with the test relevant to 'cessation', and the judge
    has failed to consider cessation at all. Mr Mills, properly in my
    judgment, accepts that the judge erred in law for the reasons advanced
    in the grounds of appeal. It was agreed between the parties that the
    errors of law are such as to require the decision of the judge to be
    set aside with no findings preserved.


 9. As to disposal of the appeal, both Mr Holt and Mills submit that in
    view of the nature of the errors, and the need for the appeal to be
    reconsidered afresh, the appropriate course is for the matter to be
    remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh. I have decided that it is
    appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
    having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
    Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the
    appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary
    will be extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


10. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh
    hearing of the appeal.


Signed                                  Date          17th September 2019


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                17th September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

