
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00100/2015 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 March 2021                   |On 22 March 2021                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department.
      However, for convenience I will refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
      designated in the First-tier Tribunal.


   Background


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Russia with Armenian heritage who was
      born in March 1991. In October 2004 he entered the UK with his father
      and was joined shortly thereafter by his mother and brother.

   3. The appellant's mother applied for asylum with the rest of the family
      (including the appellant) as her dependents. Although the asylum
      application was refused, in 2007 an appeal was successful. In a
      decision promulgated on 16 April 2007, a panel comprising of
      Immigration Judges Carroll and Herbert found that:

           "30. ...The objective material and Dr Nesvetalova's reports all
           paint a very bleak picture of violent xenophobia in the Russian
           Federation. We are satisfied that the experiences of the
           appellant, both in terms of the violence and abuse suffered by
           herself and members of her family together with the official and
           mafia sponsored obstacles to her successful running of a
           business, have given rise to a well-founded fear of persecution,
           arising out of her ethnicity coupled with her dark skinned non-
           Slavic appearance. We have also seen the appellant's husband and
           one child. They are both clearly very dark skinned and non-
           Slavic in appearance. We are satisfied that the treatment
           suffered by the appellant and her family has crossed the line
           from discrimination to persecution...


           31.We find also that there is no internal flight option
           available to the appellant and her family. All of the objective
           evidence points to the widespread nature of the violence
           xenophobia from which they have suffered...."

   4. In February 2013 the appellant was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.

   5. In March 2014 the appellant was convicted for the crime of false
      imprisonment and sentenced to 2 years imprisonment. The sentence was
      increased to 4 years in June 2014.

   6. In May 2014 the appellant was notified of his liability to deportation
      under section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").

   7. In June 2014 the appellant was notified that section 72 of the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") applied,
      as he was presumed to have been convicted of a particularly serious
      crime and to constitute a danger to the community.

   8. In March 2015 the respondent notified the appellant of her intention
      to cease his refugee status under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee
      Convention on the basis that the circumstances in which he had been
      recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist and he could now avail
      himself of the protection of the authorities in Russia.

   9. In October 2015 a deportation order was  made  against  the  appellant
      and, following consideration of submissions from the appellant as well
      as UNHCR (who were notified of the intention to cease the  appellant's
      refugee status) a  decision  was  made  by  the  respondent  that  the
      appellant did not fall within any of  the  exceptions  to  deportation
      specified in section 33 of the 2007 Act. The  respondent  stated  that
      (a) the appellant had not rebutted the presumption under section 72 of
      the 2002 Act and therefore the Refugee Convention did not prevent  his
      removal; (b) Article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention  (as  well  as
      paragraph 339A(v) of the  Immigration  Rules)  applied;  and  (c)  the
      appellant's removal would not breach article 8 ECHR.

  10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
      heard - and allowed - by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morron. This
      decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson and remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal.

  11. The matter then came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Divittie,
      who also allowed the appeal. This decision was set aside and  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal by a panel comprising of the Hon. Lady  Rae
      and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

  12. The appeal then came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Clarke,
      who also allowed the appeal. It is Judge Clarke's decision that is now
      being challenged by the respondent.


   The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke ("the judge")


  13. The  judge  firstly  considered  whether  the  appellant  successfully
      rebutted the presumption under section 72 of the 2002 that he had been
      convicted of a particularly serious crime and constituted a danger  to
      the community such that Article 33(2) of the  Refugee  Convention  was
      applicable. The judge found  that  the  presumption  was  rebutted  as
      although the appellant had committed a very serious crime he  did  not
      constitute  a  danger  to  the  community.  The  judge  reached   this
      conclusion on the basis of the psychological report of Dr  Davies  and
      the OASYs report categorising the appellant as being at  low  risk  as
      well as the evidence of the appellant  and  his  witnesses  about  the
      efforts the appellant has made with the support of  his  family  since
      the offence. At paragraph 14 the judge stated:

           Having regard to all of the evidence before me, I find that  the
           appellant could not be said to be a danger to the community when
           the evidence before me all points  to  completely  the  opposite
           conclusion, and even when taking into account fully the  details
           about the offence and the final  sentence  imposed,  I  conclude
           that he does not pose a danger to the community in  the  UK  and
           the statutory presumption is displaced.

  14. With respect to cessation of protection under Article 1C(5), the judge
      found that the circumstances in connection with  which  the  appellant
      had been recognised as a refugee had not ceased to  exist.  The  judge
      observed that the appellant and his family had been granted asylum  on
      the basis of the risk they faced in Russia because of their non-Slavic
      dark appearance. The judge rejected the respondent's argument that the
      position of  dark  skinned  minorities  in  Russia  has  fundamentally
      changed. At paragraphs 21 - 22 the judge stated:

        21.I conclude that the circumstances in connection with  which  the
        appellant was recognised individually and together with his  family
        have not changed. This is what the UNHCR letter reads, and  the  US
        country report is relied upon in part because  it  also  highlights
        serious human rights abuses occurring throughout Russia. I have the
        benefit of a recent country  expert  report  prepared  by  Dr  Rano
        Turaeva-Hoehne dated 30 September 2019 which not  only  reads  that
        the circumstances in  which  the  appellant  was  recognised  as  a
        refugee had not changed, if anything they have become worse because
        of the escalating conflicts in the region of  Ukraine  and  in  the
        Middle  East,  economic  stagnation,  the  increasing  numbers   of
        migrants in Russia and the increasing power and activities  of  the
        ultranationalist groups not only within  the  government,  security
        system and army but also generally within society.


        22.The appellant was granted refugee status in his  own  right  and
        not as a dependent under the family reunion policy. The  respondent
        has failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  upon  her  that  the
        clause applies. The removal of the  appellant  would  amount  to  a
        breach article 3.



Grounds of appeal and submissions

  15. Mr Walker relied on the respondent's grounds  of  appeal  and  written
      submissions. He did not elaborate on  them  orally.  The  grounds  and
      submissions fall into three categories: a  challenge  to  findings  in
      respect of the presumption  under  section  72  of  the  2002  Act;  a
      challenge to the findings in respect of cessation of  refugee  status;
      and a challenge to the finding in respect of article 3.

  16. In respect of section 72 the following arguments have been advanced:

        a. The judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  how  the
           appellant rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a  danger
           to the public.


        b. The reference in paragraph  22  to  the  respondent  failing  to
           discharge the burden of proof indicates that  the  wrong  burden
           was applied in respect of the presumption under  section  72  of
           the 2002 Act.

  17. With respect to cessation, the respondent argues:

        a. The judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  how  the
           documents referred to in paragraph 21 of the decision  apply  to
           the appellant.

        b. The judge erred  by  finding  that  the  appellant  was  granted
           refugee status in his own right when  in  fact  he  was  granted
           refugee status as a dependent of his mother's asylum  claim.  It
           is argued that the mother's asylum claim was based not solely on
           ethnicity  and  skin  colour  but  also  on  the  basis  of  her
           relatively prominent economic status in the local area.

        c. The judge failed to take into consideration that the appellant's
           mother returned to Russia  on  three  occasions  without  issues
           arising,  which  indicates  that   the   appellant's   fear   of
           persecution is not well-founded.

  18. Regarding article 3 ECHR, the respondent contends  that  the  decision
      contains no reasons or explanation for finding  that  the  appellant's
      removal would breach article 3 ECHR.

  19. Ms McCarthy argued that the judge addressed both the  section  72  and
      the cessation issue in a clear  and  structured  way.  In  respect  of
      section 72, she argued that  the  judge  gave  clear  and  sustainable
      reasons for finding that the appellant would not be a  danger  to  the
      community and that it is plain that the correct burden  of  proof  was
      applied.

  20. With respect to cessation, Ms McCarthy  argued  that  the  judge  made
      clear findings that were consistent with  the  UNHCR  report  and  the
      objective evidence which showed that the appellant would  be  at  risk
      because of his skin-tone. She argued  that  the  respondent's  grounds
      fail to acknowledge that in the 2007 appeal it was recognised that the
      risk to the appellant and his family arose from their skin  tone.  She
      argued that this case is entirely different to cessation cases where a
      child has been granted refugee status solely because of  the  risk  to
      their parent as in this case the basis  for  granting  refugee  status
      (skin colour) was as applicable to the appellant as to his mother.

  21. Ms McCarthy argued that the visits by the appellant's mother to Russia
      did not indicate an absence of risk to the appellant.  She  maintained
      that the appellant's mother had made short visits for less than a week
      (solely to visit her son's grave) and had done so with the  protection
      of a British passport. This, argued Ms McCarthy, is entirely different
      to, and has no relevance to the risk arising from, living  permanently
      as a Russian in Russia.

Analysis

Section 72 of the 2002 Act

  22. The issue in contention before the judge was whether the appellant had
      rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community
      of the UK. It is plain from paragraph 14 (where the judge stated  that
      "the statutory presumption is displaced") that  the  judge  recognised
      that the burden fell on the appellant to displace the presumption that
      he is a danger to the  community.  The  respondent  contends  that  at
      paragraph 22 the judge referred to the burden being on the respondent.
      However, it is clear from how  the  decision  is  structured  that  at
      paragraph 22 the judge was referring to the cessation  issue  and  not
      the presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act. There  is  therefore
      no merit to the contention that the wrong burden of proof was applied.


  23. Nor is there merit to the contention that the  judge  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons as to why the presumption  was  rebutted.  The  judge
      gave several reasons at paragraphs  10  -  14  for  finding  that  the
      appellant had rebutted the presumption including, in particular,  that
      the OASYs report and the report of Dr Davies both concluded  that  the
      appellant is  a  low  risk.  The  reasons  are  plainly  adequate  and
      therefore the "reasons" challenge to this part of the decision  cannot
      succeed.

 Cessation

  24. The judge did not err  in  finding  that  the  appellant  was  granted
      refugee status in his own right as although his application for asylum
      was made as a dependent of his mother the findings  of  the  panel  in
      2007 make clear that the appellant was personally at risk  because  of
      his "dark skinned, non-Slavic appearance" (see paragraph 30-31 of  the
      2007 decision, which is cited above in paragraph 3).

  25. The "reasons" challenge  to  the  cessation  findings  cannot  succeed
      because at paragraph 21 the judge gave several sustainable  and  clear
      reasons. These, in short, were that there was evidence (in particular,
      the letter from UNHCR and the expert report of Dr Rano Turaeva  Hohne)
      supporting the view that a  person  with  the  appellant's  appearance
      would be at risk of persecution in Russia. Another  judge  might  have
      reached a different conclusion based on the evidence about the current
      situation in Russia, but that does not mean the reasons given  by  the
      judge were inadequate.

  26. I agree with Ms McCarthy that the visits to Russia by the  appellant's
      mother are immaterial and therefore the judge did not err  by  failing
      to consider them. The appellant's mother made only  short  visits  and
      did so as a British citizen. This  is  entirely  different  to  living
      permanently (and having to find  work  and  accommodation)  in  Russia
      without the protection of British citizenship.




Article 3

  27. The finding at paragraph 22 that removal of the appellant would breach
      article 3 is not supported by any reasons and therefore  is  erroneous
      in law. However, the error is not material because,  for  the  reasons
      set out above, the judge was entitled to find  that  the  decision  to
      revoke the appellant's protection status breached the UK's obligations
      under the Refugee Convention, given  the  sustainable  and  adequately
      reasoned findings that (a)  the  appellant  rebutted  the  presumption
      under section 72 of the 2002  Act  and  (b)  the  respondent  had  not
      discharged the burden of showing a change in circumstances  in  Russia
      such that Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention was applicable.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |Dated: 11 March 2021              |

