
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00072/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2018, 18th October 2018,          |On 4th February 2020          |
|22nd November 2018, 10th May 2019,            |                              |
|17th June 2019 (at the Royal Courts of        |                              |
|Justice),                                     |                              |
|6th September 2019, and                       |                              |
|20th December 2019.                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     aya
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson of Counsel, instructed by Thompson &
Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kainth promulgated on 22 December 2017, in which his appeal against the
    Respondent's decision to refusal his protection and human rights  claim
    (in the context of revocation of his protection status and deportation)
    dated 19 May 2017 was dismissed.   In  a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    February 2019, the Upper  Tribunal  found  an  error  of  law  in  that
    decision, set it aside and gave directions for the  re-hearing  of  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  The background to this appeal is set out
    in the error of law decision annexed and will not  be  repeated  herein
    save as where necessary.

 2. The determination of this appeal, both at error  of  law  and  remaking
    stage has been complex and has necessitated a number of  hearings,  due
    to both practical difficulties and also a series of changes in relevant
    authority from both the Court of  Appeal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    matters directly relevant to this appeal.  I am  grateful  to  both  Mr
    Nicholson and Mr Kotas for their detailed preparation for the hearings,
    clear skeleton arguments and schedule of evidence relied upon.  To some
    extent, the  detailed  submissions  made  by  both  parties  have  been
    overtaken by subsequent authority and it is not therefore be  necessary
    to refer in as much detail to all of the  submissions  made  throughout
    the course of these hearings.

 3. As set out in paragraph 31 of the error of law  decision  annexed,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  was  excluded   from
    humanitarian  protection  by  virtue  of  paragraph  339D(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules due to his criminal offences and it  was  found  that
    the Appellant did not meet any of  the  exceptions  to  deportation  in
    paragraphs 398 and following of the Immigration Rules and sections 117A
    to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  nor  were
    there any very compelling circumstances which would outweigh the public
    interest in deportation.  These findings were unchallenged on appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal and expressly preserved in the decision annexed.

 4. The remaining issues to be determined were,  broadly,  in  relation  to
    cessation and protection and as to whether the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk of a breach of Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights on return to Somalia.  In light of developments in case  law,  a
    number of separate issues within these broad  grounds  of  appeal  have
    arisen.  More specifically, the  outstanding  issues  are  as  follows.
    First, whether or not the Appellant was a recognised refugee, such that
    the cessation provisions apply to him when considering the test  to  be
    applied  to  the  second  and  third  issues.   Secondly,  whether  the
    Appellant is at risk in his home area of Luuq.  Thirdly, if so, whether
    it would be reasonable and  not  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
    internally relocate to Mogadishu.  Fourthly, the appropriate test to be
    applied for the purposes of Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  Finally, whether the  Appellant's  return  would  be  in
    breach of Article 3.

The Appellant's Immigration and criminal history

 5. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born in Luuq and is a member of
    the Ashraf clan.  On 28 July 2003 he was issued  with  entry  clearance
    giving him indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom  to  join  his
    wife, who had been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a refugee on 12 December 2002.  Her status was on the  basis
    that she was at risk on return to Somalia as a  member  of  the  Ashraf
    minority clan.  The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 August
    2003 and has remained here since.

 6. On 7 May 2015, the Appellant was convicted of  possession  of  a  knife
    blade/sharp appointed article in  a  public  place  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to a one year community order with  unpaid  work  requirement
    and ordered to a pay victim surcharge and costs.

 7. On 12 April 2016, the Appellant was found to have failed to comply with
    the requirements of the earlier community order which was  revoked  and
    he was also convicted of theft from a person  and  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced to one month imprisonment
    and 16 months' imprisonment respectively, to run concurrently.

 8. On 18 October 2016,  Appellant  was  convicted  of  aggravated  vehicle
    taking for which he  was  sentenced  to  9  weeks  in  prison  and  was
    disqualified from driving;  and  for  driving  a  vehicle  with  excess
    alcohol for which he received a sentence of four weeks' imprisonment to
    be served concurrently.  On the same date  he  was  also  convicted  of
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using a vehicle
    whilst uninsured for which no separate penalties were given.

 9. Since the decision which is the subject of this appeal,  the  Appellant
    has committed and been convicted of a further criminal offence,  namely
    possession of an offensive weapon, for which he  was  sentenced  to  15
    months' imprisonment, however this  offence  is  not  relevant  to  the
    decision under appeal which predates it.

10. The Respondent notified the Appellant of the  intention  to  cease  his
    refugee status on 7 June 2016, pursuant to  which  the  Appellant  made
    representations on 12 June 2016.  In the letter dated 7 June 2016,  the
    Respondent set out the Appellant's immigration and history, as well  as
    background information as to the current  situation  in  Luuq  and  the
    country guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC).

11. From the background evidence, the Respondent considered that Al-Shabaab
    were not in control in Luuq and the Appellant would not be at real risk
    of persecution or serious harm from them there.  The Respondent went on
    in paragraph 14 to state,  "However,  it  is  accepted  that  in  areas
    outside  of  Mogadishu,   members   of   minority   groups   may   face
    discrimination and human rights abuses which,  in  some  circumstances,
    may amount to persecution.  In view of the above it is considered  that
    there may remain obstacles preventing you from returning to Luuq in the
    Gedo region where your parents were born."  The Respondent went  on  to
    identify Mogadishu as the place of  return,  where  the  Appellant  had
    previously lived according to the statement of evidence form  completed
    by his wife (and where her parents were born and where she had a house)
     and consideration was given as to whether the Appellant could resettle
    there.

12. The UNHCR made representations in relation to the proposed cessation on
    31 March 2017.  First, it was noted that the trigger for  consideration
    of cessation of status was the Appellant's criminal convictions,  which
    in the UNHCR's opinion, was not  appropriate.   Secondly,  it  was  not
    agreed that the situation currently pertaining in Somalia warranted the
    application of Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention on an individual
    or collective basis.  The UNHCR did not consider that the situation  in
    Somalia has fundamentally changed such  as  to  apply  this  provision.
    Thirdly it was not accepted that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof on her with evidence  that  demonstrated  the  specific
    fundamental  changes  needed  for  cessation,  together  with  adequate
    consideration  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  the   Appellant.
    Background  evidence  was  referred  to   which   recorded   continuing
    persecution of minority clans, in particular in  southern  and  central
    Somalia.  A recommendation was made for a thorough  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case, including his connections with Somalia; family  ties;
    access to financial resources and the likelihood  of  remittances  from
    abroad; as well as an assessment of  relevant  improvements  since  the
    Appellant was recognised as a refugee the purposes of Article 1C(5)  of
    the Refugee Convention.

Explanation for refusal

13. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
    claim on 19 May  2017.   It  was  noted  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant derived his refugee status from his  wife,  who  was  granted
    asylum on the basis of her Ashraf ethnicity.  It was found  that  there
    has been a significant and enduring  change  in  the  circumstances  in
    which the Appellant was granted refugee status,  as  there  is  now  no
    persecution on the basis  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  and  the
    Appellant's Ashraf clan has a presence  in  Mogadishu.   The  Appellant
    would no longer be at risk on return to Mogadishu, nor at risk  of  any
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  on  the
    basis of clan affiliation.  The country guidance in MOJ was referred to
    and applied.   In  the  alternative,  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return from Al-Shabaab as he  was  not  a
    high-profile member of a  political  institution.   The  Appellant  was
    excluded from humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph  339D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. The Respondent considered that the Appellant would face no  significant
    obstacles to  his  reintegration  in  Somalia,  as  an  adult  male  in
    reasonable health and his ability to assimilate into a foreign culture,
    namely the United Kingdom, meant that he would be able to re-assimilate
    to Somali culture.  The Appellant was  considered  to  have  sufficient
    ties to his home country, including language, cultural  background  and
    social network to enable him to readapt to life there.  The Appellant's
    relatives in the United Kingdom could assist him on return and he could
    use the skills gained here in obtaining lawful employment  in  Somalia.
    Overall  the  Appellant's  return   to   Somalia   would   not   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life in the United Kingdom and there  were  no  very  compelling
    circumstances  to  outweigh  the   significant   public   interest   in
    deportation.

The Appellant's claim

15. In his written  statement  signed  and  dated  29  November  2017,  the
    Appellant sets out his history.  He states that he grew up in  Luuq  in
    Somalia with his parents and sister.  It was a small village  with  400
    or 500 houses and he attended school there up to the age of 12  or  13.
    From the age of 17 he worked on a farm  and  also  in  a  small  garage
    fixing cars, such as fixing brakes and replacing tyres.

16. The Appellant's problems began in 1991  when  the  Somalian  government
    collapsed and his home area  was  caught  in  the  middle  of  fighting
    between two clans.  The Appellant is from the Ashraf minority clan  and
    was targeted because of this.  The conflict settled down  in  1993  and
    1994 when a group called al-Itihaad (a predecessor to Al-Shabaab)  came
    to the area with a focus on strict religious practices.  The  Appellant
    was imprisoned by this group in 1996 after being caught smoking, he was
    taken to the police station, beaten and subsequently given  one  year's
    imprisonment in jail.  The Appellant was  released  from  prison  after
    about three months after the Ethiopian army invaded, however al-Itihaad
    returned and the Appellant was again arrested.  He was  kept  overnight
    at a police station but then released.  After  al-Itihaad  were  pushed
    out of the area again, persecution of minority clans resumed.

17. The Appellant married in 2001.  The same year tribal soldiers  went  to
    the Appellant's home, raped  his  sister  and  killed  his  sister  and
    father.  The Appellant's wife had fled by the time he had returned home
    and he did not see her  again  until  they  were  both  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant left Luuq for  Ethiopia  with  his  mother  and
    whilst there  received  contact  from  his  wife,  following  which  he
    successfully applied to come  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2003.   The
    Appellant's relationship with his wife broke down in 2005,  his  mother
    died the same year and after that the Appellant had no surviving family
    members.

18. The Appellant's written statement also sets out  criminal  convictions;
    his English language classes and an alcohol detox  programme  which  he
    undertook in prison.

19. In his statement, the Appellant set out two reasons why he did not want
    to go  back  to  Somalia.   First,  he  did  not  have  any  family  or
    connections left in Somalia.  Secondly, there continued to be  problems
    in his home area, which was under the control of Al-Shabaab  and  where
    he would have no  one  who  could  help  him.   The  Appellant  had  no
    financial resources or connections to support him in Mogadishu  either,
    a place where he has never been, nor worked, nor  has  he  any  friends
    there.  He states that employment is found through  tribal  connections
    and family connections which the Appellant no longer has.

20. The Appellant attended the oral hearing on 17 June  2019,  adopted  his
    written statement dated 29 November 2017 and gave  oral  evidence  with
    the assistance of a court appointed Somali interpreter.

21. In cross-examination the Appellant was asked  what  he  was  scared  of
    going back to Somalia.  He said he hasn't been there for  a  long  time
    and there have been so many changes.  He was afraid of  tribes  killing
    each other in Somalia and of the risk from Al-Shabaab.

22. The Appellant had always lived in and  around  Luuq  prior  to  leaving
    Somalia in 2001 to go to Ethiopia.  He had  stayed  in  the  area  even
    though he had experienced problems there in 1996.  The Appellant's wife
    was from the Ashraf tribe and also from Luuq.

23. The Appellant's mother went to Djibouti in 2005 for medical  treatment,
    on her own and stayed for about three months before  she  died  in  the
    same year.  The Appellant's father died in 2001.  The Appellant had  an
    aunt who fled to Yemen and a sister who died at the same time as  their
    father.  The Appellant does not keep in touch with anyone in Somalia.

24. In terms of what is happening in Somalia, the Appellant stated that  he
    had seen some of it on the news and had seen that  Al-Shabaab  were  in
    control and persecuted minorities in some areas.  He thought  that  the
    government were in control in Mogadishu.

25. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant  has  worked  in  three  different
    jobs, as a cleaner and as a kitchen porter in a hospital.  In  Somalia,
    the Appellant had worked as both a farmer and changing tyres  on  cars.
    He accepted that he also fixed brakes but corrected this to say it  was
    only changing tyres.  He  said  he  learned  something  about  being  a
    mechanic since coming to the United Kingdom  working  in  a  garage  in
    North  West  London.   However,  the  Appellant   does   not   have   a
    qualification as a mechanic and did not go to college to study this.

26. The Appellant was diagnosed with hepatitis B in 2017 when he was  in  a
    detention  centre  but  is  not  on  any  medication  for  this,   only
    painkillers.  He also said that he has a pain one side of his body  and
    problems with his circulation for which he is waiting further tests.

27. The Appellant has on two occasions indicated that he wished  to  return
    to Somalia, first on 26 May 2017 when he signed a disclaimer  and  made
    an  application  under  the  facilitated  returns  scheme  (which   was
    provisionally accepted but then refused)  and   secondly  at  the  oral
    hearing before me on 17 June 2019.  Following both of these  occasions,
    the Appellant has however confirmed that he wished to proceed with  his
    appeal against deportation to Somalia.

Findings and reasons

Is the Appellant a refugee to whom the cessation provisions apply?

 1. In the Respondent's letter dated 7 June 2016,  it  was  said  that  the
    Appellant was being written to to inform him that  the  Respondent  was
    "considering revoking (ceasing) your refugee  status"  and  the  letter
    went on to refer to Article 1C of the Refugee Convention and paragraphs
    338A to 339AB of the Immigration Rules in  relation  to  revocation  of
    refugee status.  In terms of the Appellant's  immigration  history,  it
    was stated that the Appellant was issued with an entry  clearance  visa
    with indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom to join his wife  who
    had been granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
    refugee.  There was no express reference to the Appellant  having  been
    granted refugee status himself, although this was  clearly  implied  by
    the  premise  of  the  letter  being  revocation  of  the  same.    The
    Respondent's decision letter of 19 May 2017 is in similar  terms,  with
    the same description of the Appellant's entry to the United Kingdom and
    express consideration of revocation of protection status.

 2. On this basis, the appeal proceeded through the First-tier Tribunal and
    initially in the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    been granted refugee status and the decision  under  challenge  was  in
    part the cessation of the same.   However,  in  the  skeleton  argument
    submitted on behalf of the Respondent dated  30  August  2019,  it  was
    raised for the first time as a preliminary point that the Appellant had
    not in  fact  been  granted  refugee  status,  nor  has  he  ever  been
    recognised as a refugee, such that the  cessation  provisions  are  not
    applicable, notwithstanding the terms of the refusal  letter.   It  was
    noted that the Appellant's visa  was  for  indefinite  leave  to  enter
    rather than any grant of refugee status pursuant to paragraph  334  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Nicholson strongly  opposed  this  point
    being raised part-way through the remaking of the appeal, which  was  a
    point not raised before the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  circumstances
    where the decision under appeal was expressly about the  revocation  of
    refugee status and treated as such  throughout  by  both  parties.   Mr
    Kotas accepted the lateness of the point  but  submitted  that  it  was
    partly a response to the Appellant's  oral  evidence  at  the  previous
    hearing and seen in the context of his indications of wishing to return
    to Somalia and his failure  to  articulate  any  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for convention reasons  on  return  to  Somalia.   However,
    pending a Court of Appeal decision on this point in  a  case  heard  in
    July 2019, the point was not developed further  at  the  hearing  on  6
    September 2019.

 4. Prior to determination of this appeal, the Court of Appeal handed  down
    judgement in KN (Democratic Republic of Congo) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1665 and Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v JS (Uganda) [2019] EWCA Civ 1670; both of which dealt
    with the status of those who entered the United Kingdom  as  dependents
    of a refugee.  I issued directions to the parties on  14  October  2019
    inviting written submissions on the issues raised by  these  decisions,
    including whether the Respondent should be permitted to argue the point
    at this stage in proceedings about whether the Appellant was in fact  a
    refugee.

 5. Written submissions dated 29 October 2019 were received  on  behalf  of
    the Respondent addressing the issues raised and  requesting  a  further
    oral hearing for full legal argument.  There was  no  response  to  the
    directions on behalf of the Appellant and I issued  further  directions
    on 31 October  2019  for  a  further  oral  hearing  and  supplementary
    skeleton argument behalf of the Appellant.  These  matters  were  dealt
    with at the oral hearing on 20 December 2019.  Neither party  made  any
    detailed submissions on KN (Democratic Republic of  Congo)  as  it  was
    factually distinct to the present appeal.

 6. The Respondent's position is  that  the  decision  in  JS  (Uganda)  is
    binding on the Upper Tribunal and must be  considered  and  applied  as
    such whether or not points taken therein had been relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent  previously.   Following  that  decision,   the   Respondent
    submitted first that this Appellant was never in fact recognised  as  a
    refugee by the Respondent, notwithstanding the  terms  of  the  refusal
    letter which is the subject of this appeal.  There had  never  been  an
    express grant of refugee status to the Appellant, it was  submitted  to
    be unequivocally the case that the Appellant was joining his  wife  who
    had fled persecution and that he himself had  suffered  no  persecutory
    treatment prior to leaving Somalia.  It was only in the  terms  of  the
    letters dated 7 June 2016 and  19  May  2017  that  the  Appellant  was
    implicitly referred to as a refugee and for the reasons  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in JS (Uganda) that reasoning is arguably flawed.

 7. In the  alternative,  if  the  Appellant  was  accepted  to  have  been
    recognised as a refugee, such a concession should be permitted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal to be withdrawn by the  Respondent,  in  line  with  the
    Court of Appeal's reasoning in JS (Uganda) that such a  concession  was
    misconceived and discretion should be exercised for it to be  withdrawn
    because the Appellant's status derived only from his spouse.

 8. On either basis, the  Respondent  submitted  that  Article  1C  of  the
    Refugee Convention and the cessation provisions have  no  relevance  to
    this Appellant's appeal and instead it is for  the  Appellant  to  show
    that he satisfies Article 1A of the Refugee Convention that  he  is  at
    real risk of persecution on return to Somalia.

 9. Mr Nicholson's primary submission on behalf of the  Appellant  is  that
    the Respondent should not be permitted to argue  the  point  about  the
    Appellant's status, which had not been  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, nor prior to the rehearing of the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 17 June 2019.  This is in contrast to the proceedings in JS
    (Uganda) where the issue  had  been  fully  canvassed  in  the  initial
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  with  findings  of  fact  made.
    Further, the Appellant's wife was granted refugee status on  the  basis
    of risk of persecution as a minority Ashraf clan member, the same  clan
    that the Appellant is from and  who  would  be  at  the  same  risk  of
    persecution for the same reason as his wife, both at the  date  of  his
    admission to the United Kingdom  and  now.   In  this  regard  specific
    reliance was placed on paragraph 190 of Underhill LJ's judgement in  JS
    (Uganda) which stated as follows:

         "I should like to observe, at the risk of spelling out the obvious,
         that this issue only arises in cases where the risk of  persecution
         which leads to the grant of protection  to  the  "primary"  refugee
         does not also extend to his or her family members:  very  often  of
         course it will, either because they share the  same  characteristic
         as gives rise to the risk because the persecutor  will  extend  his
         persecution of, say, a political activist  to  his  or  her  family
         members irrespective of their own conduct or opinions.   I  do  not
         wish to be understood as saying that they may not  be  very  strong
         reasons  for  the  admission  of  family  members  even  way   they
         personally are not at risk: I say only that those  reasons  do  not
         derive from the Convention itself."

10. In addition, Mr Nicholson submitted that in any event  it  is  doubtful
    that the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion to permit this point to be argued in the same way  that  the
    Court of Appeal did in JS (Uganda).  This is  because  the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal are no longer considering whether  there  was
    an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  was
    decided in the error of law decision promulgated on  14  February  2019
    and is not therefore a  fresh  point  of  law  not  argued  below,  but
    involves further findings of fact such that a court should be extremely
    reluctant to exercise its discretion to hear fresh points, as stated in
    by Elias LJ in paragraph 69 of Miskovic v Secretary of State  for  Work
    and Pensions [2011] 2 C.M.L.R 20.

11. The issue of whether or not the Appellant is a refugee is important  as
    it determines whether it is the cessation  provisions  which  apply  to
    this appeal, for which the burden of proof is on the Respondent to show
    a significant and non-temporary change  such  that  the  person  is  no
    longer at risk; or the normal provisions in an asylum claim  for  which
    the burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that he is at real risk
    of persecution for a convention reason on return to Somalia.

12. In terms of the discretion of the Upper Tribunal to admit consideration
    of this issue, Haddon-Cave LJ confirmed in paragraph 88 of JS  (Uganda)
    that "where an administrative decision has  been  made  on  a  mistaken
    premise, the decision can be revisited so  that  the  law  is  properly
    applied, unless it would be unjust to allow this such  as  where  there
    has been reliance to the detriment of  the  individual."   Although  as
    noted by Mr Nicholson the issue had not been properly raised before the
    First-tier Tribunal, there is nothing to suggest any  reliance  to  the
    detriment of this Appellant of the issue being raised during the course
    of this appeal before the Upper Tribunal and  a  full  opportunity  was
    given to him to address the point both in writing and at a further oral
    hearing.

13. Reasons for the exercise of discretion were given in paragraph 89 of JS
    (Uganda) as follows:

         "In my view, this is a case in which the court should exercise  its
         discretion to allow a concession to be withdrawn.  First, there  is
         no evidence that particular consideration was given to JS's  actual
         status by the SSHD's officials.  The 2015 letter  appears  to  have
         been written on the assumption that JS  was  a  Refugee  Convention
         refugee (an assumption which, on this  hypothesis,  was  mistaken).
         Second, the point as to JS's status is a difficult one (as Irwin LJ
         pointed out when granting permission  to  appeal)  and  it  is  not
         altogether surprising that the SSHD's Presenting Officer and  legal
         advisers  did  not  appreciate  it  until  a  late  stage  in   the
         proceedings.  The point is not 'Robinson obvious' (c.f Underhill LJ
         in GS (India) v SSHD [2015] 1 WLR 3312 at [88]-[89]).   Third,  the
         point in question is a pure point of law as to  the  definition  of
         "refugee"  under  Article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
         requires no fresh evidence.  Fourth, there is no material prejudice
         to JS in allowing the point be taken appeal.  The possibility  that
         JS had never been  a  refugee  within  the  ambit  of  the  Refugee
         Convention was raised (albeit somewhat Delphically) in  the  SSHD's
         skeleton arguments dated 22nd of February 2018 before the  UT;  but
         it is right to say that the point was not  pleaded  in  the  SSHD's
         Rule 24 Respondent's Notice.  But there is ample authority that  an
         appellate court has jurisdiction to hear fresh points  of  law  not
         argued below (per Elias LJ in Miskovic v SSHD [2011] 2 CMLR  30  at
         [69]."

14. I find that the same reasons essentially apply in  the  present  appeal
    for the exercise of discretion to allow the Respondent to withdraw  the
    concession.  There is nothing to suggest in the present case  that  any
    particular consideration of this issue was given before; it was  not  a
    straightforward issue as recognised by the court and at least prior  to
    the handing down of judgement in JS (Uganda).  Although it may be  that
    a court should be reluctant to exercise such discretion  where  further
    findings of fact are required, the present appeal concerns  essentially
    a point of law as to the definition of a refugee and at  most  requires
    very limited further findings of fact as to the Appellant's  status  in
    2003 and no further evidence is relied upon by either  party  for  this
    purpose.  The  appeal  was  listed  for  further  hearing  specifically
    because further evidence and fact-finding was required  in  any  event.
    This point adds little to that task.

15. Further, the fact that this issue has been raised during the course  of
    the remaking of the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  rather  than  at
    error of law stage, does not mean that the Upper Tribunal does not have
    jurisdiction to entertain the argument in accordance with section 82 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or otherwise.

16. The question is then as to whether this Appellant was a refugee on  the
    facts of his case.  Underhill LJ set out the interpretation of  Article
    1A(2) of the Refugee Convention in paragraphs 70 and 71 of JS  (Uganda)
    as follows:

         "70.  The Refugee Convention is a  free-standing  instrument  which
         must be read as a whole.  Article  1A(2)  provides  that  the  term
         "refugee" applies to a person who "... owing to a well-founded fear
         of being persecuted for reasons of race,  religion  [etc  ...]"  is
         unable or unwilling to avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  his
         country of nationality.  Article 1C(5) provides that a person shall
         cease to be a "refugee" under Article 1A if "... the  circumstances
         in connection which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased
         to exist" such that he can no longer continue to  refuse  to  avail
         himself of the protection of his country of nationality.  The  same
         formulation "... the circumstances in connection which he has  been
         recognised as a refugee ..." is also to be found in Article 1C(6).

         71.  In my view, the plain and ordinary meaning  of  the  words  of
         Article 1A is that the status of a Refugee Convention "refugee"  is
         only accorded to a person who themselves have a "well-founded  fear
         of being persecuted",  i.e.  an  individual  or  personal  fear  of
         persecution, not one derived from or dependent upon another person.
          It is clear both from the language of Article 1A itself  and  when
         read together with Article 1C(5).  The reference in  Article  1C(5)
         to  "...  the  circumstances  in  connection  which  he  has   been
         recognised as a refugee ..." is a direct reference to the  "person"
         who falls within the definition of "refugee" in Article 1A,  namely
         "... any person  who  ...  owing  to  [his]  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution ...", i.e. not someone else's fear of persecution."

17. In the present case, there is no dispute that the Appellant was granted
    indefinite leave to  enter  as  the  spouse  of  a  person  who  was  a
    recognised refugee in the United Kingdom on the basis of her membership
    of the minority Ashraf clan.  There is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant made any application for asylum in his own right  (which  was
    open to him to do), nor that there was any assessment of whether he was
    personally at risk on return to Somalia, nor that there was any express
    grant of refugee status or recognition  under  paragraph  334A  of  the
    Immigration Rules to the Appellant in 2003, nor at any  time  prior  to
    the letter about cessation in 2016.  It seems likely that in accordance
    with current practice in 2003,  the  Appellant  was,  at  its  highest,
    simply granted in line with his spouse.   In  these  circumstances,  in
    accordance with the reasoning in JS (Uganda) given by Underhill LJ, the
    Appellant is  not  and  was  not,  in  law,  recognised  as  a  Refugee
    Convention refugee by the Respondent in 2003.

18. It may be arguable that in 2003 the Appellant met the definition  of  a
    refugee in Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, not as suggested by
    Mr Nicholson because the risk of persecution to his  wife  extended  to
    him as a family member, but because the Appellant is himself  a  member
    of the Ashraf clan (albeit the Respondent suggests that  the  Appellant
    is from the Hassan group within the Ashraf  which  is  not  a  minority
    clan), who may have been accepted as being at real risk of  persecution
    on return to Somalia at that time for that reason.  However, that  does
    not assist the Appellant in this appeal because he was  not  personally
    recognised as a Refugee Convention refugee, he was  not  given  refugee
    status as such and there can therefore be no cessation of such  status.
    Article 1C(5) and 1C(6) of the  Refugee  Convention  refer  only  to  a
    person who has personally  been  recognised  as  a  Refugee  Convention
    refugee.

19. For these reasons, I exercise  discretion  to  allow  the  Respondent's
    mistake/concession in the letters of  7  June  2016  and  19  May  2017
    regarding cessation of the refugee status and find that  the  Appellant
    was not lawfully recognised as a refugee in accordance with Article  1A
    of the Refugee Convention in 2003 (or at anytime since).  As such,  the
    cessation provisions in Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention are not
    applicable, neither is Article 11 of Council Directive 2004/83/EC  (the
    Qualification Directive), nor paragraph 339A of the Immigration  Rules.
    In such circumstances,  the  Appellant's  protection  claim  is  to  be
    considered only in accordance with the normal provisions in Article  1A
    of the Refugee Convention and similar in  the  Qualification  Directive
    and Immigration Rules; and the burden of proof is on the Appellant.

20. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

21. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

22. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).



Is the Appellant at real risk of persecution  for  a  convention  reason  on
return to his home area?

23. The Appellant's preliminary point on whether he is at risk on return to
    his home area of Luuq in the Gedo province is that this was conceded by
    the Respondent in paragraph 14 of the letter dated 7  June  2016,  when
    the Respondent accepted  that  members  of  minority  groups  may  face
    discrimination human rights abuses which, in  some  circumstances,  may
    amount to persecution and in light  of  this  there  may  be  obstacles
    preventing the Appellant's return to Luuq.  Mr Nicholson further relied
    upon paragraph 25 of the error of law decision annexed to show that the
    Upper Tribunal had already accepted the  Respondent's  concession  that
    the Appellant would be at risk on return to his home area.

24. The Respondent has not expressly conceded, in the letter of 7 June 2016
    or otherwise, that the Appellant would be at risk on return to his home
    area, only that there may be such a risk followed by  consideration  of
    return to Mogadishu in any event.  The error of law  decision  goes  no
    further than repeating the wording in the letter of  7  June  2016  and
    given the finding that the First-tier Tribunal erred in not considering
    the Appellant's home area at all, there is no preserved finding of  any
    alleged concession or risk on return.

25. The Appellant maintains that he is at risk on return to his home  area,
    both as a member of the minority Ashraf clan and also that he would  be
    at risk on return from Al Shabaab.  Although accepted by the  Appellant
    by reference to background material that Luuq is relatively or entirely
    free from Al-Shabaab, he relies on the map of  areas  of  influence  in
    Somalia as at  July  2017  from  within  the  EASO  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report, 'Somalia Security situation', dated August 2017, to
    show that the area between  Mogadishu  and  Luuq  is  under  Al-Shabaab
    control.  The journey by road of over 400 km between Mogadishu to where
    the Appellant would be returned and Luuq would not be  safe,  with  two
    thirds of the journey in an area where road connections are unsafe  and
    susceptible to Al-Shabaab attacks.  The risks from Al-Shabaab are  also
    said to include recruitment and extortion, as well as  sanctions  being
    applied to civilians who do not obey the strict rules and  ideology  of
    Al-Shabaab.  It was reiterated that the Appellant had already  suffered
    ill treatment from al-Itihaad (said to be the predecessor of Al-Shabab,
    albeit there is no specific evidence on that point) on the  basis  that
    he did not  conform  to  their  strict  standards  having  been  caught
    smoking.

26. In relation to his risk on return as a minority clan member, background
    evidence referring to discrimination, human rights abuses and  in  some
    cases persecution of minorities was relied  upon  and  even  if  not  a
    concession as to risk on return, was also referred to and  accepted  by
    the Respondent.  The Appellant's  sister  and  father  were  killed  by
    tribal Somali forces in 2001, which was submitted  to  amount  to  past
    persecution of the Appellant himself.  The Ashraf have been accepted as
    a minority clan as long as go as 2005 in the country guidance of NM and
    Others (Lone women - Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00076.

27. The Appellant produced a significant bundle of background  evidence  in
    relation to Somalia totalling some 227 pages  and  helpfully  extracted
    into a schedule of specific parts of  that  bundle  which  were  relied
    upon.  Even though not all of that evidence is expressly referred to in
    this decision, I have considered  it  in  full.   I  make  the  initial
    observation that much of the background country material relied upon by
    the Appellant refers to the general security situation in Somalia  with
    almost no information specifically about the Appellant's home  area  of
    Luuq and similarly, save for express reference to the truck bombing  in
    Mogadishu on 14 October 2017 and the demolition of informal settlements
    in Mogadishu since late 2017,  relatively  little  evidence  about  the
    general security situation in the capital either.  Whilst it  is  clear
    from the background evidence relied upon  that  conditions  in  Somalia
    generally  remain  poor,  with  instability,  continuing  violence  and
    conflict as well as poor humanitarian  conditions;  I  make  a  further
    observation that despite the volume of background material relied  upon
    by the Appellant, there was no suggestion  that  there  should  be  any
    departure from the country guidance  in  MOJ,  nor  that  the  material
    relied upon  was  credible  fresh  evidence  of  a  change  since  that
    decision.

28. The Respondent's position on the Appellant's return  to  home  area  is
    that it would be safe for him to do so and he would not be at real risk
    of persecutory treatment on the basis of clan membership or  otherwise.
    Although accepted that the Ashraf suffered during the civil war in  the
    1990s, the Respondent submits that the normalisation of  conditions  in
    the country appears to have benefited the Ashraf in  the  same  way  as
    other Somalis.  Further, that the position as to whether the Ashraf are
    a minority  clan  is,  in  reliance  on  the  Landinfo  Query  Response
    'Somalia: The Ashraf' 10 August 2018, suggested to be more nuanced than
    that relied upon by the Appellant as the group has  been  divided  into
    the Hussain and the Hassan.  The latter living mainly inland, including
    in Gedo and Mogadishu and are not considered to  be  a  minority.   The
    Hussain group are found more in the coastal cities of southern Somalia,
    also including Mogadishu.  It is suggested that as the Appellant  comes
    from Luuq, he is part of the Hassan group and therefore not a  minority
    clan member and not at risk of discrimination or persecution  as  such.
    However, although this  report  suggests  a  split  into  two  separate
    groups, I do not find that it is reliable evidence that only one  group
    is considered to be a minority clan and the other not.

29. In any event, even if the Appellant is accepted to be a  minority  clan
    member, the Respondent submits that it is safe for him to return to his
    home area.  The Respondent relies on the  Asylum  Research  Consultancy
    report, 'Situation in South and Central Somali (including  Mogadishu)',
    25 January 2018 to the effect that most urban areas  are  held  by  the
    Somali  authorities,  with  assistance  from  AMISOM,  who  cover   the
    Appellant's province, together  with  the  Ethiopian  National  Defence
    Force and the Kenny Defence Force.  Further, the EASO Country of Origin
    Report, 'Somalia Security Situation', December 2017 describes the  town
    of Luuq as an island of stability where progress and development  takes
    place and confirms that Luuq is under AMISOM control.

30. The Respondent acknowledges that in the Gedo region from 1 January 2016
    to 31 August 2017, there were 229 security incidents with estimated 753
    deaths and in Luuq specifically four aid workers were abducted in April
    2017.  The Respondent also refers  to  the  voluntary  repatriation  of
    32,500 Somalis from Kenya to a number of cities including  Luuq.   This
    of itself was submitted to be evidence of  the  stability,  safety  and
    lack of inter-clan violence in Luuq, albeit  there  were  problems  and
    displaced persons  because  of  drought,  with  cash  assistance  being
    provided to some and critical global  acute  malnutrition  rates  being
    observed as well as a cholera outbreak  (based  on  background  country
    information up to late 2017).

31. Finally, the Respondent submitted that it would  be  possible  for  the
    Appellant to travel from Mogadishu to Luuq by minibus with  nothing  to
    suggest that the Appellant would be at any risk  if  a  checkpoint  was
    encountered along the way, in particular because  the  Appellant  would
    not be perceived as an enemy of Al-Shabaab.

32. The evidence before me specifically in relation to conditions in  look,
    both in terms of the situation for minority clan members and risk  from
    Al-Shabaab is relatively thin.  In relation to Al-Shabaab, it is common
    ground between the parties that they are not in control in Luuq,  which
    is a relatively stable town to where displaced persons  have  returned.
    I do not find on the evidence that is available that the  Appellant  is
    at any risk in Luuq from Al-Shabaab.

33. In relation to the position of minority clan members, of which  I  find
    the Appellant is one,  belonging  to  the  Ashraf  clan,  there  is  no
    specific information at all as to the situation in Luuq and at  best  I
    can only rely on  generalised  evidence  pertaining  to  Somalia  as  a
    broader area, of discrimination,  human  rights  abuses  and  is  cases
    poorer living conditions for minority clans.  This much is accepted  by
    the Respondent, who went so far as to say  that  this  may  amounts  to
    persecution, albeit there was no concession in this case that  it  did.
    To the lower standard of proof applicable in such cases,  I  find  that
    the evidence is just sufficient to show that there is a  real  risk  of
    persecution of  the  Appellant  based  on  his  ethnicity,  namely  his
    membership of the minority Ashraf clan in his home area.

34. In any event, I find force in the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that even if not at real risk on return  to  his  home  area,
    there was no safe journey option for him to reach there from Mogadishu.
     It is clear from the map available that the Appellant  would  have  to
    travel a significant  distance  by  road  (some  400km),  predominantly
    through territory  held  by  Al-Shabaab  and  where  there  is,  albeit
    limited, evidence of unsafe conditions  to  civilians  generally.   The
    Respondent has not established that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    safely reach his home area in the circumstances.

Is it reasonable and not  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to  internally
relocate to Mogadishu?

35. On the basis that I have found that the Appellant is at risk on  return
    to his home area (or at least getting to his home area), the next issue
    to determine is whether it would be reasonable or not unduly harsh  for
    him to internally relocate to  Mogadishu.   The  legal  principles  for
    internal relocation are well established and not  in  dispute  in  this
    appeal and therefore will not be repeated within this decision.

36. As above,  neither  party  has  suggested  that  there  should  be  any
    departure from the country guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), which is applicable to the  present
    appeal.  The key findings for the purposes of this appeal as summarised
    in the headnote, with  additional  cross-referencing  to  the  original
    paragraph numbers in the main body of  the  decision  given  in  square
    brackets for ease of cross referencing to relevant paragraphs in  later
    decisions below, are:

        i) The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.

       ii) Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
           will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in  a
           European location for a period of  time  of  being  viewed  with
           suspicion either by the authorities as a possible  supporter  of
           Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
           Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
           country. [paragraph 407(a)]

      iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the  Al  Shabaab
           withdrawal from Mogadishu is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
           prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That  was
           not the case at the time of the country guidance  given  by  the
           Tribunal in AMM. [paragraph 407(b)]

       iv)  The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding   non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabaab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk. [paragraph 407(c)]

        v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further
           still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral  damage"
           in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted
           at him by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are  clearly
           identifiable as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable for him to do so.  [paragraph 407(d)]

       vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for
           civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees
           from the West.  [paragraph 407(e)]

      vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming from majority clan members, as minority
           clans may have little to offer.  [paragraph 407(f)]

     viii) The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially, social  support  mechanisms  and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of   a
           protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias
           in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan-based discriminatory
           treatment, even for minority clan members.  [paragraph 407(g)]

       ix) If it is accepted that a person facing return to Mogadishu after
           a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives  in
           the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
           there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all   the
           circumstances.  These considerations will include, but  are  not
           limited to:


          . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure:
          . length of absence from Mogadishu;
          . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
          . access to financial resources;
          . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that  be  employment
            or self-employment;
          . availability of remittances from abroad;
          . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
          . why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
            enables an appellant to  secure  financial  support  on  return.
            [paragraph 407(h)]

        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have  never  been  away.
           [paragraph 407(h)]

       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.  [paragraph 408]

      xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing  a  real  risk  of  destitution.   On  the  other   hand,
           relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with  no
           formal links to the city, no access to funds and no  other  form
           of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to  be  realistic
           as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form of
           ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of having no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is  a  real  prospect  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions  that  will  fall   below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards.  [paragraphs 424 and 425]

28. At the outset, I find in accordance with the country guidance  set  out
    above, that the Appellant is not at risk on return to Mogadishu because
    of his ethnicity, as a member of the Ashraf minority clan; nor is he at
    risk on return to Mogadishu from Al-Shabaab.  For the same  reasons  he
    does not face any Article 15(c) risk and in any event is excluded  from
    humanitarian protection.  There was in any event no reliance placed  by
    the Appellant on any such risks specifically in Mogadishu, the  matters
    relied upon were that internal relocation to Mogadishu was unduly harsh
    and unreasonable because of the living conditions that he would face on
    return there.

29. The Appellant's position is that the  factors  set  out  in  paragraphs
    407(h) and 408 of MOJ apply only to those from Mogadishu who  would  be
    returning there and are not applicable to someone  like  the  Appellant
    who is not from  Mogadishu.   Although  some  of  these  factors  could
    arguably be of relevance to people not from Mogadishu in a similar  way
    to their relevance for a person who has been absent for some  time,  it
    was submitted that these were not directly relevant to this Appellant's
    circumstances and overall the  factors  in  407(h)  and  408  were  not
    applicable to someone not originating from Mogadishu.  Further, it  was
    submitted that the reference to opportunities  in  Mogadishu  from  the
    economic boom in MOJ were also only applicable to  returning  residents
    and had no application to those not from Mogadishu.

30. Mr Nicholson submitted that the Appellant fell within  paragraph  (xii)
    of the head note (paragraphs 424 and 425 of the main decision) in  MOJ,
    in that the Appellant  is  from  a  minority  clan  with  no  links  to
    Mogadishu, no access to funds or any other  support  and  therefore  no
    means to establish a home or therefore  employment  in  Mogadishu.   As
    such the Appellant would be at real risk of having no  alternative  but
    to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp  which  would  be
    unreasonable and unduly harsh.

31. The Respondent submitted that consistent with country guidance in  MOJ,
    it is for the Appellant to establish that he would not be able to  take
    advantage of the economic boom in Mogadishu, but that he has  given  no
    reason as to why he would be unable to do so, even as  a  member  of  a
    minority clan and even if accepted that he had no access  to  funds  or
    other support.  To  the  contrary,  the  Appellant  has  an  employment
    history in both Somalia and the United Kingdom, as a cleaner, a kitchen
    porter and at its lowest, a tyre fitter (albeit with some  evidence  of
    wider experience as a mechanic in both Somalia and the United  Kingdom)
    and the Ashraf clan have a presence in Mogadishu such that he may  have
    some clan protection.  Further, the Appellant still speaks Somali.  The
    Appellant is overall in good health and has no dependents.  There is no
    reason to think that the Appellant would end  up  in  an  IDP  camp  in
    Mogadishu in the circumstances.  Overall the Appellant would be able to
    lead a relatively normal life by the standards generally prevailing  in
    Mogadishu and internal relocation would not therefore be  unduly  harsh
    on him.

32. There is some concern expressed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 as to possible
    conflation between factors  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  internal
    relocation, humanitarian protection and Article 3 in MOJ, which need to
    be set out in full to clarify which parts of the guidance set out above
    are specifically relevant to the assessment of internal relocation  and
    which are relevant to an assessment under Article  3.   Although  ideal
    separately with Article 3 in the section below, part of what is set out
    here sets the scene for the assessment  of  Article  3  as  well.   The
    discussion in Said is at paragraphs 26 to 31 which state as follows:

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are directed to the issue that  arises
         under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Sub-paragraphs
         (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
         Mogadishu, and the current absence of  risk  from  belonging  to  a
         minority clan.  Sub-paragraph (h) and paragraph 408 are  concerned,
         in broad terms, with the ability of a returning Somali national  to
         support himself.  The conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises
         the possibility of a person's circumstances failing below what  "is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".  It is, with respect,
         unclear whether that is a  reference  back  to  the  definition  of
         "humanitarian  protection"  arising  from   article   15   of   the
         Qualification Directive.  These factors do not  go  to  inform  any
         question under article 15(c).   Nor  does  it  chime  with  article
         15(b), which draws on the language of article 3 of the  Convention,
         because the fact that a person might be returned to  very  deprived
         living conditions, could not (save in  extreme  cases)  lead  to  a
         conclusion that removal would violate article 3.

         ...

         28. In view of the reference in the paragraph immediately preceding
         para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras 407(h) and 408
         are likely to have been  introduced  in  connection  with  internal
         flight  or  internal  relocation  arguments,  which  was  a  factor
         identified in para 1 setting out the scope  of  the  issues  before
         UTIAC.  Whilst they may have some relevance in a search for whether
         a removal to Somalia would give rise to a violation of article 3 of
         the Convention, they cannot be understood as  a  surrogate  for  an
         examination of the circumstances to determine whether such a breach
         would occur.  I am unable to accept that if a Somali national  were
         able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he would  have
         established that his removal to Somalia would breach article  3  of
         the Convention.  Such an approach would be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and  Convention  jurisprudence  which  at  para  34  UTIAC
         expressly understood itself to be following.

         29. Having set out its guidance,  UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
         IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.   It
         recognised that  the  label  was  problematic  because  there  were
         individuals who are considered as internally displaced persons  who
         have settled in a new part of Somalia in "a reasonable standard  of
         accommodation" and with access to food, remittances from abroad  or
         an independent livelihood.   UTIAC  considered  that  the  position
         would be different for someone obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the
         conditions  of  some  of  which  "are  appalling",  para  411.   It
         continued by quoting from evidence of armed attacks on  IDP  camps,
         of  sexual  and  other  gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible
         recruitment of internally displaced children into violence,  albeit
         that it  did  not  accept  the  evidence  it  quoted.   UTIAC  also
         mentioned overcrowding, poor  health  conditions  and  (ironically)
         that  the  economic  improvements  in  Mogadishu  were  leading  to
         evictions from IDP camps in urban centres with  vulnerable  victims
         being unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         30.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that  the  discussion  of  this
         evidence, which  is  culled  from  expert  reports,  understandably
         touches on concerns about violence, which in article 3 terms  would
         be analysed by reference to the approach in MSS and Sufi  and  Elmi
         cases, and aspects of  destitution,  which  would  be  analysed  by
         reference to the approach in the N and  D  cases.   The  conflation
         continues in para 412:

             "Given what we have  seen,  and  described  above,  about  the
             extremely harsh living  conditions,  and  the  risk  of  being
             subjected to a range of human rights abuses, such a person  is
             likely to found to be living  at  a  level  that  falls  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards."

         Having further discussed the contradictory evidence about how  many
         people lived in IDP camps, UTIAC concluded that "many thousands  of
         people are reduced  to  living  in  circumstances  of  destitution"
         albeit that there was no reliable figure of how many  people  lived
         in such destitution in IDP camps.  The determination continued:

             "420. Whilst it is likely that those who  do  find  themselves
             living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in  an  IDP  camp
             will be experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to
             engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR, we do not  see
             that it gives rise to an enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since
             there  is  an  insufficient  nexus  with  the   indiscriminate
             violence which, in any event, we have found not to be at  such
             a high level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm.  Nor does the evidence support  the  claim  that
             there is an enhanced risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
             for those in the IDP camps or  that  such  a  person  is  more
             likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack ...

             421. Other  than  those  with  no  alternative  to  living  in
             makeshift accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp,  the  humanitarian
             position in Mogadishu  has  continued  to  improve  since  the
             country guidance in AMM was published.  The famine is confined
             to  history  ...  The  "economic  boom"  has  generated   more
             opportunity for employment and ... self-employment.  For  many
             returnees remittances will be important ...

             422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to
             civilian returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that  no  Somali
             national can succeed in a refugee or  humanitarian  protection
             or article 3 claim.  Each case will fall to be decided on  its
             own facts.  As we have observed,  there  will  need  to  be  a
             careful assessment of all the circumstances  of  a  particular
             individual."

         31. I entirely accept that some of the  observations  made  in  the
         course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that
         if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3.  Yet such a stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts.  In my judgement the position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered.  An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
          Impoverished conditions which were the direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

37. As in  paragraph  28  above,  it  would  appear  that  the  factors  in
    paragraphs 407(h) and 408 of  MOJ  (paragraphs  (ix)  to  (xi)  of  the
    headnote) are relevant to internal relocation, with the reference to  a
    person facing a return to Mogadishu  not  limited  to  those  who  have
    previously lived there but also those returning to there from elsewhere
    in Somalia.  This conclusion is not undermined by the reference to  the
    length of absence from Mogadishu which will simply be  at  the  extreme
    end of the scale for those who have never lived there.   The  Court  of
    Appeal did not expressly quote or comment on paragraphs 424 and 425  of
    MOJ (paragraph (xii) of the headnote), but did refer to the  conflation
    of the issues in paragraphs 412 and in 420 to 422 (preceding the  parts
    extracted for the headnote), as being more relevant to Article 3 rather
    than any need for humanitarian protection and without there  being  any
    reference this section being specifically  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

38. In these circumstances, I consider the factors in  paragraphs  (ix)  to
    (xi)  in  respect  of  the  Appellant  for  the  purposes  of  internal
    relocation  and  also  include  (xii)  given  its  status  amongst  the
    conflated issues is, to some extent uncertain, but would appear to have
    at least some relevance to a person internally relocating to Mogadishu.

39. The Appellant is  not  from  Mogadishu  and  although  there  was  some
    reference by the Respondent in 2016 to the Appellant  having  lived  in
    Mogadishu with his wife (where her parents were born and where she  had
    a house), this point has not been pursued since and the  Appellant  has
    maintained, including in his unchallenged oral evidence before me, that
    he had always lived in and around Luuq.  In these circumstances, I find
    that the Appellant is  not  from  Mogadishu  nor  is  there  sufficient
    evidence before me to establish that he has previously lived there  nor
    spent  any  substantial  period  of  time  there.   In  terms  of   the
    Appellant's circumstances before departing from Somalia, these are that
    he was living in Luuq with his wife and family, working as a farmer and
    in a local garage, fixing tyres and  brakes  and  with  no  significant
    personal experience of living in Mogadishu.

40. The Respondent has not challenged the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  no
    remaining family in Somalia or the  United  Kingdom  (his  parents  and
    sister having passed away and being divorced from his wife) such that I
    find that he will not have any family  associations  to  call  upon  in
    Mogadishu.  The Appellant is the member of a minority clan who do  have
    a presence in Mogadishu, but as a minority clan are, in accordance with
    the country guidance, unlikely to be  able  to  offer  any  significant
    assistance.

41. It is unclear as to how the Appellant has been  supporting  himself  in
    the United Kingdom, other than for some  periods  of  employment  as  a
    cleaner,  kitchen  porter  and  working  in  a  friend's  garage.   The
    Appellant has not offered any detail as to periods of his employment or
    earnings, nor in the alternative, of any person who has been supporting
    him here.  There is however nothing to suggest that he would  have  the
    benefit of any remittances from friends or associates here on return to
    Somalia;  nor  that  he  would  have  access  to  any  other  financial
    resources,  in  particular  as  his  previous  application  under   the
    facilitated returns scheme was refused.  There is no evidence at all as
    to how the Appellant's journey to the Untied Kingdom was funded in 2003
    but equally nothing to suggest that any such financial resources  would
    be available to him now given the passage of time and passing of family
    members.

42. In terms of the factors to consider in the country guidance, this  then
    leaves the Appellant's prospects of securing a  livelihood  on  return,
    either through employment or self-employment; or,  as  in  the  country
    guidance, put another way, why the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    access the economic opportunities available in Mogadishu.

43. The Appellant has a  work  history  in  both  Somalia  and  the  United
    Kingdom, albeit without evidence of  any  formal  qualifications.   The
    Appellant is in good health and still speaks Somali with at least  some
    English.  These are matters which,  as  a  person  returning  from  the
    United Kingdom put him in relatively good stead to access the  economic
    opportunities in Mogadishu.  The Appellant has not offered  any  reason
    as to why he would not be able to use his skills and  experience,  both
    from work and languages, to gain  employment  or  be  self-employed  on
    return.  Although he  will  not  have  any  specific  family,  clan  or
    financial support; he does have a real prospect of securing access to a
    livelihood on return and will not therefore face the prospect of living
    in circumstances which are unreasonable, unduly harsh,  nor  that  fall
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian  protection  terms.   In
    terms of paragraph (xii) of the headnote to MOJ, the Appellant's  means
    to establish a  home  and  financial  support  are  him  accessing  the
    economic  opportunities  in  Mogadishu  through  employment  or   self-
    employment; from which he can support himself even without other  forms
    of external support.

44. For these reasons I do not find that the Appellant  would  be  at  real
    risk of persecution on return  to  Mogadishu,  he  would  not  face  an
    Article 15(c) risk there and it would not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh  for  him  to  internally  relocate  to  Mogadishu  either.   The
    Appellant's appeal on protection grounds is therefore dismissed.

45. For the avoidance of doubt, even if, contrary to the findings above  in
    relation to cessation this is a case in which the  Appellant  had  been
    granted refugee status in accordance with the Refugee  Convention  such
    that Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention on  cessation  applies;  I
    would have in any event found the test therein to be satisfied in  part
    on the findings set out above in relation to internal relocation and in
    part because, as expressly recognised in MOJ itself, there had  already
    been significant and durable change in Mogadishu by 2013/2014 and there
    is nothing in the evidence before  me  to  suggest  that  that  durable
    change has not been maintained to date.  In these circumstances,  there
    has  been  the  required  durable  and  significant   improvements   in
    Mogadishu, specifically in the eradication of clan based  violence  and
    removal  of  Al  Shabaab,  relevant   to   the   Appellant's   personal
    circumstances, to support a decision ceasing any refugee status.

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights

46. In terms of the Article 3 threshold to be applied, the present case  is
    not a "paradigm" case as in MSS v Belgium &  Greece  53  EHRR  28.   As
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Said, Article  3  was  intended  to
    protect persons from violations of their civil  and  political  rights,
    not their social and economic rights.  The return of a person  who  was
    not at risk of harm because of armed conflict or violence would not  in
    the  case  of  economic  deprivation  violate  Article  3  unless   the
    circumstances were such as those  in  N  v  UK  [2005]  2  AC  296  (as
    summarised by Lady Justice Arden in paragraph  34  of  MA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  994).   The
    main conclusion on this point in Said is at paragraph 18  which  states
    as follows:

         "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal  on
         article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or  deprivation
         on return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country
         or others in the sense described in para  282  of  Sufi  and  Elmi,
         whether or not the feared deprivation is contributed to by  medical
         condition, the person liable to deportation must show circumstances
         which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in  the
         D and N cases."

47. The question of whether the risk of deprivation on return would lead to
    a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
    revisited in MA (Somalia).  Lady Justice  Arden,  being  bound  by  the
    decision in Said, confirmed that there is no violation of Article 3  by
    reason of a person being returned  to  a  country  which  for  economic
    reasons  can  not  provide  him  with  basic  living  standards.    The
    Respondent in MA contended that the situation in  Somalia  was  brought
    about by conflict, which is recognised by the European Court  of  Human
    Rights as an exception to the analysis.   Lady  Justice  Arden  however
    concluded at paragraph 63 that:

         "... It is true that there has historically been severe conflict in
         Somalia, but, on the basis of MOJ, that would  not  necessarily  be
         the cause of deprivation if the respondent were returned to Somalia
         now.  The evidence is that there is no present reason why a person,
         with support from his family and/or prospects of employment, should
         face unacceptable living standards."

48. Mr Nicholson submitted that the decisions of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Said and MA were simply wrong as to the correct test to be applied  for
    Article 3 for return to Somalia, and/or that the decision on this point
    in MA was obiter.  These decisions are however  binding  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal as to the correct test to be applied and have  been  expressly
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal in MI (Palestine) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1782 and by the Upper  Tribunal
    in SB (refugee revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00358 (IAC).

49. In the alternative, Mr Nicholson submitted that the  standard  in  Sufi
    and Elmi is the appropriate one to apply in the present appeal  because
    the Appellant would only be at risk of treatment  violating  Article  3
    because he had to internally relocate to Mogadishu because of  risk  in
    his home area, caused  by  the  conflict  in  Somalia.   However,  that
    misunderstands the relevant cause of poverty or deprivation, it must be
    conditions in Mogadishu or the IDP camps in particular that are  caused
    by the conflict and/or absence of appropriate  protection  rather  than
    the mere fact that a person may, on internal relocation, live in such a
    place.  The risk of treatment  on  return  to  the  place  of  internal
    relocation that may violate Article 3  must  itself  emanate  from  the
    conflict; not merely that the Appellant is relocating for that reason.

50. It is well established that in Article 3 cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual is not from treatment emanating from intentionally inflicted
    acts of the public authorities in the receiving state or from those  of
    non-State bodies in that country when the authorities there are  unable
    to afford him appropriate protection; it is only  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances that there would  be  a  violation  of  Article  3.   The
    principles are summarised by the European Court of Human Rights in N as
    follows:

         "42. Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.

         43.  The court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling.  However, it considers that it should maintain the high
         threshold set in D v UK ... and applied in its subsequent case law,
         which it regards as correct in principle, given that in such  cases
         the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
         or omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies, but instead
         from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.

         44...  Advances  in  medical  science,  together  with  social  and
         economic differences between countries, entail that  the  level  of
         treatment available in the Contracting State  and  the  country  of
         origin may vary considerably.  While it  is  necessary,  given  the
         fundamental importance of Article 3 in the Convention  system,  for
         the Court to retain a degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in
         very exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an  obligation  on
         the Contracting State to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the
         provision of free and unlimited healthcare to all aliens without  a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction.  A finding to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."

51. It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that applying the  threshold
    in N, he could not meet that standard to establish a  real  risk  of  a
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.   For
    the avoidance of doubt, it is clear that  he  can  not  do  so  on  the
    evidence available.  In any event, it is very difficult to see  on  the
    facts of this case how the Appellant could meet the high threshold  for
    a breach of Article 3 in circumstances where I have found that it would
    not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him to internally  relocate  to
    Mogadishu.  In essence, his claim under Article 3, applying the correct
    standard in N, can  not  succeed  independently  when  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim has failed, given the lower threshold for consideration of
    the reasonableness of internal relocation which need not reach the same
    level as required for a breach of Article 3.

52. As above, the First-tier Tribunal findings dismissing  the  Appellant's
    claim on humanitarian protection grounds and on Article 8 grounds  were
    preserved such that no further findings on either of these  issues  are
    required.  For all of these reasons, the Appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the attached error of law  decision,  the  making
of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and  as  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision is remade as follows.

The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     31st January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00072/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2018                |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                            THE HON LORD MATTHEWS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    A Y A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson of counsel, instructed by Thompson &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the decision of  the  Tribunal,  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.   The  Appellant  appeals  with  permission  against   the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kainth promulgated on 22 December
    2017, in which the Appellant's appeal against the respondent's  refusal
    of his protection and human rights claim (in the context of  revocation
    of protection status and deportation), dated 19 May 2017 was dismissed.



 2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 30 September 1972.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 5 August  2003  as  the  dependent  of  a
    refugee, his then wife, who had been granted indefinite leave to remain
    on 12 December 2002 on the basis that she was at risk of persecution in
    Somalia as a member of the Ashraf minority clan.  The Appellant's entry
    was preceded by an entry clearance visa for indefinite leave  to  enter
    issued on 28 July 2003.

 3. The Respondent made a decision to  deport  the  Appellant  pursuant  to
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and the Immigration  Act  1971
    on 23 April 2016.  The Respondent also served a notice of intention  to
    cease the Appellant's refugee status on 7 June  2016.   Both  of  these
    decisions followed the Appellant's multiple convictions, including  the
    trigger offence on 11 April 2016 for assault occasioning actual  bodily
    harm for which he was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment.

 4. On 19 May 2017, the Respondent refused the Appellant's  protection  and
    human rights claim and further submissions  made  in  response  to  the
    decisions above.  In relation to the revocation of  protection  status,
    the Respondent considered that paragraph  339A(v)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention applied to his case
    because  the  circumstances  in  connection  with  which  he  had  been
    recognised as  a  refugee  ceased  to  exist.   Having  considered  the
    representations from the UNHCR on  the  specifics  of  the  Appellant's
    case, the Respondent concluded that there had been  a  significant  and
    enduring change in Somalia such that there was no longer persecution on
    the basis of clan membership  in  Mogadishu  and  the  Appellant  could
    return there without any breach of Article 3 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights, on the basis of clan  membership  or  otherwise.   The
    Respondent did  not  consider  that  there  would  be  any  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration in Somalia, that he retained
    sufficient ties to Somalia and could gain lawful employment on  return.
    The general security situation in Somalia did not place  the  Appellant
    at risk on return.  For the same reasons it  was  considered  that  the
    Appellant was not eligible for humanitarian protection and in any event
    he was excluded from the same by  paragraph  339D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The Respondent also considered the Appellant's  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights even though no claim was made under this  provision.   The
    Appellant had a wife and minor step-daughter  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    both of whom are British Citizens but it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  either  of
    them and in any event it would not be unduly  harsh  for  those  family
    members either to relocate to Somalia with the Appellant or  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without him if he were deported.   The  Appellant
    therefore did not meet the family exception in paragraph 399(a) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Neither did he meet the private life  exception  in
    paragraph 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  were  no  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions to outweigh  the
    very significant public interest in deporting the Appellant.

 6. Judge Kainth dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated
    on 22 December 2017 on all  grounds.   We  return  to  the  detail  and
    reasons for that decision below.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on the grounds that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not properly apply the country guidance case of MOJ & Others (Return to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) applicable to persons who
    would be internally relocating to Mogadishu, for whom the assessment is
    materially different, i.e. that paragraph (xii) of the head note should
    have  been  applied  as  opposed  to  paragraph  (ix)  of   the   same.
    Specifically, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  account  of  or
    recognise the fact that the Appellant  came  from  Luuq  and  not  from
    Mogadishu, such that any consideration of  return  to  Mogadishu  would
    have to be on the basis of internal relocation.

 8. Separately, the Appellant disputes that he made the concession recorded
    in paragraph 51 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  there
    was some protection offered by the larger Benadin clan.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on  21
    February 2018 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its application of MOJ in relation to  a  person  not
    from Mogadishu and arguably failed to adequately explain  the  findings
    in this regard.  It was noted in  the  grant  of  permission  that  the
    decision  appeared  not  to  have  been  properly  structured,  with  a
    conflation of  separate  issues  around  cessation,  current  risk  not
    starting from the Appellant's home area,  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The parties were
    also notified of the need to address the Court of Appeal's decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA  Civ  442
    and the unchallenged conclusion that the  Appellant  is  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection.

10. Subsequent to the grant of permission and prior to  the  error  of  law
    hearing, there were further developments in the authorities which  were
    potentially relevant to the determination of this appeal and which  the
    parties were further directed to address.  Due  to  these  developments
    and directions given to the parties to deal with the subsequent matters
    arising, the issues ultimately for determination in this appeal are  in
    fact  broader  than  what  at  first  sight  would  appear  to   be   a
    straightforward issue as to the application of MOJ, as set out  in  the
    original grounds of appeal.  The issues do however fall within  or  are
    consequent upon the original grounds of appeal and grant of  permission
    such that no amendment is required to them.

11. We are grateful to both Mr Nicholson and Mr Wilding  for  the  detailed
    skeleton arguments submitted, identifying the issues in this appeal and
    dealing with a number of cases subsequent to the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal which may/or do have a material bearing  on  this  appeal
    and to the correct approach as to cases such as the present one.

12. The parties agree that there are two broad issues to determine in  this
    appeal as to whether there is an error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it should be set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remade.  The first issue is whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    its consideration of cessation of the Appellant's  refugee  status  and
    the second is as to whether, if not, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    dismissing the appeal under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

13. In summary, the Appellant's position is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to make  any  findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  clan
    membership and risk on return to his home area (the  Respondent  having
    already accepted that he may be at risk  of  persecution  in  his  home
    area, a conclusion which is consistent with the  Respondent's  "Country
    Policy and Information  Note:  Somalia:  Majority  clans  and  minority
    groups in south and central Somalia"  June  2017)  and  in  failing  to
    appreciate that a return to Mogadishu would be  a  matter  of  internal
    relocation, such that there was a failure to apply the correct parts of
    MOJ.  In any event, in the assessment of cessation  undertaken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, there is a  conflation  of  consideration  of  the
    issues under the Refugee Convention with those that would  be  relevant
    to the assessment under Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  It was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that  there  should
    be symmetry between the consideration of a grant of refugee status  and
    cessation (as in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  MS  (Art   1C(5)-
    Mogadishu) Somalia [2018] UKUT 00196 (IAC) and MA (Somalia) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994,  although  the
    parties disagreed as to  the  extent  to  which  those  decisions  were
    consistent with each other) and in  such  circumstances  the  Appellant
    would only need to show that internal relocation to Mogadishu would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh and he does not need to  show  that  there
    would be a breach of Article 3 for these purposes.

14. In the alternative, the Appellant claims that to  return  to  Mogadishu
    would be a breach of Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights on the basis of the standard in Sufi and Elmi v  United  Kingdom
    54 EHRR 209  because  the  Appellant  would  only  have  to  internally
    relocate to Mogadishu at all because of conflict reasons and it  cannot
    therefore be said that the conditions he  would  be  faced  with  there
    could be for anything other than conflict  reasons.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant necessarily had to submit that the Court of Appeal were wrong
    in deciding that the test to be applied was that in N v UK [2005] 2  AC
    296, as held in both Said and MA.

15. In summary, the Respondent's position is that the First-tier Tribunal's
    failure to consider the situation  in  the  Appellant's  home  area  is
    immaterial to the outcome of the appeal given the findings that in  any
    event it is reasonable for him to return to Mogadishu, in light of  the
    presumption in MOJ that he would be able to access  the  advantages  of
    the economic boom there.  The issue of cessation being a  mirror  image
    of the grant of Refugee status meaning that  the  issue  of  whether  a
    person could reasonably internally relocate was a necessary part of the
    consideration to the decision.

16. In relation  to  Article  3,  the  Respondent  submitted  that  if  the
    Appellant was unable to succeed on the  first  ground  in  relation  to
    cessation, it was impossible to see how he could succeed on the  higher
    Article 3 threshold on either test, but in any event the Upper Tribunal
    is bound by the decisions of the Court of Appeal in Said and MA to  the
    effect that the applicable test in the circumstances of this  appeal/in
    Somalia is that in N as conditions in IDP camps are caused primarily by
    severe droughts in Somalia rather than  by  reason  of  past  conflicts
    there.  In any event, on the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, there
    is no reason to suggest that the Appellant would end up in an IDP  camp
    in Mogadishu.

Findings and reasons

17. At the outset, we turn in more detail to the findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal and in particular the  structure  of  those  findings  to
    determine whether the decision contains an error of law,  before  going
    on to determine whether it is necessary to set it  aside  if  there  is
    such an  error.   The  starting  point  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration is in paragraph 39 of the decision which sets out Article
    1C(5) of the Refugee Convention, followed by consideration of the  case
    of Abdulla and others v Bundesrepublik Deutshlan  D  Case  C175/08  and
    others and Secretary of State for the Home Department v  MM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 797 and the representations from the UNHCR as  well  as
    the Appellant's own representations.

18. The country guidance in the head note of MOJ is then set out  in  full,
    followed by the conclusion that the Appellant would be returning as  an
    ordinary civilian to Mogadishu, where there has been a  durable  change
    since the previous country  guidance.   By  further  reference  to  the
    Respondent's Country  Information  Guidance  Report  dated  July  2016:
    "South  and  Central   Somalia   Country   Information   Security   and
    Humanitarian Situation", the First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph
    48 of the decision that  during  the  period  of  13  years  since  the
    Appellant left Somalia and was granted  refugee  status,  the  security
    landscape of Somalia in respect of the human rights situation of ethnic
    minorities has fundamentally improved.

19. The First-tier Tribunal noted that on behalf of the Appellant, none  of
    the background or  objective  evidence  in  a  significant  bundle  was
    specifically referred to or relied upon at the hearing  and  the  Judge
    concluded that the Appellant's concerns about  return  to  Somalia  not
    being a safe country, and in which life would  be  very  difficult  for
    him, were no  more  than  speculation  and  conjecture.   The  decision
    continues as follows:

         "50.  In my assessment of the evidence in the round, there were  no
         significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration  into  his
         country of birth.  He is an adult and in good health.  He has  been
         able to make a life for himself in the United  Kingdom  (a  foreign
         country) where he  secured  employment  and  enhanced  his  skills.
         There is no reason to suspect that the skills he has learnt in  the
         United Kingdom could not be put  to  good  effect  upon  return  to
         Somalia.  The appellant  had  the  benefit  of  a  Somali  speaking
         interpreter.  He has been the vast majority of his life in Somalia,
         some 30 years.  He is fully  familiar  with  local  traditions  and
         customs and spent his formative years there.  He  was  educated  up
         until the age of approximately 14 in Somalia.  The appellant speaks
         some English albeit it is limited.  He could put that to  good  use
         upon return.  His ability to secure employment has been enhanced as
         a result of the skills learnt whilst in the UK.   Whilst  I  accept
         that there may be challenges to life in Somalia, it cannot be  said
         on the objective material and considering  the  case  of  MOJ  that
         there would be a violation of Article 3 of the ECHR."

20. It was not suggested on behalf of the Appellant that he was at risk  of
    persecution or serious harm from Al-Shabaab because he was not a  high-
    profile  member  of  an  institution  representing  the   international
    community or the Somali government.  In light of all of these  reasons,
    the First-tier Tribunal concluded in paragraph 54 that the appellant no
    longer qualifies to remain in the United Kingdom because  the  position
    in his country of birth is now substantially different to that  at  the
    point of his entry to the United Kingdom in 2003.

21. In paragraph 55 of the decision, there  is  a  simple  conclusion  that
    there is no real risk that the Appellant would be  killed  contrary  to
    Article 2 on return, nor any real risk that his life  under  Article  3
    would be breached on return.

22. We find that the First-tier Tribunal's  approach  to  the  question  of
    cessation, or at least the reasons given for finding that the Appellant
    no longer qualifies  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  due  to  the
    substantially  different  situation  now  in   Somalia   is   confused,
    conflating broader issues not relevant to the question of cessation and
    with a distinct lack of factual findings, clarity and relevant  reasons
    for the conclusions reached.

23. The First-tier Tribunal refers in paragraph 53  only  to  the  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm from Al-Shabaab, which is only one part  of
    the Appellant's representations as to why he should not be deported  to
    Somalia, namely the general security  situation  there.   There  is  no
    express consideration of the original reasons for the grant of  Refugee
    status - although as a dependent of his wife, the Appellant  claims  to
    be a member of the same minority  clan  as  her,  had  previously  been
    targeted for that reason and claims to continue to be at  risk  on  the
    same basis.  There is no express finding as to  whether  the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return now for these reasons, either  in  his  home
    area or whether internal relocation to  Mogadishu  would  be  safe  and
    reasonable.  At its highest, there is  a  brief  statement  as  to  the
    applicability of head note (ii) and (iii) of MOJ to the effect that  in
    general there is no real risk of persecution on return to Mogadishu  to
    an ordinary civilian.  There  is  no  express  reference  to  paragraph
    (viii) of the head note in MOJ to the effect  that  there  is  no  clan
    violence or discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members in
    Mogadishu; nor any suggestion of its application to this Appellant.

24. Although there is a self-direction as to the extent of  the  change  of
    circumstances necessary for a cessation decision, there is only a  very
    brief  conclusion  that  the  security   landscape   of   Somalia   has
    fundamentally improved as in MOJ and later background material from the
    Respondent's reports as to the situation in 2016 and 2017.  The  First-
    tier  Tribunal  refers  to  an  improvement  in  Somalia,  rather  than
    specifically in relation to Mogadishu, although the findings in MOJ and
    the references made to the background material which post-date  it  are
    specifically only about the situation in Mogadishu.

25. The First-tier Tribunal fails to recognise at this  juncture  that  the
    Appellant is not from Mogadishu and it had already been accepted by the
    Respondent that the Appellant may be at risk in  his  home  area,  such
    that the situation in other parts of Somalia  is  not  necessarily  the
    same.  Further, as there is no reference at all to the Appellant's home
    area, there is no recognition that  a  return  to  Mogadishu  for  this
    Appellant would be on the basis of internal relocation and not a return
    to his home area.

26. In paragraph 50 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, there is an
    assessment of  the  Appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  possible
    situation on return to  Somalia  (again  the  references  are  only  to
    Somalia  in  general  terms  and  not  specifically  in   relation   to
    Mogadishu), with the conclusion that there would  be  no  violation  of
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  It is  difficult
    to tell how this paragraph fits within the initial section dealing with
    cessation, to  which  Article  3  has  no  relevance  for  the  reasons
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in MA and which in any event does  not
    really address the proper question to  be  considered  in  relation  to
    Article 3, on either of the possible tests (either that in N or in Sufi
    and Elmi) and reads  more  as  we  would  expect  an  assessment  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  to  be  structured.   This
    paragraph in particular displays an error of law in the  approach  both
    to the issue of cessation (if that is in fact what it was directed  to)
    and as to whether there is a breach of Article 3, not being directly on
    point or correct in law for either.

27. In all of these circumstances, we find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    fails to engage with the relevant question on the issue  of  cessation,
    as to whether there has been a change of circumstances of a significant
    and non-temporary nature which is durable  and  which  means  that  the
    basis on which the grant of Refugee status was made no  longer  exists.
    That may include the need for a proper assessment of the reasonableness
    of internal relocation on the facts of this case, but that  is  in  our
    view entirely absent from the decision  as  well.   For  all  of  these
    reasons we find an error of  law  in  relation  to  this  part  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and in  the  conclusions  found  in
    relation to cessation and Article 3 in paragraphs  54  and  55  of  the
    decision.  As such, it is necessary to set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

28. On the basis identified above, we would not characterise the  error  by
    the First-tier Tribunal as a failure to apply the  right  part  of  the
    guidance in MOJ (on the basis of any  distinction  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant is a returning resident to Mogadishu or would  be  internally
    relocating there), but  rather  a  wholesale  failure  in  the  way  it
    addressed the issue of cessation and a failure to  make  necessary  and
    relevant findings of  fact  to  determine  that  question.   For  these
    reasons, we cannot accept the submissions on behalf of  the  Respondent
    that any failure to consider the Appellant's home area  is  immaterial,
    because we cannot discern from the First-tier's Tribunal's decision any
    clear or sustainable findings that it  would  be  reasonable  for  this
    Appellant to return to Mogadishu or therefore  that  cessation  of  his
    Refugee status was correct.

29. We are mindful that in reaching the conclusions we have above,  it  has
    not been necessary for the purposes of determining  whether  there  has
    been a material error of law to set out our conclusions  on  the  wider
    legal issues that arise on the facts of this case  and  upon  which  we
    have heard detailed submissions from the  parties  as  to  the  precise
    nature of the exercise required for cessation (and  in  particular  the
    consideration of internal relocation and the application of MOJ) and as
    to the correct test for Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Those submissions  however  remain  highly  relevant  for  the
    purposes of remaking the appeal on those two grounds and subject to any
    further submissions  from  the  parties,  will  stand  as  their  legal
    submissions on those points as part of the directions  set  out  below.
    The parties are however invited to make further submissions  either  in
    writing or orally at the relisted hearing on the recently reported case
    of AMA (Article 1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation)  Somalia  [2019]
    UKUT 00011 (IAC).

30. The remaking of this appeal is reserved to UTJ  Jackson  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in light of the detailed legal  submissions  already  made  in
    this case as to the correct approach to cessation and  Article  3.   We
    are also mindful that although further findings of fact  are  required,
    these are relatively limited and the appeal has been  in  progress  for
    some time, including two First-tier Tribunal decisions which have  both
    been set aside; such that in any  event  we  would  have  retained  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal for redetermination.

31. In paragraphs 55 and 56 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant was excluded from humanitarian protection by  virtue
    of paragraph 339D(iii) of the Immigration Rules  due  to  his  criminal
    offences.  There is no challenge  to  this  conclusion  in  the  onward
    appeal before us, nor to any of the findings in paragraph 57 onwards of
    the decision as to the assessment of  deportation  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 398 and following of the Immigration Rules and sections  117A
    to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  namely
    that the Appellant did not meet any of the  exceptions  to  deportation
    and there were no very compelling circumstances  which  would  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.  These findings are  all  therefore
    preserved.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Directions

 1) The appeal is adjourned to be relisted in the Upper Tribunal before UTJ
    Jackson on the first available date after 12 March  2019  with  a  time
    estimate of 2.5 hours.  On the assumption that the Appellant will  give
    further oral evidence, a Somali interpreter is required.

 2) The Appellant is to file and serve any further evidence upon  which  he
    wishes to rely no later than 14 days prior to the relisted hearing.

 3) The Appellant and Respondent are at liberty (but are not  required)  to
    file and serve any further  written  submissions  or  updated  skeleton
    argument no later than 7 days prior to the relisted hearing.


Signed   [pic]         Date         11th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


