
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00034/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th December 2017                       |On 22nd January 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr phi van pham
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    none


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Shore who, in a decision promulgated on 13th
    July 2017, dismissed Mr Pham's appeal against the refusal of his asylum
    claim and the decision to revoke his refugee status,  but  allowed  his
    human rights appeal. The underlying decisions subject to the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal were made on 18 March 2016.  For  the  sake  of
    convenience I will refer to Mr Pham as the claimant.

2.   The claimant is a national of Vietnam his date of  birth  5th  December
    1949.  He is almost 68 years old. He entered the United Kingdom on 26th
    September 1995 on the basis of family reunion,  his  wife  having  been
    granted refugee status. The claimant was automatically granted  refugee
    status under the provisions then  in  existence  as  the  spouse  of  a
    recognised refugee.  The  claimant's  wife  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen on 1st December 2004.

3.   The claimants made various trips to Vietnam in 1996 and 1997.   He  was
    convicted of being concerned with the production of  cannabis  and,  on
    12th July 2005, received a six month prison sentence. He was thereafter
    convicted and sentenced on 3rd February 2009 to 30 months' imprisonment
    in respect of offences relating to the  possession  of  and  intent  to
    supply  cannabis,  and  in  respect  of  an  offence  relating  to  the
    acquisition of criminal property.  His two sentences, each of 30 months
    duration, were to be served concurrently.

4.   On 23rd January 2013 the claimant was convicted of his  involvement  in
    the production of cannabis and on 27th February  2013  he  received  an
    eighteen months sentence of imprisonment.  The claimant had  previously
    been served notice of his liability to deportation on 18th  June  2009.
    In spite of this he was given permission to visit his ailing mother  in
    Vietnam on 15th May 2012.

5.   On 3rd October 2013 the claimant  was  informed  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's intention to revoke his refugee status.  On 4th  November  2013
    his solicitors at the time advised that they would not  be  making  any
    representations  challenging  the   Secretary   of   State's   proposed
    intention. On 1st June  2015  the  claimant  was  invited  to  rebut  a
    presumption under Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 by which he was presumed to have been convicted of  a  serious
    offence and to pose a danger to  the  public.   In  December  2015  the
    claimant made a claim to be a victim of trafficking. This  however  was
    rejected by the Competent Authority later that month and, at the appeal
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 22nd June 2017, the  claimant
    disavowed any reliance on this assertion.

6.   On 17th March 2016 a deportation order was  made  under  the  automatic
    deportation provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  The  claimant
    appealed the decisions to revoke his refugee status and the refusal  of
    his protection and human rights claims.


The First-tier Tribunal's decision

7.   At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the claimant  was  not  represented.
    There were no witness statements and no bundle of  documents  had  been
    prepared. He was the only person to give evidence.   That  remains  the
    position before the Upper Tribunal.

8.   The judge confirmed that the claimant was not pursuing  any  appeal  on
    trafficking grounds. The judge heard evidence from the claimant that he
    was still living with his wife, whom he married in  October  1974.  The
    claimant confirmed that he had a number of medical  problems  including
    high blood pressure, heart problems, high cholesterol and  asthma.  The
    judge considered some medication detailed in prescriptions produced  by
    the claimant and noted the claimant's assertion that the medication  he
    needed was not available in Vietnam and that it would,  in  any  event,
    cost too much.  The claimant claims that his wife's  health  was  worse
    than his and she had an operation on her heart and  had  problems  with
    her spinal cord. There was however no medical evidence relating to  the
    claimant's wife before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  there  was  and
    remains no medical evidence before the Upper Tribunal.

9.   The claimant explained that  he  committed  his  criminal  offences  in
    order to raise money to treat his brother's medical  condition  and  to
    help his mother.   Both  are  now  deceased,  his  mother  having  died
    approximately three years ago. The  claimant  confirmed  that  his  two
    adult sons lived in London and Kings Lynn and that they did not  attend
    the hearing because they were very busy at work and they  had  children
    to look after.  The claimant claimed to see  his  grandchildren  weekly
    and that his wife was not well enough to attend the hearing. I note the
    absence of any evidence relating to the claimant's wife or his children
    or his grandchildren before the Upper Tribunal. The claimant  confirmed
    at the First-tier hearing that his wife had family both in  the  United
    Kingdom and in Vietnam. She had returned to Vietnam  approximately  two
    to three years beforehand for  a  holiday.  The  claimant  additionally
    confirmed that he had two surviving brothers  in  Vietnam  but  claimed
    that he had no contact with them because they had  their  own  families
    and concentrated on their own immediate family.

10.  The judge did not find the claimant  to  be  a  credible  witness.  The
    judge placed significant reliance on inconsistencies in the  claimant's
    account  of  his  contact  with  his  children  and  grandchildren  (he
    variously that he saw them every three months or every week).

11.  In his assessment the judge found that the  presumption  under  Section
    72 of the 2002 Act had not been rebutted by the claimant.  There is  no
    challenge to that aspect of the decision.  The judge however noted that
    it was accepted by the respondent that the claimant was married to  his
    wife and there was no suggestion that they were  not  living  together.
    Nor  was  there  any  challenge  to  the  claimant's  assertion   that,
    regardless of the frequency, he did see his children and grandchildren.
    The judge however  found  that  there  was  only  the  claimant's  oral
    evidence concerning his wife's ill health and was  not  satisfied  that
    the claimant demonstrated that she suffered from serious health issues.



12.  The judge accepted the claimant's evidence that he was in  poor  health
    but rejected his assertion that there would be no  treatment  available
    in Vietnam.  In support of this conclusion  the  judge  relied  on  the
    October 2013 COIS Report on Vietnam which indicated  that  the  country
    had a mixed public private sector provider system in which  the  public
    sector plays a key role in healthcare and that by reference to a  World
    Bank Report from November 2011 the majority of those  who  reported  an
    illness were able to visit a healthcare worker or  centre.   The  judge
    concluded that he was unable to find on the balance  of  probabilities,
    based on the limited evidence before him, that the  claimant  would  be
    unable to access treatment for his medical conditions.

13.  Having regard to the absence of any evidence provided by  the  claimant
    that he would be at risk on return to Vietnam, and given  that  he  had
    visited the country on numerous occasions, the judge was satisfied that
    the limbs in paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules for the revocation
    of refugee status had  been  met.  There  is  no  appeal  against  this
    decision.

14.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 by reference to  Sections  117A
    to D of the 2002 Act.  The judge noted  that  the  claimant  could  not
    speak English despite having been in the United Kingdom for  more  than
    twenty  years.   I  pause  to  note  that  the  claimant  was  able  to
    communicate with me during the hearing, albeit to a limited extent. The
    judge noted that the claimant and his wife appeared to be dependent  on
    taxpayers and they  had  not  demonstrated  any  significant  level  of
    integration.  In considering Section 117C of the  2002  Act  the  judge
    stated that the sentence of 30 months' imprisonment was only six months
    more than the threshold for the respondent to be required  to  consider
    deportation. This is incorrect. The threshold is one of  twelve  months
    and the claimant's sentence was eighteen months  over  that  threshold.
    Having satisfied himself that Exception 1 of Section  117C(4)  had  not
    been met the judge considered whether the claimant met the requirements
    of Exception 2 contained in Section 117C(5). At [56] the judge stated,

         "Given that the [claimant's] wife has UNHCR refugee status and that
         I accept the claimant's evidence that she does not wish  to  return
         to Vietnam,  when  I  also  take  into  account  the  ages  of  the
         [claimant] and his wife and the length of his marriage, I find that
         the effect  of  his  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
         [claimant's] wife. I therefore find that Exception 2 applies to the
         [claimant] and that his appeal against deportation succeeds."

15.  The judge proceeded to  consider  Article  8  pursuant  to  the  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 approach  and  having  regard  to  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision of Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    decision to deport the claimant amounted to an interference  sufficient
    to attract the operation of Article 8 and, at [60], the judge stated,

         "Such interference would not be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end that the respondent was seeking to achieve. The  balance
         that I undertook were the public interest in removal,  to  which  I
         have given substantial weight, and the ages of the  [claimant]  and
         his wife and the effect on the [claimant's] wife if he were  to  be
         deported.  She still has refugee status and could not be  compelled
         to return to Vietnam."

16.  The judge found that these were very compelling reasons  sufficient  to
    resist the decision to deport and that the effect on his wife would  be
    devastating and that,  given  his  advanced  age,  the  effect  on  the
    claimant would also be devastating.  The judge consequently allowed the
    human rights appeal.


The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

17.  The Grounds of Appeal contend that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for concluding that the impact on the claimant's wife,  if  she
    was to be separated from the claimant, would be unduly  harsh.  It  was
    submitted that the judge failed  to  identify  what  the  unduly  harsh
    consequences of deportation would be given the particular facts of  the
    case. The grounds additionally contend that the judge made  a  material
    mistake or fact in concluding that the claimant's imprisonment was only
    six months more than the threshold required to  trigger  the  automatic
    deportation provisions.  In her submissions Ms Fijiwala  expanded  upon
    the grounds submitting that the judge did not give adequate reasons  as
    to why the impact on the claimant and his wife  would  be  devastating.
    In response, the claimant indicated that he had nothing to say.

18.  I indicated to the parties that I was  satisfied  that  the  judge  had
    materially  erred  in  law  and  I  then  proceeded,  pursuant  to  the
    directions issued by the Upper Tribunal, to remake  the  decision.   No
    further documentary evidence was provided by the claimant.

19.  The claimant indicated that he had now been in the United  Kingdom  for
    more than twenty years.  He claimed that all his family were in the  UK
    and that he had nothing in Vietnam.  His duty to  his  deceased  mother
    and brother came to an end on their  passing.   His  life  was  in  the
    United Kingdom and he had nothing in Vietnam and he was nearly 70 years
    old. He claimed that his wife had attended the previous  court  hearing
    but it was too cold for her to come out and his children did  not  live
    with him.  There was no cross-examination.


Discussion

20.  In determining whether the impact  on  the  claimant's  wife  of  being
    separated from him, and, in particular, whether  the  impact  would  be
    unduly harsh, I find that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  indicate
    whether he  was  adopting  the  approach  identified  in  MM  Uganda  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450  and  MA
    Pakistan v Upper Tribunal IAC [2016] EWCA Civ  705.  These  authorities
    require consideration  of  the  relevant  public  interest  factors  in
    determining what amounts to an unduly harsh consequence. It is  unclear
    from the decision  whether,  in  concluding  that  the  impact  on  the
    claimant's wife would be unduly harsh, that the judge took  account  of
    the nature and  seriousness  of  the  claimant's  criminality,  or  his
    criminal history. In determining whether that impact on the wife  would
    be unduly harsh the judge  gave  insufficient  reasons  and  failed  to
    adequately identify what specific impact on the wife  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  The judge relied on the fact that the  wife  had  been  granted
    refugee status, although she is  now  a  British  citizen  who  visited
    Vietnam two to three years ago, and the ages of the  claimant  and  his
    wife, their length of marriage  and  her  unwillingness  to  return  to
    Vietnam. The requirement for an unduly harsh impact is however  a  high
    test and there has been no sufficient explanation as to why the  impact
    on the wife would be  unduly  harsh  in  the  absence  of  any  medical
    evidence or any statement from her, or indeed any other evidence. There
    was simply no  evidential  basis  entitling  the  First-tier  Judge  to
    conclude that the impact on the claimant's wife of being separated from
    him would be 'devastating', as was found at [61].

21.  Furthermore, in assessing proportionality outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and applying the Razgar  approach  the  judge  failed  to  assess
    whether there would be very compelling circumstances and failed to give
    adequate reasons for concluding that the impact on the  wife  would  be
    devastating or why, because of his age,  the  impact  on  the  claimant
    would be devastating.  In so concluding the judge  additionally  failed
    to take into account relevant considerations,  namely,  the  claimant's
    familiarity with Vietnam, that  medical  treatment  was  likely  to  be
    available and that both the claimant and his wife still had  family  in
    the country.


Remaking the decision

22.  In remaking the decision I have taken full account  of  the  claimant's
    oral evidence, the length of time he has resided in  this  country  and
    that he has his wife and immediate family in the UK.  I also take  into
    account the fact that he is nearly 68 years of age.  I have  considered
    the  claimant's  manuscript  statement  in  which  he  makes   specific
    reference to his  length  of  residence,  that  his  sons  and  British
    grandchildren are present here,  that  he  committed  his  offences  to
    provide medical  treatment  to  his  family  in  Vietnam,  that  he  is
    remorseful, that his next of kin have their own families to care about,
    and to his illness and the time  he  has  spent  in  hospital.  I  have
    additionally considered a typed letter from the claimant's  wife  dated
    20th May 2013 in which she indicated that her health condition was  not
    good enough to travel to visit her husband, that  they  are  a  couple,
    that they used to helping each other and that  their  children  do  not
    visit them on a regular basis because  they  live  far  away.   I  have
    additionally considered the various medical documentation including the
    2013 medical notes indicating that the claimant  is  at  high  risk  of
    heart disease, he has a chronic cough, that he has been in low mood, he
    has a vitamin  D  deficiency,  he  has  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary
    disease, high cholesterol and that he has complained of chest pains  in
    the past and that he has previously had prostate  problems.   There  is
    nothing in the medical evidence before me indicating that the  claimant
    is at imminent risk of significant deterioration in his health or  that
    he is unable to  travel  to  and  live  in  Vietnam  in  light  of  the
    availability of health care, as disclosed  in  the  October  2013  COIS
    report.

23.  Applying firstly the Immigration Rules relating  to  private  life  and
    paragraph 399A, which are reflected in Exception 1 of  Section  117C(4)
    of the 2002 Act, it is apparent that the claimant has  not  resided  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life and that he is not socially and
    integrated in the United Kingdom. There is little evidence before me of
    the nature and extent of his integration  and,  despite  being  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1995, he requires  an  interpreter.  There  is  no
    evidence of his employment or involvement with the  community,  and  no
    evidence of any private or other extended family life relationships  he
    may have established. There is no evidence  of  any  stake  he  has  in
    society, and his criminal conduct undermines his claim to  integration.
    Nor am  I  satisfied  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration. He has lived in Vietnam for most of his life and would  be
    familiar with the language,  the  culture  and  the  way  of  life.  He
    previously visited the country frequently.  He still  has  siblings  in
    that country and his wife has family.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that his family in the United Kingdom would not or  could  not  support
    him. Nor is there any evidence that  medical  treatment  would  not  be
    available, and nothing to indicate that his medical conditions  prevent
    him from travelling.

24.  In considering whether the impact  on  the  claimant's  wife  would  be
    unduly harsh, I note firstly that his wife has not attended the hearing
    and there is no evidence  from  her  other  than  the  brief  statement
    referred to earlier.  There is simply no evidence that  the  impact  on
    the claimant's wife if the claimant was deported would be  devastating,
    and certainly no evidence that it would have an unduly harsh impact.

25.  Whilst I accept that the claimant  does  have  relationships  with  his
    adult children and his grandchildren there was nothing to indicate that
    these relationships contain any elements  over  and  above  what  would
    normally be expected between adult children and their parents, or minor
    children and their grandparents.

26.  Nor is there any evidence that communication could  not  be  maintained
    through periodic visits or more remote forms of communication.  I  note
    that the claimant's wife visited Vietnam two to three years ago,  which
    suggests that she could continue to visit or,  perhaps,  even  relocate
    given that her visits suggest no risk of ill-treatment.   In  assessing
    whether there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  I  note  that  the
    claimant is unlikely to be without any support given that  he  has  his
    wife's family in Vietnam and given that he has his sons and wife living
    in the United Kingdom.  They are both said to be very  busy  suggesting
    that they are in employment, and there was  nothing  to  indicate  that
    they would not be able to financially support the claimant, at least in
    the short term to enable him to obtain accommodation  and  means  to  a
    living.  The claimant is almost 68 years of age but this along does not
    amount to very compelling circumstances. Nor is there any  new  medical
    evidence before me.  I once again I note that the claimant is  familiar
    with Vietnam.

27.   Having  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation   and   the
    seriousness of the claimant's offending, and the need to deter  foreign
    nationals  from  offending,  I  am  satisfied   that   the   claimant's
    deportation would not amount to a disproportional breach of Article  8.
    I consequently dismiss the appeal.


The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained a  material  error  of  law.  I
proceed to remake the decision, dismissing Mr Pham's human rights appeal

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

