
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00151/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (face to face   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing)                             |                                     |
|On Wednesday 10 March 2021           |On Thursday 29 April 2021            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     HSB
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel instructed by Simman solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
This appeal is brought in part on protection grounds.   Accordingly,  it  is
appropriate that the Appellant's details be protected.  Unless and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any member of his family. This direction applies  both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND AND THE HEARING


    1. By a decision promulgated on 25 January 2019, the Tribunal (the  Hon
       Lord Beckett and Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman) found an error of law
       in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney  promulgated  on
       16  October  2018.   By  her  decision,  Judge  Swaney  allowed  the
       Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  23
       November  2017  revoking  the  Appellant's  protection  status,  and
       refusing his human rights claim made in the context of a decision to
       deport the Appellant to Afghanistan.


    2. On 3 December  2019,  the  Tribunal  (UTJJ  Reeds  and  Smith)  gave
       directions for the preparation of the appeal for a resumed  hearing.
       Those  included  a  requirement  for  the  Respondent  to   disclose
       documents relating to the recognition of the Appellant's father as a
       refugee which were or might be relevant to the  issues  we  have  to
       determine (see below).  The Appellant  was  also  directed  to  file
       further evidence in the form of an updated medical report and expert
       report in relation to the country situation in Afghanistan. Although
       the country expert was  to  be  instructed  by  the  Appellant,  the
       Respondent was directed to  provide  questions  for  the  expert  to
       consider.  The Tribunal directed that the appeal should not be heard
       until after the determination of the country guidance  case  pending
       in relation to safety of return to Kabul.


    3. On 17 November 2020, following the promulgation of the  decision  in
       AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  (CG)  [2020]  UKUT  130   ("AS
       (Afghanistan)"), this appeal was  relisted  for  a  case  management
       hearing before UTJ Smith.  We note as an aside  that  the  Court  of
       Appeal has recently refused  permission  to  appeal  the  Tribunal's
       decision in AS (Afghanistan).   The  issues  which  required  to  be
       determined were agreed between the parties.  We set those out below.
        It was agreed that it would be preferable if  the  resumed  hearing
       were conducted on a  face-to-face  basis.   The  Appellant  and  his
       father were to  be  the  only  witnesses.   The  Appellant's  father
       required an interpreter for his evidence.   The  Appellant  and  his
       father did not have access to technology at home.


    4. So it was that this appeal came before us for the  resumed  hearing.
       We had a consolidated bundle for the hearing to which we refer below
       as [AB/xx].  That contains the  updated  report  from  Mr  Thomas  J
       Sobel, MA, MBACP dated 17 February 2020 ("the  Medical  Report")  in
       relation to the Appellant's mental  health  ([AB/618-633])  and  the
       updated report of Dr Antonio Giustozzi dated 30 January  2020  ("the
       Expert Report") in relation to the situation in Afghanistan ([AB/567-
       610]).   We also have a Respondent's bundle to which we refer  below
       as [RB/xx].


    5. We also had before us a detailed skeleton argument  from  Ms  Capel.
       Ms Cunha explained that she had been unable to complete her  written
       submissions in reply as she did not have a copy of the  consolidated
       bundle.  We therefore allowed her  to  use  one  of  the  Tribunal's
       copies of the bundle which was unmarked and gave her  some  time  to
       refamiliarize herself with the documentation  before  beginning  the
       hearing.  Although Ms Cunha indicated that she had drafted  some  of
       her submissions in writing in advance of the  hearing,  we  declined
       her invitation to receive the  incomplete  submissions  and  instead
       allowed her to use those as a speaking note in her submissions.


    6. When the hearing resumed, Ms Cunha indicated that she did  not  wish
       to cross-examine the Appellant's father.   There  was  short  cross-
       examination of the Appellant.  We deal with his  evidence  below  so
       far as it is necessary for us to do so.

    7. Following Ms Cunha's submissions, we adjourned to  consider  whether
       we needed to hear from Ms Capel since we  had  carefully  considered
       her written submissions in advance of  the  hearing.   We  concluded
       that we did not need to hear from her.  We  indicated,  having  also
       carefully considered Ms Cunha's oral submissions that we would allow
       the Appellant's appeal.  We indicated  that  we  would  provide  the
       reasons for our decision in writing which we now turn to do.


    FACTUAL BACKGROUND


    8. The Appellant's father was recognised as a refugee  on  26  November
       2004.  He has since been naturalised  as  a  British  citizen.   His
       claim for asylum was based on  the  ill-treatment  of  him  and  his
       family by Islamic fundamentalists in their home area  of  Nangarhar,
       Afghanistan due to their Sikh religion.


    9. On 22 September 2006, the Appellant entered the  UK.   He  was  then
       aged fifteen years.  He was granted indefinite leave to enter.   His
       passport was stamped "Visa family reunion" ([RB/A1]).  Although  the
       Appellant has not seen any information disclosed by  the  Respondent
       showing whether the Respondent had at that time given  consideration
       to the Appellant's potential status  as  a  refugee,  the  Appellant
       draws attention to a letter dated 12 July 2016  at  [RB/I1;  AB/456]
       which states that "[i]t is noted that you have been recognised as  a
       refugee by the United Kingdom".


   10. On 18 November 2011, the Appellant, having completed five years with
       leave to remain in the UK, applied  for  naturalisation.   That  was
       refused as he declared a conviction for driving without insurance on
       7 October 2010.  We note  that  the  remainder  of  the  Appellant's
       family are  naturalised  as  British  citizens  and,  but  for  that
       conviction, it is likely that he too would  have  become  a  British
       citizen at that time.


   11. On 2 December 2015, the Appellant was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to
       handle  stolen  goods  and   concealing,   disguising,   converting,
       transferring or removing criminal property.   He  was  sentenced  to
       terms of eighteen months and three years in prison, those  sentences
       to run concurrently.



   12. Thereafter, the Respondent notified the Appellant of  her  intention
       to  deport  him  to  Afghanistan.    She   invited   him   to   make
       representations why he should not be deported.  On 12 July 2016, the
       Respondent informed  the  Appellant  that  section  72  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 72") applied  to  him  and
       the Appellant was invited to rebut the presumption that he was not a
       danger to the community.  Representations were made on 7 March 2016,
       5 May 2016 and 31 July 2016.  Representations were also made  on  25
       March 2017 dealing with the proposed revocation of  the  Appellant's
       refugee status as set out in the Respondent's letter dated 10  March
       2017 ([AB/403-410]).


   13. On 23 November 2017, the Respondent made the decision which is under
       appeal ([AB/241-262]) and signed a  deportation  order  against  the
       Appellant ([AB/263]).  The decision  included  a  certificate  under
       Section 72.  It also revoked the Appellant's refugee status applying
       Article 1C (5) of the Refugee Convention. The Appellant's  claim  to
       be at risk on return  was  rejected.   His  claim  for  humanitarian
       protection was also rejected.  Finally, the letter also refused  the
       Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR.  We note that  the  decision
       letter is extremely detailed. We have paid careful regard to what is
       said, in particular in the letter dated 10  March  2017  ([RB/K1-7])
       dealing with cessation of refugee status when reaching our decision.


    THE ISSUES


   14. It was agreed by the parties that the issues  for  the  Tribunal  to
       determine are as follows:


       Issue One: Should the certificate made under Section 72  be  upheld?
       If so, the Appellant cannot  benefit  from  the  protection  against
       refoulement in the Refugee Convention (although risk on return would
       remain relevant under Article 3 ECHR).
       Issue Two: If not, on what basis was the Appellant granted status in
       the UK in the past?  Did that amount to recognition as a refugee? If
       it did not, then the issue of cessation does not arise.
       Issue Three: If the Appellant was recognised as a  refugee,  is  the
       Respondent entitled to cease the Appellant's  status  under  Article
       1C(5) of the Refugee Convention ("Article 1C(5)")?
       Issue Four: Whatever, the answers to the first three issues, is  the
       Appellant at risk on return to Afghanistan whether on the basis that
       he has a well-founded fear of persecution there (if he  is  entitled
       to benefit from the Refugee Convention) or under Article 3 ECHR?
       Issue Five: Also, whatever the answers to  the  first  four  issues,
       would the Appellant's deportation be disproportionate under  Article
       8 ECHR?


   15. We deal below with each of those issues in turn, making reference to
       the relevant legal framework and  evidence  which  relates  to  that
       issue.




    ISSUE ONE: SECTION 72 CERTIFICATE


   16. Section 72 reads as follows (so far as relevant):




           "Serious criminal

           (1)   This section applies for the purpose of the construction
           and application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention
           (exclusion from protection).
           (2)   A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a
           final judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute
           a danger to the community of the United Kingdom if he is-
           (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
           (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.
           ...
           (6)   A presumption under subsection (2), (3) or (4) that a
           person constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable by
           that person.
           ...
           (9)   Subsection (10) applies where-
           (a) a person appeals under section 82 of this Act ... wholly or
           partly on the ground mentioned in section 84(1)(a) or (3)(a) of
           this Act (breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the
           Refugee Convention), and
           (b) the Secretary of State issues a certificate that
           presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to the
           person (subject to rebuttal).
           (10)  The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal-
           (a) must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal by
           considering the certificate, and
           (b) if in agreement that presumptions under subsection (2), (3)
           or (4) apply (having given the appellant an opportunity for
           rebuttal) must dismiss the appeal in so far as it relies on the
           ground specified in subsection (9)(a).
           (10A) Subsection (10) also applies in relation to the Upper
           Tribunal when it acts under section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the
           Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007..."


   17. Section 72 therefore provides for  a  presumption  of  certification
       where, as here, there is a sentence of more than two years, but that
       presumption is rebuttable.  The Tribunal is required  to  begin  its
       deliberations with the Section 72 certificate.   We  note,  in  this
       case, that this only becomes a live issue  if  we  accept  that  the
       Appellant has been recognised as a refugee and/or if we accept  that
       he is at risk on return as otherwise the Refugee Convention does not
       and could not apply to him in any event.  However, as we  will  come
       to, we accept that the Refugee Convention does apply in  this  case.
       We therefore turn to consider Section 72 as it applies here.


   18. The Respondent relies on the length of  sentence  coupled  with  the
       Judge's  sentencing  remarks  as  showing  that  the  crime  was   a
       particularly serious one.  Those remarks are at [RB/D2-7] and are as
       follows (so far as relevant):


           "[HSB] and [MK] ...As you have heard me say, I suppose there  is
           something to be said that you did not go into  the  witness  box
           and try and give a jury some absolutely  ridiculous  account  of
           where you said you got these phones or any sort of justification
           for where you might have got these phones.
           Necessarily, those who steal phones by whatever  means  have  no
           incentive to steal them unless they can sell them on, get rid of
           them, for money.  That is what this is all about.  Huge  amounts
           of money.  Of course, it is no accident, I am afraid, [MK], that
           others knew about you so that you could go  to  the  Big  Yellow
           Storage Company.  Of course, your cut in relation to each  deal,
           as in fact the [Bs'] cut, was not the full value of  the  phone.
           You had to pay others, other dishonest people who you knew  were
           dishonestly obtaining these phones by various means.   The  rest
           of society suffers as a result of that.
           The great pity is that  neither  of  you  had  the  strength  of
           character  to  own  up  to  it.   There  was  no  defence  here,
           shamefully.  Society welcomes you here.  Hopefully you can  make
           a better life, a life, for you and your  dependants.   You  have
           elected to abuse that in this  way  and  it  is  a  huge  shame.
           Custodial sentences are  inevitable.   There  is  absolutely  no
           mitigation.
           So far as  the  [Bs]  are  concerned,  [HSB],  you  may  have  a
           completely dependent mother.  That in itself may be  thought  to
           be an extremely sad state of affairs, but that is your business,
           not this court's.  They, of course, suffer as  a  result.   That
           brings about shame.  It may well be that  you  have  managed  to
           better yourself.
           I do not know how much your father was involved  in  the  income
           that you received, but it was your telephone that had  the  IMEI
           numbers and there is no  doubt  at  all  from  the  overwhelming
           visual evidence.  It would not have been thought  for  a  moment
           that you were casually there playing on  a  mobile  phone  while
           they were selling these phones and taking the money or that  you
           were unaware of what was happening or the fact that you put in a
           signed defence statement saying that, of course,  you  were  the
           driver.  You were saying that is the reason they got there.  You
           did not dare go into the witness box and try and tell  the  jury
           that. I do not know what they would have thought.  Who knows?...
           [HSB], so far as you are concerned, it is a  sentence  of  three
           years' imprisonment on count 1.  It is 18 months  concurrent  on
           count 2.  There is no sentence obviously on count 3.
           So far as you are concerned, [MK] in fact I do  think  that  you
           were lesser involved than the [Bs]. ..."


   19. The Appellant said in his oral evidence that he had  pleaded  guilty
       to the offence.  However, as the sentencing remarks show and as  the
       Appellant subsequently clarified, he pleaded guilty at  the  end  of
       the trial before sentencing.  He did not do so at the outset.


   20. We have before us,  at  [AB/180-211]  documents  from  the  National
       Probation Service and the OASys  report  dated  25  March  2016.   A
       letter from the Appellant's offender  manager,  Ms  Nicole  John  at
       [AB/182-183] records that the Appellant has been released on licence
       since 21 February 2017.  He has reported regularly to the  Probation
       Service.  The Appellant has employment working for  his  brother-in-
       law.  Ms John sets out her views on the risk posed by the  Appellant
       as follows:


           "Regarding [HSB]'s risk, I  have  utilised  the  Offender  Group
           Reconviction Scale (OGRS).   This  is  an  actuarial  tool  that
           estimates the probability of an individual committing a  further
           offence based on their age, previous convictions, age  at  first
           contact with the Police and  other  static  factors.   OGRS  has
           calculated that  [HSB]  is  13%  likely  of  committing  another
           general offence within one year of community sentence/discharge,
           and 24% within two years.  This indicates that there  is  a  low
           risk of reconvictions; [HSB] was therefore  assessed  as  a  low
           risk of serious harm.  It is my assessment that [HSB] is  not  a
           danger to society and he has  completed  the  relevant  work  to
           ensure he desists from crime.
           Overall, it is  my  assessment  that  [HSB]  has  completed  the
           rehabilitative work to reduce his risk to  society.   I  believe
           that given the  opportunity,  he  will  desist  from  crime  and
           continue his life in accordance with the law."

       Nothing in the papers we have before us indicates that the Appellant
       has reoffended since his release.


   21. We accept Ms Capel's submission that we  must  consider  as  a  fact
       whether the Appellant was convicted of a particularly serious  crime
       and whether he is  in  fact  (presently)  a  danger  (see  IH  (s.72
       Particularly Serious Crime) Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 00012).


   22. The Appellant points out that the offences of which he was convicted
       are not ones involving violence.  The  Respondent  has  provided  no
       evidence that harm was caused or the extent to which  the  Appellant
       benefitted from his crime.  We do not consider that it can  be  said
       based on the sentencing remarks that the Appellant played any lesser
       role in the offending, as was contended by the Appellant.   His  co-
       defendant was said by the Judge to bear less responsibility than the
       Appellant and possibly also members of the  Appellant's  family  who
       appear to have been involved.


   23. We accept that the length of sentence imposed is  not  determinative
       of the issue whether the crime is a  particularly  serious  one  (AH
       (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA
       Civ 395).  Nonetheless, simply  because  the  offence  was  not  one
       involving violence does not mean it is not particularly serious.  As
       the sentencing Judge pointed out, the incentive for those who  steal
       phones is to make money from them.  We take judicial notice  of  the
       fact that the stealing of mobile  phones  often  includes  violence.
       Whilst the offence of handling and converting  those  stolen  phones
       does not itself involve violence it is  indirectly  linked  to  such
       violence.  We accept that we do not have evidence as to  the  extent
       of the benefit which the Appellant individually received.   However,
       Ms Cunha took us to the Statement of Offences which showed that  the
       Appellant and his co-accused  were  said  to  be  in  possession  of
       �122,000 cash, said to be the proceeds of the  criminal  enterprise.
       We record again that the Appellant pleaded guilty, albeit at a  late
       stage, to the offences of which he was accused.  �122,000 is  a  not
       insignificant sum.


   24. For those reasons,  we  accept  that  the  crime  is  one  which  is
       particularly serious.  However, we do not accept that the  Appellant
       continues to pose a danger.  Ms Cunha accepted that the letter  from
       Ms John to which we have referred shows that the Appellant is a  low
       risk of serious harm.  However, she said that the  risk  is  managed
       because the Appellant remains  on  licence,  is  the  subject  of  a
       deportation order and has been appealing against  deportation  since
       2017, not long after his release.  She asserted that the risk  would
       be likely to be reignited if his appeal were allowed.  She drew  our
       attention to what was said by the Appellant in his oral evidence and
       submitted that this did not show contrition.


   25. The Appellant deals with his offending in  his  statement  dated  29
       September 2018 ([AB/8-15] as follows:


            "18. If given the opportunity to build my life again in the UK,
           once I am mentally stable,  I  am  hoping  to  join  our  family
           business and/or start my own business.  At  present,  given  the
           support from the family I work part-time with my  brother-in-law
           at [B] London Ltd...
            19.  I am deeply remorseful for my actions in relation  to  the
           criminal charges against me whilst in this employment but I have
           served the appropriate sentence and have not  been  involved  in
           any other wrong doings.  I have also complied with all probation
           conditions.  I acted out of immaturity and  have  been  punished
           for same.  I submit that my conviction should not be  termed  as
           serious crime which makes me a danger to the community.  I  have
           been working hard in the UK and unfortunately I  got  caught  in
           this web of deceit as a  result  of  bad  influence.   I  cannot
           reverse  the   situation   but   there   are   very   compelling
           circumstances that apply to me and outweigh the public  interest
           which would make my removal to Afghanistan undesirable. I accept
           that I was convicted of an offence of theft/dishonesty.   It  is
           not an  offence  such  as  terrorism,  sexual  offence,  violent
           offence or murder which are all serious offences which present a
           physical threat to the public.  I have family in the UK who  are
           dependent on me and vice versa and we share normal and emotional
           ties.  I have learnt from my mistakes and I just want to  become
           a better person..."


   26. We accept that, at one point during his oral evidence, the Appellant
       did appear to disclaim responsibility but, having re-read our notes,
       we are satisfied that the Appellant was simply pointing out that  he
       had not stolen the phones and not that  he  had  not  committed  the
       crime of which he was accused and convicted.  He  accepted  that  he
       had known that the phones were stolen, and he expressed his remorse.
        We consider that remorse to have been genuinely expressed.


   27. Having considered the available evidence and placing weight  on  the
       views expressed by Ms John, we are satisfied that the Appellant does
       not pose a danger to the public.   The  Appellant  has  successfully
       rebutted the presumption. We therefore find that the conditions  for
       the Section 72 certificate are not made out.


    ISSUE TWO: RECOGNITION AS A REFUGEE


   28. As we indicated at [2] above, the Respondent was directed  to  serve
       on the Appellant documents relating to his  father's  asylum  claim.
       Although the Respondent was unable to provide a  statement  made  by
       the Appellant's father at the time due, it  appears,  to  it  having
       gone missing from the file, the  Respondent  complied  in  substance
       with the disclosure direction.  The documents appear at  [AB/26-114]
       and show the following.


   29. The Appellant's father, [PB], arrived in the UK illegally on 2 March
       2002 and claimed asylum on the same day.  That claim was refused  by
       the Respondent on 23 March 2004.   PB  appealed.   His  appeal  came
       before Adjudicator Mr K St J Wiseman who, in a decision  promulgated
       on 9 November 2004 allowed the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
       grounds.  The Adjudicator's decision appears at  [AB/102-113].   The
       following parts of the decision are of particular relevance  to  the
       issue we have to decide:
       (a)  PB fled Afghanistan with his whole family but became  separated
       from them during the journey ([2]);
       (b)  The essence of PB's claim was  that  he  was  harassed  by  the
       Mujahideen for money because they thought he was  wealthy.   He  was
       ill-treated if he failed to pay.  When the Taliban  came  to  power,
       they also started to harass the family.  They were ordered  to  wear
       different colour clothes to differentiate them  from  other  groups.
       PB said that he was detained by the Taliban who sought money for his
       release ([3]);
       (c)  PB claimed in his witness statement that  "[h]e  was  a  devout
       practising Sikh and he and his family had always been  subjected  to
       persecution  and  harassment   at   the   hands   of   the   Islamic
       fundamentalists" ([7.2]);
       (d)  Adjudicator Wiseman had some  doubts  about  PB's  history  but
       found the core of his evidence was credible (although also  observed
       that "it would not matter very much if it was not") ([10.9];
       (d)  Having had regard to background material and  relevant  country
       guidance, Adjudicator Wiseman said this:


            "10.10     Both of  the  most  recent  cases  clearly  strongly
           assist this appellant; whilst the Tribunal has been at pains  to
           say that each case has to be looked at on its individual  facts,
           with respect that is not an easy exercise.  None of the Sikhs in
           these important cases were leaders or controversial in any  way;
           if they were discriminated against or ill-treated  or  prevented
           from following their religion properly  it  was  simply  because
           they were Sikhs; they were attacked at random because  they  had
           that one identifying feature.
            10.11      A Convention reason is therefore clearly involved in
           the way that they are treated and either they are safe  or  they
           are not.  The thrust of these most recent  authorities  is  that
           they are not and where there is any significant  doubt  it  must
           obviously be exercised  in  favour  of  an  appellant;  such  an
           individual after all only has to show (in  the  context  of  his
           return) that there is a significant likelihood of persecution.
            10.12      The thrust of these recent authorities is  that  the
           treatment of Sikhs in Afghanistan has  moved  from  a  sometimes
           unpleasant  existence  involving   discrimination   across   the
           borderline that carries their treatment into persecution.
            10.13      As the risk of whatever treatment is involved  seems
           to me to derive simply from being a Sikh I am not entirely  sure
           that the past history of an individual actually takes  one  very
           far; as a member of a clearly identifiable group  an  individual
           would obviously be at risk on return whatever  had  or  had  not
           happened to him personally before.
            10.14      It may be that the position for Sikhs in Afghanistan
           is hovering at the moment on something of a  borderline  between
           just about tolerable discrimination  and  persecution.   However
           even in that situation an appellant is entitled to  the  benefit
           of the doubt, and particularly for a Sikh  from  Jalalabad  both
           the recent decided cases that I have referred to  carry  him  in
           view across the borderline in question with relocation in  Kabul
           being inappropriate or 'unduly harsh'."


   30. Also of relevance to this issue is the way in  which  the  Appellant
       himself was treated by the Respondent on arrival  to  the  UK.   The
       visa in his passport is stamped as  for  "family  reunion"  with  PB
       ([AB/122]).  The Appellant was on that basis given indefinite  leave
       to enter.   The Home Office GCID case records  in  relation  to  the
       Appellant (at [AB/124-179]) indicate that the  caseworkers  involved
       gave consideration to the issue whether  to  cease  the  Appellant's
       refugee status on the basis that the Appellant's refugee status  was
       "recognised  through  his  father".   There  is  no  apparent  prior
       consideration to whether the Appellant  had  been  recognised  as  a
       refugee and nor have any documents been disclosed dating back to the
       time when the Appellant was given a visa to enter the UK.  A  letter
       from the Home Office to the Appellant  on  12  July  2016  ([RB/I1])
       adopts the same position,  stating  that  the  Appellant  had  "been
       recognised as a refugee by the United Kingdom". The notes  and  that
       letter are supportive of the Appellant's case  that  the  Respondent
       had recognised him as a refugee and intended to do so.


   31. We would in any event have reached the same conclusion based on  the
       legal test which applies.  We can  deal  with  the  legal  framework
       quite shortly as both parties agree as to the relevant case-law  and
       what it has to say about the test.


   32. The parties agree that, for our purposes, the relevant  case  is  JS
       (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA
       Civ 1670 ("JS (Uganda)").  In that case, the appellant had  come  to
       the UK to join his mother who had been recognised as a  refugee  due
       to ill-treatment by the authorities in Uganda arising from political
       opinions which had been  imputed  to  her.    The  Court  of  Appeal
       accepted (at [75] to [78] of the judgment)  that  the  appellant  in
       that case had been recognised as if he were a refugee based  on  the
       Respondent's family reunion policy and on his relationship with  his
       mother.  He was not recognised as a refugee in his own right.  As an
       aside, we note that, in that case, the appellant was himself said to
       have been recognised as a refugee and therefore that his status  had
       to be withdrawn.  That is the same position as was  adopted  by  the
       Respondent in correspondence in this case.

   33. The Appellant in JS (Uganda) argued that a "derivative  refugee"  in
       the category of the appellant was also entitled to protection of the
       Refugee Convention.  The Court rejected that submission,  concluding
       at [125] that those  who  themselves  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution for a Convention reason represented the entire class  to
       whom the Refugee Convention applies.  However,  Underhill  LJ  (with
       whom Newey LJ agreed) pointed out at [190]  that  "this  issue  only
       arises in cases where the risk of persecution  which  leads  to  the
       grant of protection to the 'primary' refugee does not also extend to
       his or her family members: very often  of  course  it  will,  either
       because they share the same characteristic as gives rise to the risk
       or because the persecutor will extend his  persecution  of,  say,  a
       political activist to his or  her  family  members  irrespective  of
       their own conduct or opinions."


   34. We accept the point made by the Respondent that this  issue  depends
       on the facts of the case.  We accept that  the  recognition  of  the
       Appellant's father as a refugee  does  not  automatically  confer  a
       right to the Appellant.  However, what is said by Underhill LJ in JS
       (Uganda)  is  highly   pertinent   to   the   instant   case.    The
       characteristics which were found to give rise to  the  risk  to  PB,
       namely that he was a practising Sikh from Jalalabad,  at  risk  from
       discrimination amounting to persecution  in  that  area  and  unable
       reasonably to relocate to  Kabul  apply  equally  to  his  son,  the
       Appellant in this appeal.  That is not the same factual scenario  as
       existed in JS (Uganda) where the  risks  faced  by  the  appellant's
       mother were based on her own political opinions which were  not  (on
       the face of the judgment) also imputed to the appellant.

   35. For those reasons, we accept that the Refugee Convention applies  to
       the Appellant.  He was recognised  as  a  refugee  and,  before  the
       Respondent can return him to Afghanistan, the continuation  of  that
       status has to be considered.

    ISSUE THREE: ARTICLE 1C (5) REFUGEE CONVENTION;  ISSUE  FOUR:  RISK  ON
    RETURN TO AFGHANISTAN

   36. As we understood Ms Cunha to accept, once it is  accepted  that  the
       Appellant is entitled to the protection of the  Refugee  Convention,
       the burden is on the Respondent to show that the circumstances which
       formed the basis of recognition of him as a  refugee  have  changed.
       If we had reached the opposite  conclusion,  it  would  be  for  the
       Appellant to show that he has a well-founded fear of persecution  on
       return.  As it is, and based on the conclusion we reached  on  issue
       two, the relevant question is "whether there has been a  significant
       and non-temporary change in circumstances so that the  circumstances
       which caused the person to be a refugee have  ceased  to  apply  and
       there is no other basis on which he would have been  held  to  be  a
       refugee" (MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       [2018] EWCA Civ 994 at [2(1)] - "MA (Somalia)").


   37. We pause to note that it is not suggested by the Respondent that the
       Appellant falls to  be  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention  by
       Article 1F.  That is  mentioned  as  an  issue  in  the  Appellant's
       skeleton argument but does not arise for determination.

   38. The Court of Appeal in MA  (Somalia)  endorsed  the  "mirror  image"
       approach to cessation.  The Court  of  Appeal  was  referred  to  MM
       (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
       757 on which judgment Ms  Cunha  relied.   Paragraph  [24]  of  that
       judgment neatly encapsulates the approach  to  the  Article  1C  (5)
       issue as follows:
           "However, Article 1C (5) is framed more widely  than  this,  and
           requires examination of whether there has been a relevant change
           in 'the circumstances in connexion with  which  [a  person]  has
           been recognised as a refugee'. The circumstances  in  connection
           with which a person has been recognised as a refugee are  likely
           to be a combination of the general political conditions in  that
           person's home country and some aspect of that person's  personal
           characteristics. Accordingly, a relevant change in circumstances
           for the purposes of Article 1C (5) might in  a  particular  case
           also  arise  from  a  combination  of  changes  in  the  general
           political conditions in the home country and in the individual's
           personal characteristics, or even from  a  change  just  in  the
           individual's personal characteristics, if that change means that
           he now falls outside a group likely  to  be  persecuted  by  the
           authorities of the home state. The relevant change must in  each
           case be durable in nature."
   39. In this case, given the characteristics on which PB's  asylum  claim
       was based and which we have concluded also gave rise to  recognition
       of the Appellant as a refugee, our consideration is necessarily more
       limited.  The Appellant remains a practising  Sikh.   The  issue  is
       therefore in reality a limited one.  We have to consider whether the
       situation for Sikhs in Afghanistan has undergone a "significant  and
       non-temporary"  change  so  that  the  Appellant  no  longer   needs
       international protection and can return to his home country.


   40. Ms Cunha drew our attention to the case of  TG  and  others  (Afghan
       Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG  [2015]  UKUT  00595  ("TG").   The
       headnote in that case reads as follows:

           "Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:
           (i)  Some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
           Afghanistan continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim
           zealots.
           (ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan do
           not face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as  to
           entitle them to a grant of international protection on the basis
           of their ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be
           said that the cumulative impact of  discrimination  suffered  by
           the Sikh and Hindu communities in general reaches the  threshold
           of persecution.
           (iii) A consideration of whether an individual  member  of  the
           Sikh and Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon
           return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.  All  the  relevant
           circumstances must be considered but careful attention should be
           paid to the following:
           a.  women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
           appropriate protection from a male member of the family;
           b.  likely financial circumstances and ability to access  basic
           accommodation bearing in mind
           -           Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member of
              the Sikh and Hindu communities
           -           such individuals may face  difficulties  (including
              threats, extortion, seizure of land and acts of violence)  in
              retaining  property  and  /  or  pursuing   their   remaining
              traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader
           -           the  traditional  source  of  support   for   such
              individuals, the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide
              adequate support;
           c.  the  level  of  religious  devotion  and   the   practical
           accessibility to a suitable place of religious worship in  light
           of declining numbers  and  the  evidence  that  some  have  been
           subjected to harm and  threats  to  harm  whilst  accessing  the
           Gurdwara;
           d. access to appropriate education for  children  in  light  of
           discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children and the  shortage
           of adequate education facilities for them.
           (iv)  Although it appears there is a willingness at governmental
           level to provide  protection,  it  is  not  established  on  the
           evidence that at a local level the police are willing,  even  if
           able, to provide the necessary level of protection  required  in
           Refugee  Convention/Qualification  Directive  terms,  to   those
           members of the Sikh and Hindu communities who experience serious
           harm or harassment amounting to persecution.
           (v)  Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the Sikh or
           Hindu communities to relocate is a  fact  sensitive  assessment.
           The relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at
           (iii) above. Given their particular circumstances and  declining
           number, the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of
           the Sikh and Hindu communities  must  be  carefully  considered.
           Those without access to an independent income are unlikely to be
           able  to  reasonably  relocate  because  of   depleted   support
           mechanisms.
           (vi)  This replaces the county guidance provided in  the  cases
           of K  (Risk  -  Sikh  -  Women)  Afghanistan  CG [2003]  UKIAT
           00057 and SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan
           CG [2005] UKAIT 00137."


   41. We accept, as Ms  Cunha  submitted,  that  this  guidance  does  not
       suggest that all Sikhs are  at  risk  on  return.   As  we  observed
       however  it  is  rare  that  country  guidance  suggests  that   all
       individuals in a particular category are at risk.  Consideration  of
       an asylum claim is inevitably a fact sensitive assessment.   Neither
       do we accept her submission that, had this been the country guidance
       at the time of PB's appeal in 2006, the outcome would not have  been
       the same.  As the passage which we have cited at [29]  above  shows,
       even  at  that  time  it  was  not  accepted  that  all  Sikhs  from
       Afghanistan would be  able  to  establish  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution on return.   We remind ourselves again, of course,  that
       in this case, and when considering the cessation issue,  the  burden
       is not on the Appellant to establish that he has a well-founded fear
       of persecution but on the Respondent to show that the  circumstances
       have changed.


   42. We turn then to the expert evidence.  The most recent country expert
       evidence is the Expert Report at [AB/567-610].  In addition  to  the
       Expert Report, the country expert, Dr Giustozzi,  has  provided  two
       further reports in this appeal on 18 March 2017 ([AB/369-402]) and 2
       October  2018  ([AB/611-617]).  We  accept  that  Dr  Giustozzi,  is
       recognised as a  leading  country  expert  on  Afghanistan.   He  is
       described as such at [17] of the decision in TG.

   43. We have focussed on the Expert Report dated 30 January 2020  as  the
       most recent.  However, before turning to that report, we mention the
       following aspects of the earlier reports to which our attention  was
       drawn and provide our comment on those aspects:
       (a)  Mistreatment of Sikhs by the authorities.   The  paragraphs  of
       the earlier reports to which our attention was  drawn  ([AB/382  and
       AB/399-400]) refer to incidents in 2012.  Those  incidents  are  too
       historic to be of relevance.  The Expert Report records an improving
       position regarding treatment of Afghan Sikhs by the authorities (see
       below).
       (b)  Similarly, we do not consider it appropriate  to  consider  the
       levels of violence based on a 2013 report or the  position  in  2014
       ([AB/391]) or harassment and abuse based on  the  position  in  2014
       ([AB/390] and [AB/402]).  We have regard below to  the  more  recent
       situation as set out in the Expert Report.
       (c)  The targeting of Sikhs by criminal gangs  in  conjunction  with
       the police as referred to  at  [AB/387-390]  is  similarly  historic
       (footnotes date from 2002-2016).   Again,  we  have  regard  to  the
       position as set out in the Expert Report below.


   44. As Ms Cunha accepted in the course of her submissions, Dr  Giustozzi
       reports a "dramatic decline" in the number of Sikhs in  Afghanistan.
       The numbers vary as Dr Giustozzi acknowledges but, in 2019 were said
       to comprise somewhere between 220  and  250  families  of  1000-1800
       members.  As Dr Giustozzi points out, the  sample  of  incidents  of
       violence recorded in his report has to be looked at in  the  context
       of the very small numbers of those available to be targeted.


   45. The Appellant and his family emanate from Jalalabad.   Dr  Giustozzi
       draws  attention  to  a  targeted  suicide  attack  against  a  Sikh
       community in that area in July 2018 which  killed  nineteen  people,
       including thirteen Sikhs.  Dr Giustozzi records that "[t]his  attack
       was the bloodiest ever carried out against Sikhs in Afghanistan  and
       is likely to have strong repercussions  on  the  Sikh  community  in
       Jalalabad.  According to two community  leaders,  after  the  attack
       several local families fled to India and the Jalalabad community  is
       now down to just a few families."


   46. This attack was thought  to  be  the  work  of  the  Islamic  State.
       However, Dr Giustozzi also reports on continuing threats and attacks
       by the Taliban and abuse from the wider population.


   47. On a more positive note, Dr Giustozzi acknowledges  that  there  has
       been an improvement  in  the  attitudes  of  the  police  under  the
       direction of President Ghani  who  ordered  the  police  to  prevent
       street abuse against Sikhs.  As a result, the behaviour of the wider
       population in terms of harassment and discrimination is said to have
       improved albeit  Sikhs  are  still  referred  to  as  "kafirs".   Dr
       Giustozzi also records that "[s]ystematic extortion seems to  be  in
       decline" but points out that this may be due to the declining wealth
       of the Sikh community.   He  also  records  a  July  2019  interview
       reporting a wave of armed robberies against Sikh shops.


   48. Notwithstanding those more positive developments, Dr Giustozzi is of
       the opinion that "[t]he police would not be  able  to  protect  [the
       Appellant] even if they wanted to".  He records  reports  of  police
       bribery and corruption on the part of the law  enforcement  agencies
       in Afghanistan and of ineffectiveness in providing protection.


   49. Dr Giustozzi also reports that  "[t]here  has  been  no  significant
       progress after 2017 in reclaiming ownership of properties taken from
       the Sikh community" although we do not understand  this  to  be  put
       forward as a relevant factor in this case.  There is  no  suggestion
       that PB has any property to which he or the Appellant would wish  to
       lay claim.


   50. Dealing with the  particular  circumstances  of  the  Appellant,  Dr
       Giustozzi points out that "[v]irtually all Sikhs in Afghanistan have
       their own business, as they are unemployable".  The Appellant's lack
       of language skills in Dari  and  Pashto  would,  in  Dr  Giustozzi's
       opinion, render the Appellant  "completely  unemployable".   If  the
       Appellant cannot find work, and has no family support,  without  any
       assistance to refugees in Afghanistan, he  would  probably  have  to
       look to the Sikh community for assistance and accommodation (in  the
       Gurdwara).  As he points  out,  "[a]s  80%  of  the  remaining  Sikh
       population is displaced, any help coming from members  of  the  Sikh
       community is inevitably going to be  very  limited".   Even  if  the
       Appellant could find  employment,  he  would  face  difficulties  in
       obtaining accommodation as Muslims would not wish to rent to a Sikh.
        He would not be allowed to reside in the Gurdwara indefinitely.


   51. Ms Cunha drew our attention to what is said  in  the  Expert  Report
       about the Home Office's Country Policy and Information Note entitled
       "Afghanistan: Sikhs" dated May 2019 ("the 2019 CPIN").  Dr Giustozzi
       cites the following passage from the 2019 CPIN ([26] of  the  Expert
       Report):


           "There are not very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence
           to justify a departure from the conclusions of  TG  and  others.
           Whilst there have been attacks on Sikhs and Hindus, notably  the
           July 2018 suicide bomb attack in Jalalabad, they do  not  appear
           to have escalated to the point that the conclusion at (ii) above
           should change.  Similarly, whilst Sikhs and Hindus also continue
           to experience discrimination, it has not escalated or changed to
           the extent that the conclusion at (ii) above should change."


       Although the 2019 CPIN no longer appears on the Home Office  website
       and is not produced in evidence, we understand the conclusion  there
       mentioned to refer to the guidance given in  TG  about  the  general
       risk to Afghan Sikhs.


   52. Dr Giustozzi takes issue with the 2019 CPIN passage  which  we  have
       cited for the following reasons:
       (a)  The dramatic decline in the population of the  Sikh  population
       in Afghanistan.  He points out that the Rohingya in Myanmar has  not
       suffered such a dramatic decline in numbers and yet is  accepted  to
       be a persecuted minority.
       (b)  Although harassment in Kabul at least may have diminished,  the
       level of violence against Afghan Sikhs  is  very  high  when  judged
       against the decreasing numbers of that community.
       (c)  Hardly any Sikhs have returned to Afghanistan from India.  Only
       40-50 families have done so.
       (d)  The level of indiscriminate violence even in Kabul has prompted
       UNHCR in 2018 to state that  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  is  no
       longer viable.  We disregard this reason as running contrary to  the
       recent guidance given in  AS  (Afghanistan).   We  note  however  Dr
       Giustozzi's view that "[the Appellant] would be at risk from  Muslim
       zealots anywhere in Afghanistan and likely from  insurgents  too  if
       they returned to Jalalabad".
       (e)   The  Appellant  has  no  source  of  livelihood  or  home   in
       Afghanistan.  As we have already referred to, Dr Giustozzi is of the
       view that the Appellant is  virtually  unemployable  other  than  by
       other Afghan Sikhs.
       (f)   The  Khost  community  disappeared  a  few  years  ago.    The
       Lashkargah and Kunduz communities have recently been "pushed out  by
       the  violence".   The  Ghazni  community  is  "on   the   verge   of
       disappearing" and the Jalalabad community is "seriously imperilled".


       (g)  It is not safe for Afghan Sikhs in Kabul. Plans  to  set  up  a
       development area on the outskirts of Kabul for  the  Sikh  community
       has been opposed by local communities.  We  note  the  reference  to
       this plan in the  Respondent's  letter  dealing  with  cessation  of
       status ([RB/K3]). According to Dr Giustozzi, a ceremony  which  took
       place to transfer control of the area to Sikhs was disrupted forcing
       the  government  representatives  and  Sikhs  to  flee.   Those  who
       disrupted the ceremony "held hundreds of Sikhs for hours and  warned
       them never to come back".  The plan is also opposed by the Sikhs due
       to  the  quality  of  the  area.   The  area  is  also  "subject  to
       significant Taliban infiltration".


   53. Although we were not taken to it in the course  of  submissions,  we
       have regard to the view expressed by UNHCR which  was  consulted  by
       the Respondent in relation  to  the  cessation  of  the  Appellant's
       refugee status.  UNHCR's views are contained in a  letter  dated  17
       May 2017 at [RB/O1-8].  UNHCR draws attention to the  situation  for
       civilians in Afghanistan generally.  The salient paragraphs for  our
       purposes, concerning the plight for Afghan Sikhs in  particular  are
       as follows:


           "UNHCR notes that there are increased tensions between  minority
           Sikh and Muslim communities, and UNHCR wishes to draw  the  HO's
           attention to the fact that [HSB] may be additionally targeted as
           a Sikh in Afghanistan.  The HO Policy and  Information  Note  on
           Afghanistan:   Hindus   and   Sikhs   [2017]   highlights    the
           discriminatory   societal   treatment   that   Sikhs   face   in
           Afghanistan.
           'There are reports that the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  face
           societal intolerance which some commentators have attributed  to
           'extremist elements' who have moved from the provinces to  Kabul
           and other cities.'
           'Some members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan
           continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.'


   54. We also consider the evidence regarding the position in Kabul in the
       event of the Appellant being unable to  return  to  Jalalabad.   The
       country guidance given in AS (Afghanistan) was  not  concerned  with
       Afghan Sikhs per se.  It did however give guidance on factors  which
       might  be  relevant  to  the  situation  for  a  person  with  other
       characteristics possessed by the  Appellant.  Those  characteristics
       are   "a   person's   age,   nature   and   quality    of    support
       network/connections  with  Kabul/Afghanistan, their  physical  and
       mental  health,  and  their  language,  education   and   vocational
       skills".


   55. We do not understand it to be disputed that the Appellant  does  not
       have continuing connections to Afghanistan, whether to his home area
       or Kabul.  He came to the UK in 2006 when he was aged only  fifteen.
       He has lived in the UK for nearly fifteen years.   We  have  already
       pointed  to  Dr  Giustozzi's  view  that  the  Appellant  would   be
       "virtually unemployable" other than by Afghan Sikhs.  The  Appellant
       does not speak Dari or Pashto.

   56. In addition, the Appellant  has  mental  health  difficulties.   The
       latest report which we have in that regard is the Medical Report  at
       [AB/618-633].  The author of the  Medical  Report  is  Mr  Thomas  J
       Sobel, MA, MBACB.  He is a specialist in mental health  and  trauma.
       He has fifteen years' experience in those fields. The Medical Report
       offers a balanced assessment of  the  Appellant's  difficulties.  We
       give it weight.  The Medical Report provides the  following  insight
       into the Appellant's problems:


            "31. [HSB's] depression and anxiety continue to be  exacerbated
           by fear and worry surrounding his forthcoming immigration status
           hearing, as  well  as  the  possibility  of  being  returned  to
           Afghanistan.  He still suffers flashbacks  related  to  bullying
           from his ex-wife and her parents, as well as fears of  religious
           persecution and possible death if he is returned to Afghanistan.
            32.  Additionally, since I first saw [HSB],  he  has  begun  to
           misuse pain medication as means of coping with chronic pain,  as
           well as his anxiety and depression.
            33.  During the assessment, [HSB]  was  hyper  verbal  and  his
           speech pressured.  At times, it was difficult  to  keep  him  on
           task and he needed redirection.  This may be due to his anxiety,
           or  perhaps  another  underlying  condition.   Again,  I   would
           recommend he visit  a  psychiatrist  to  rule  out  any  further
           underlying conditions, such as Adult Attention Deficit Disorder.
            34.  Due to his difficulties remaining on task may  impact  his
           ability to provide clear and concise response to questioning, it
           is important  to  speak  clearly  and  directly  to  [HSB].   In
           addition, if [HSB] is still taking  a  higher  than  recommended
           dose of pain medications, this may also affect  his  ability  to
           concentrate and provide accurate answers to questions.   Despite
           [HSB]'s having difficulties concentrating and remaining on task,
           I do not believe [HSB] should not be considered vulnerable based
           on the Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.
            35.  The International Classification of Diseases  (ICD-10)  is
           the  classification  used  since  1994  by  the   World   Health
           Organization (WHO).  It has become  the  international  standard
           diagnostic classification  for  most  epidemiological  purposes.
           [HSB]'s clinical impression appears to conclude that he  suffers
           from  Post-traumatic  Stress  disorder,  as  well  as   moderate
           depression  and  mild  anxiety  based  on  clinical  assessments
           administered.  In  addition,  I  would  recommend  a  follow  up
           consultation with a psychiatrist to  rule  out  Adult  Attention
           Deficit  Disorder  based  on  my   observed   interactions   and
           difficulties with attention section of the Mental Status Exam.
            ...
            36.  [HSB] states previously  experiencing  suicidal  thoughts.
           He has previously stated that "If they deport me, I would rather
           kill myself because they [religious extremists] will  abuse  and
           torture me. If I go back, it's the end for me." [HSB] states  he
           would use a kitchen knife or a  razor  blade  to  kill  himself.
           When asked what keeps him safe for now, [HSB] states  his  worry
           about what would happen to his mother is  what  keeps  him  from
           acting on his suicidal ideations.
            37.  [HSB] states he last  experienced  suicidal  ideations  in
           December 2019 after his last hearing regarding his asylum case.
            38.  At this time, [HSB] appears rational and is not impulsive.
            However, whilst he has no previous  suicide  attempts,  he  has
           expressed concrete plans as to how he would suicide  [sic].   If
           returned to Afghanistan, [HSB]'s mental health and wellbeing may
           decompensate and thus increase the risk of him harming  himself.
           Additionally, he would not have the community and family support
           that he has here in the UK.
            39.  If he is allowed to remain, [HSB] will be able  to  access
           appropriate mental health and  substance  misuse  treatment  and
           have an access [sic] to an established primary  support  network
           in  the  UK.   Along  with  psychological  treatment,  including
           counselling, CBT, substance counselling and detox, and  possibly
           Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) therapy, he
           stands a better chance of  a  positive  outcome  in  his  mental
           health stability and recovery.
            40.  As indicated by World Health Organisation's Mental  Health
           Atlas country profile 2014, I am concerned [HSB] would not  have
           access to, or receive the  specialised  psychological  treatment
           required if he is returned to Afghanistan."


   57. Our attention was also drawn to a letter  dated  6  July  2020  from
       Bhajan Singh Kapoor, the chairman of  Khalsa  Diwan  Afghanistan,  a
       registered charity based in the UK ([AB/747-754].   That  letter  is
       interesting for the  details  of  the  various  attacks  which  have
       occurred  in  Afghanistan,  against  Sikhs   and   more   generally.
       Specifically, our attention is drawn to an incident  in  March  2020
       (post-dating the Expert Report) where Islamic State gunmen stormed a
       Gurdwara in Kabul and killed twenty-seven  worshippers  there.   The
       funeral procession which took place on the following  day  was  also
       targeted with rocket attacks and land mines along the route.


   58. Finally, we have regard to the guidance given  in  TG  at  (v)  that
       "[t]hose without access to an independent income are unlikely to  be
       able to reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms".


   59. We end our consideration where we started.  It is for the Respondent
       to show that there has been a significant and  non-temporary  change
       in the conditions which led to the recognition  of  refugee  status.
       The  recognition  was  based  on  the  Appellant's  position  as   a
       practising Afghan Sikh.

   60. We accept Dr Giustozzi's evidence  that  the  population  of  Afghan
       Sikhs has dramatically declined.  Ms  Cunha  did  not  dispute  that
       evidence and it is consistent with the  2019  CPIN.   As  such,  the
       evidence about attacks  and  abuses  has  to  be  seen  against  the
       backdrop of a very small  population  of  targets.   We  have  drawn
       attention to the evidence about the 2018 attack in Jalalabad  and  a
       more recent attack on a gurdwara in 2020 (see [45] and [57]  above).
       Although those attacks killed a total of forty  Sikhs,  that  number
       has to be seen in the context of  a  population  of  less  than  two
       thousand. Whilst we accept that this is evidence of only  two  major
       attacks in a two year period, those are in addition to  the  general
       level of violence in Afghanistan and also smaller, random  incidents
       of abuse and threats.

   61. We accept that the position in relation to discrimination  may  have
       improved to some extent and that the police themselves may no longer
       harass and discriminate Afghan  Sikhs.   However,  as  Dr  Giustozzi
       concludes, even if the police are  willing  to  provide  protection,
       they are unable to do so.  Again, that position  appears  consistent
       with the Home Office's own policy guidance.

   62. We accept also that the position in relation to  systemic  extortion
       may have improved.  That  may  well  be,  as  Dr  Giustozzi  opines,
       because the wealth of the Sikh community  has  diminished.   In  any
       event, however, it has little bearing on this  case  as  it  is  not
       suggested that the Appellant would return with any wealth.

   63. We have regard also to the effect which that factor  would  have  on
       internal relocation.  It is accepted by the Respondent, based on the
       guidance in TG that, without independent income, it is  unlikely  to
       be reasonable for the Appellant to relocate. We would in  any  event
       have reached the  same  conclusion  based  on  the  guidance  in  AS
       (Afghanistan) having regard to the Appellant's age he  was  when  he
       left Afghanistan, lack  of  familiarity  with  Kabul,  lack  of  any
       support mechanisms there and his mental health.

   64. We remind ourselves that the burden is on  the  Respondent  to  show
       that the circumstances in Afghanistan for the Appellant have changed
       to a significant and non-temporary degree.  Taking into account  the
       totality of the evidence, the Respondent  has  not  discharged  that
       burden.  We accept therefore that the Appellant continues to have  a
       well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.  In  those
       circumstances, the Appellant's status as a refugee cannot be ceased.



   65. As we indicated at the outset of this section,  if  we  reached  the
       conclusion that the Appellant's status could not be ceased based  on
       the current circumstances in Afghanistan, it would not be  necessary
       for us to reach any further conclusion on Issue Four as  that  would
       be determinative as to the risk on return.

   66. We do not consider it necessary either to consider Issue Five.   The
       Appellant is and remains a recognised refugee and cannot be returned
       to Afghanistan.  There is no purpose in considering  the  impact  on
       his family and private life in the event of return.





    DECISION
    The  appeal  is  allowed  on  protection  grounds.    The   Appellant's
    deportation to Afghanistan would breach the Refugee Convention.




    Signed             L K Smith       Dated: 29 April 2021
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

