
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00036/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 7 June 2019                       |on 11 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HASSAN [F]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    in person.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Keith (as he then was) ('the Judge')  promulgated
       on 31 December 2018 in which the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal
       on  asylum  grounds  but  dismissed  the   appeal   on   humanitarian
       protection, human rights and EEA grounds.


Background


    2. Mr [F] is a citizen of  Somalia  born  on  25  December  1981.  On  8
       February 2016 the Secretary of State made an order of his deportation
       from the United Kingdom and on 24 February 2017 refused his claim  on
       protection  and  human  rights  grounds  and  revoked   his   refugee
       protection status.
    3. Mr [F] is a national of Somalia who came to the United Kingdom on  22
       March 2003 at which point he was granted refugee  status  based  upon
       his membership of a minority clan. His wife and three children joined
       him in March 2006 with family reunion visas. The couple had a further
       child born in the United Kingdom. The Judge finds Mr [F]  appears  to
       remain married although now estranged from his wife.
    4. Mr [F] has formed a relationship with a Swedish national with whom he
       has had three children although the Judge records a lack  of  clarity
       in relation to the nature of that relationship at [3] of the decision
       under challenge.
    5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr [F] indicated  he  wished
       to challenge the Judges findings regarding the nature of the  changes
       in Somalia. There was no application by him to challenge the  Judge's
       decision by seeking permission to appeal in time  at  all.  There  is
       therefore no grant  of  permission  by  a  Judge  of  the  first-Tier
       Tribunal or Upper Tribunal giving leave to make such a challenge.  It
       was not considered to be in  interests  of  fairness  to  allow  such
       challenge in light of the country conditions as found;  which  appear
       to be within the range of findings available  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.
    6. In relation  to  the  protection  issues  the  Judge's  findings  are
       summarised at [74 - 75] in the following terms:

           "74.   In summary, I concluded  that  the  situation  throughout
                Somalia as a whole remained  volatile  with  risks  changing
                depending   on   the   withdrawal   of   Somali   government
                authorities. Noting the Country guidance; and also accepting
                that the appellant was from Mogadishu;  the  fact  that  the
                situation across the country as a whole is not  stable,  but
                is to be contrasted to the  durable  changes  in  Mogadishu,
                which were those circumstances which  are  relevant  to  the
                appellant, as he is from Mogadishu;  I  concluded  that  the
                changes that had taken place are fundamental as they  relate
                to the appellant, as he is from Mogadishu. MS (Art 15C(5)  -
                Mogadishu) can be distinguished as  the  appellant's  return
                would not necessitate relocation - he could return to family
                neighbourhood in which he  was  brought  up,  regardless  of
                wider country instability.


           75.    In relation to humanitarian protection more widely  under
                Article 15 (c), which  was  not  the  subject  of  purported
                cessation (the appellant had  been  granted  refugee  status
                rather than  humanitarian  protection)  I  accept  that  the
                nature of generalised violence separate from  the  issue  of
                clan membership was not sufficiently bad,  noting  that  the
                appellant was an 'ordinary citizen' within  the  meaning  of
                the guide set out in MOJ. The appellant's  claimed  fear  of
                generalised violence from Al Shabab  was  no  more  than  an
                assertion, without his identifying any further risk factors.
                For the same reasons, I concluded that provided he  remained
                in Mogadishu, the appellant would not face a real  risk,  to
                the lower evidential standard, of  harm  or  of  destitution
                sufficient to breach Article 3. The appellant is resourceful
                and would have the benefit of foreign remittances;  and  his
                (sic) medically fit to work and would, I find get employment
                in Mogadishu. He would not be at risk of clan  violence;  or
                discrimination at a level  which  might  breach  his  rights
                under Article 3."

    7. At [92] the Judge writes "the appellants refugee status, predating 21
       October 2004, cannot be revoked and so the appellant's appeal against
       that revocation succeeds. The appellant has  rebutted  the  statutory
       presumption against his exclusion from protection, on the basis  that
       he is not a danger to the community" the  latter  being  the  Judge's
       conclusions in relation to the section 72 element of the claim.
    8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the  upholding  of
       the asylum claim which was initially refused by another judge of  the
       First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by  a  judge
       of the Upper Tribunal on the grounds it is said to be  arguable  that
       the Judge failed to apply MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994.


Error of law


    9. There is no viable challenge to the Judge's findings relating to  the
       country situation within Somalia and particularly in  Mogadishu.  The
       appeal relates to the proper legal conclusions open to the  Judge  in
       light of such findings.
   10. The Judge refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Dang  which
       examined the impact of the decision to revoke refugee status pursuant
       to paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules.  The  Upper  Tribunal  in
       that case noted  that  Article  14  of  the  Qualification  Directive
       enabled Member States to revoke, end, or refuse to renew status  that
       was granted by that Member State to an  individual  pursuant  to  its
       obligations under the Qualification Directive, making it necessary to
       distinguish between refugee status granted pursuant to the provisions
       of  the  Directive  and   the   Refugee   Convention   which   exists
       independently of any State recognition. The  Qualification  Directive
       was not in force when Mr [F] was recognised  as  a  refugee  and,  as
       noted by the Judge, can have no application  on  the  facts  of  this
       case.
   11. The respondent's decision revoking refugee status is made pursuant to
       paragraph 339A which is said  to  mirror  the  cessation  clauses  in
       Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.
   12. It appeared for a while therefore that if an individual  was  granted
       refugee status under the Refugee Convention prior to the introduction
       of the Qualification Directive the Secretary of State would  have  no
       power to revoke such a grant. This  was  the  situation  specifically
       addressed by the Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994.
       In giving the lead judgement Lady Justice Arden stated at [47]:

           "47.   I accept that it would be inconsistent with the  purposes
                of refugee status, whether under the Refugee  Convention  or
                the QD, if protection could be  to  easily  ceased  while  a
                person was still in need of international protection  or  it
                was not reasonably clear that the need for it had gone. That
                would  hardly  solve  the   problem   of   persecution   and
                displacement  which  those  instruments  are   intended   to
                address. Equally, as it seems to me, there is  no  necessary
                reason why refugee status should  be  continued  beyond  the
                time when the refugee is subject to  the  persecution  which
                entitled him to refugee  status  or  any  other  persecution
                which would result in him being a refugee, and why he should
                be entitled to further protection. There should simply be  a
                requirement for symmetry between the grant and cessation  of
                refugee status."

   13. The Judge  therefore  applied  the  wrong  test  when  assessing  the
       question of whether Mr [F] was still entitled to be recognised  as  a
       refugee. The Judge properly reminded himself  of  the  need  for  any
       changes in the place to which Mr [F] was to be returned to be durable
       and non-temporary which the Judge found was the case for  sustainable
       reasons. As the  Court  of  Appeal  state  the  risks  which  entitle
       individuals to protection are risks which affect them personally  and
       individually, "an individualised approach". In this  case  the  Judge
       finds that those aspects which Mr [F] relied on  and  which  entitled
       him to be recognised as a refugee no longer exist.
   14. Refugee status is not granted by any international body such as  that
       under the Qualification Directive by a Member State but is  a  status
       which comes into effect if an individual is able to establish  he  or
       she is suffering from a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  a
       Convention reason and is unable or owing to such  fear  unwilling  to
       avail himself of the protection of their country  of  nationality  or
       who, not having a nationality and being outside the  country  of  his
       former habitual residence as a result of such events,  is  unable  or
       owing to such fear or is unwilling to return to it. If such  a  well-
       founded fear is established a person is entitled to be recognised  as
       a refugee. Conversely, as found  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  if  the
       circumstances which entitled a person to such a grant no longer exist
       that person is no longer entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee  as
       they are no longer able to show they can satisfy the requirements  of
       Article 1A of the Refugee Convention.
   15. Article 1C of the Refugee  Convention  states  that  that  Convention
       shall cease to apply to any person falling into the terms of  Section
       A if:

           '(5)   He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection
                with which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased
                to exist,  continue  to  refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
                protection of the country of nationality;'

   16. In light of the Judge's finding that the circumstances  that  related
       to Mr [F] have ceased to  exist  and  that  such  changes  that  have
       occurred are significant and durable I find the Judge erred  at  [97]
       in finding that the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  is  upheld.  I  find
       arguable merit in the Secretary of States submission that  the  Judge
       failed to apply the guidance in MA(Somalia) which led  to  the  Judge
       applying the wrong test when assessing this element of the appeal.
   17. No legal error is made out in relation to the dismissal of the appeal
       on humanitarian protection or human rights grounds or pursuant to the
       EEA  Regulations.   Even  if  Mr  [F]  disagrees  with  the   Judge's
       conclusions on  those  points  the  findings  at  [98  -  100]  stand
       unchallenged.
   18. In light of the above I set aside the Judges finding at [79]  of  the
       decision under challenge. I remake  the  decision  finding  that  the
       appellant's appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed.

Decision

   19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original  Judge  in  upholding  Mr  [F]'s  asylum
       appeal. I remake the  decision  as  follows.  The  appeal  on  asylum
       grounds is dismissed.


  Anonymity.


   20. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 June 2019

