
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00093/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 December 2018                     |On 10 January 2019                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                            MRS JUSTICE COCKERILL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. We find that it is  appropriate
to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the original appellant  (HD)  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:    Ms S. Walker, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
(Harrow)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, we shall refer  to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the  Secretary
    of State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Decision to refuse a protection and human rights claim

2.    The appellant (HD) appealed the Secretary of  State's  decision  dated
    27 April 2018 to refuse a protection and  human  rights  claim  in  the
    context of deportation proceedings. The Secretary of State  noted  that
    the appellant fled Vietnam in 1986. He was issued with  refugee  status
    and a settlement visa in Hong Kong on 20 July 1990 and entered  the  UK
    on 31 July 1990.  He  was  issued  with  a  Refugee  Convention  travel
    document in 1994. In 2005 he applied for and was  issued  with  a  Home
    Office travel document (Certificate of Identity) to visit  Vietnam  due
    to compassionate family circumstances. The Secretary of  State  records
    that he made three visits to Vietnam in 2005 and 2006. Between 03  July
    1995 and 19 September 2011 the appellant received 16 convictions for 28
    offences including theft, possession of a controlled  drug,  attempting
    to obtain property by deception, failing to surrender and possession of
    a listed false instrument.  On  07  February  2008  the  appellant  was
    convicted  of  producing  cannabis  and   sentenced   to   15   months'
    imprisonment. On 09 May 2008 the Secretary of State issued him  with  a
    warning letter stating that deportation action might  be  taken  if  he
    committed another offence.

3.    On 31 August 2011 the appellant was  convicted  of  kidnapping,  false
    imprisonment and wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm. On 19
    September 2011 he was sentenced to 3 years' concurrent imprisonment for
    kidnapping, 5 years' concurrent imprisonment for false imprisonment and
    14 years' imprisonment for wounding with intent to do  grievous  bodily
    harm. The  Secretary  of  State  quoted  from  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks. A fuller extract is as follows:

         "The facts of the matters for which  you  find  yourself  convicted
         today are that on 28 February and after that date, you  and  others
         abducted the person who turned out to be the victim in this matter,
         a man called Mr [F]. He was abducted from the place he was  working
         which was a Chinese supermarket  in  South  London.  He  was  taken
         initially to your wife's house in East London and then taken on  to
         your own bed-sit flat which you occupied at the time  or  owned  at
         the time and it was there that he was in fact viciously  assaulted.
         After that, he was trussed up in a plastic bag and  left  deposited
         in a car park, probably left for dead by the  way  that  he  looked
         when he was found by the police.


         I say initially that the  truth  of  what  was  going  on  here  is
         probably unlikely ever to come to light,  as  counsel  has  pointed
         out. There were lots of  wheels  within  wheels  going  on.  It  is
         clearly a criminal background, a retribution of some sort, probably
         for bad behaviour in a criminal sense and it looks like Mr [F]  was
         the victim of that retribution from a criminal gang with which  you
         must have been involved.


         Mr [F] is  the  victim.  He  is  also  Vietnamese,  like  yourself,
         originally. Mr [F] it seems, was smuggled in from his home country,
         Vietnam, and it is likely that as a result of that smuggling he was
         expected to work for the gang who were involved in  the  smuggling.
         It seems from what one could glean from the facts in this case that
         the work he was allocated was to be a member of staff in a cannabis
         factory, of course the sort of place  that  we  in  these  criminal
         courts hear so much about, probably a converted house or commercial
         premises being used to grow cannabis using hydroponics and all  the
         rest of it.


         Mr [F] said that he did work in the cannabis  factory  as  ordered,
         that he received nothing for it and that after a while  decided  he
         did not want to continue. He  refused  to  continue  and  left  the
         factory. As far as one can tell,  just  looking  at  motive  for  a
         moment, and as I say it is very foggy and difficult  to  ascertain,
         but it seems that those who expected him to work for them were  not
         pleased about his departure and therefore became involved  in  this
         violent episode  which,  as  I  have  said  earlier,  was  probably
         punishment for his failing to conform with the requirements of  the
         gang.


         You were obviously involved in this one way or another. I know  not
         whether it was because you were involved in the gang as a member or
         whether it was because you knew Mr [F] or whether it  was  because,
         as you hinted, you were a sort of father figure  who  was  seen  as
         someone who could negotiate, et cetera. Whatever  your  background,
         you certainly became involved and involved in a criminal way.


         As I said earlier, what happened was that Mr [F], having upset  the
         gang, was visited by you initially, two or three  weeks  before  it
         seems, and refused to come with  you.  You  then  returned  with  a
         number of men and made sure that he came. He was bundled  off  from
         the supermarket he was working at, put into a car  driven  by  you,
         taken initially to your wife'[s premises  where  there  was  a  lot
         going on and it seems a number  of  men.  Counsel  on  your  behalf
         described it as possible negotiations. One knows not what was going
         on there, although it is fair to say that somebody independent  had
         visited that house during the time you were there and there was  no
         sign at that time of you being assaulted or treated in  that  sense
         violently.


         But whatever happened in that house did not go as planned so far as
         the gang were concerned, it seems, and at this point the gang  with
         which you were  involved  and  group  of  men  in  which  you  were
         involved, although I know not whether  you  were  actually  one  of
         those, took Mr [F] off to premises which you  owned  or  rented,  a
         small bed-sit near your wife's house, and there  he  was  kept  and
         that was the false imprisonment.


         So, going back to the indictment of kidnapping, it was  the  taking
         of Mr [F] from the supermarket by force and the false  imprisonment
         was the keeping of Mr [F] in the second premises against his will.


         By that point things had become violent. He was trussed up and tied
         up with cable and his mouth was sealed with a tape of some sort. He
         was kept for a day and a night, left tied up, as I say, with  cable
         ties, and it was at this point that the most serious part  of  this
         crime was perpetrated, namely the wounding with  intent.  You  were
         directly involved in that, according to the evidence and  according
         to the conviction, in that Mr [F] was beaten and hit with  probably
         two hammers but at least one hammer and you were one of  those  who
         hit him with the hammer. He was very  badly  assaulted  indeed  and
         injured to the extent that his legs were  broken.  ...  [a  lengthy
         description of the victim's extensive injuries ensued]


         You are now 53 years of age. As far  as  previous  convictions  are
         concerned, I have noted a list  of  previous  convictions.  Nothing
         really is anything near this sort of offending.  There  is  towards
         the end of the matters an  interesting  matter  involving  cannabis
         but, again, cannabis was fleetingly part of this case.  It  is  not
         entirely clear how you are linked with the world  of  cannabis  but
         you do have a conviction noted in your record.


         ... it is clear that you were seen to be either a main  perpetrator
         or involved in knowingly and actively being one of the gang members
         and committing these crimes in that sense, so you have to take full
         responsibility for the convictions that have been recorded  against
         you.


         I have considered dangerousness in this case and I  take  the  view
         that it does not apply. I said that initially.  This  is  a  single
         incident, a gang-based  background  and  you  have  no  history  of
         violence.  Therefore,  I  do  not  think  that  the   dangerousness
         provisions apply in this case."

4.    In light of the serious nature of the offence, the Secretary of  State
    was obliged to make a deportation order pursuant to section 32  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 ("the UKBA 2007"). The Secretary of State certified
    the case with reference to section 72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  NIAA  2002")  because  the  appellant  was
    convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom attracting a sentence  of
    more than two years' imprisonment. The Secretary  of  State  considered
    the representations made by the  appellant  on  22  November  2017  but
    concluded  that  nothing  in   those   representations   rebutted   the
    presumption that he was a danger  to  the  community  in  the  UK.  The
    respondent went on to revoke the  appellant's  refugee  status  on  the
    ground that Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention applied because the
    appellant could no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
    which he was recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist,  continue  to
    refuse to avail himself  of  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
    nationality. The Secretary of State considered the views  expressed  by
    UNHCR but concluded that there was a significant and durable change  in
    the circumstances since he left the country. There was no  evidence  to
    suggest that he would be at  risk  at  the  current  time  due  to  his
    political opinion.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson ("the judge") allowed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 03 September 2018. He began by considering
    the terms of section 72 of the NIAA 2002  and  summarised  the  correct
    legal framework. He quoted a  large  part  of  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks as outlined above. His core findings on this issue were:

         "35.     Bearing in mind the above, it is  beyond  doubt  that  the
             appellant has been convicted of particularly serious crimes.


         36.      The second question is whether he currently constitutes  a
             danger to the community of the UK. The  appellant's  assertion
             is that he does not, that he feels remorse for his  offending,
             that his criminal history is due to his former dependency upon
             drugs and that he has no intention of offending in the future.
             Such evidence is  essentially  reiterated  by  his  witnesses.
             However, I do not find credible  the  appellant's  contention,
             that  his  serious  2011  offences  were  the  result  of  his
             dependency upon drugs, bearing in mind that it is his evidence
             that he ceased to take drugs in 2006 and  that  and  that  his
             determination to stay away from drugs was reinforced following
             his wife's stroke in 2009. Thus, his former drugtaking  is  no
             excuse, or reason, at all  for  the  commission  of  the  2011
             offences.


         37.      In his submissions, Mr Grennan noted  that  the  appellant
             had previously used a large number of  aliases  and  different
             dates  of   birth.   In   cross-examination,   the   appellant
             acknowledged that he had done so and essentially  acknowledged
             that this was for  the  purpose  of  seeking  to  avoid  being
             identified as a person who had  previously  committed  various
             offences. Thus, it demonstrates the appellant's propensity  to
             be untruthful in the past.  I  have  taken  that  factor  into
             account when assessing  whether  he  currently  constitutes  a
             danger to the community, although I  do  not  find  it  to  be
             determinative.


         38.      There is  a  recent  Offender  Assessment  System  (OASys)
             report,  of  relevant  to  the  question  of  the  appellant's
             propensity to reoffend. It commences at page 61  of  AB2.  The
             report is dated 17 July 2018 and is written by one  Hannah  de
             Jonk, a Probation Officer. The numbers in brackets below refer
             to the paragraph numbers in the report. The report appears  to
             be based  upon  an  assessment  undertaken  on  18  May  2017.
             Indication is given therein that the victim was  a  friend  of
             the appellant's brother [2.4]. At [2.11], indication is  given
             that the appellant "denies any involvement  in  the  offence",
             which indication, I find, is consistent with the fact that  he
             pleaded not guilty to the changes and was found  guilty  by  a
             jury. That fact, I find, does not in itself  suggest  remorse.
             It  is  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  previous   offences
             "revolve around drug use"  [2.12].  At  [R4.4],  the  risk  of
             reoffending is assessed as being low. However,  indication  is
             given that the appellant presents a  medium  risk  of  serious
             harm to  people  involved  in  the  Vietnamese  drug  culture;
             specifically, a known adult, which appears to be  a  reference
             to the victim in the 2011 offences, who would now appear to be
             living back in the appellant's home area in Vietnam.


         39.      Apart from the OaSys report, I have no further independent
             evidence with  reference  to  the  appellant's  propensity  to
             reoffend. His solicitors have obtained a psychiatrist's report
             (Dr Olufadejimi Jegede, dated 20 July 2018) with reference  to
             the appellant's mental health. One of the questions  asked  of
             Dr Jegede was for him to comment on the appellant's propensity
             to reoffend but Dr Jegede has indicated that such  not  within
             his professional remit.


         40.      The appellant's unchallenged evidence is that he  has  not
             been involved in the use of heroin or crack  cocaine,  or  any
             other Class A drugs, since 2009,  although  the  OaSys  report
             does make reference to him having a positive drugs test of  16
             April 2014,  it  would  appear  in  relation  to  him  smoking
             cannabis, which  resulted  in  an  adjudication.  Further,  Dr
             Jegede's report makes reference to the appellant informing him
             that he does not use any  drugs  except  occasionally  smoking
             cannabis. In oral  evidence,  the  appellant  confirmed  that,
             whilst in prison, he had occasionally smoked cannabis but that
             he had not done so since. That said, there  is  no  suggestion
             that he has, in fact, used what  might  be  described  as  any
             'hard drugs' since about 2009, which is  when  he  recommenced
             residing with his wife.


         41.      I have taken into account the content of the OaSys  report
             which, I  reiterate,  is  the  only  independent  evidence  in
             relation to the appellant's propensity  to  reoffend.  I  have
             also taken into account the essentially unchallenged evidence,
             that he has not participated in the use of heroin  or  cocaine
             for several years. The OaSys report indicates that his  former
             offending was essentially the result of  drug  dependency  and
             that the very serious 2011 offences appear  to  have  been  an
             isolated escalation in the appellant's offending. I link  this
             to the appellant's own assertion that he has no  intention  of
             committing offences in the future,  which  indication,  having
             had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the  appellant  give  oral
             evidence, I accept as being a truthful one. The  OaSys  report
             indicates that the appellant's risk of reoffending  is  a  low
             one.


         42.      In the circumstances, and on a balance  of  probability  I
             accept  that  it  has  been  established  that  he  no  longer
             constitutes a danger to the community of the  United  Kingdom.
             Consequently, I find that the appellant has rebutted the  s.72
             presumption in that regard."

6.    The judge went on to  consider  the  issue  of  cessation  of  refugee
    status. He quoted the UNHCR response in detail and  outlined  what  was
    said in the decision letter. The judge noted the appellant's claim that
    he continued to fear persecution because  of  his  desertion  from  the
    Vietnamese army during the  war  as  well  as  an  additional  fear  of
    retribution from the family of the  victim  of  the  serious  crime  he
    committed in the UK. The judge outlined the respondent's assertion that
    the appellant is no longer at risk in  Vietnam  given  the  passage  of
    time, the changes in the situation there and the fact that  he  visited
    Vietnam  on  several  occasions.  The  judge  took  into  account   the
    appellant's explanation about the nature and extent of those visits. He
    bore in mind that it was for the respondent to show that there had been
    a significant and non-temporary change in the situation in Vietnam.  No
    evidence was produced to show that deserters from  the  army  would  no
    longer be at risk. The respondent failed to show that the circumstances
    in connection with which he was recognised as a refugee had  ceased  to
    exist.

Grounds of appeal

7.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to conduct an adequate assessment, and  failed  to
         give sufficiently clear reasons, for his finding that the appellant
         rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to the  community  in
         the UK.


     ii) In assessing the cessation clause, the judge failed to have  proper
         regard to the test set out by the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Somalia)
         [2018] EWCA Civ 994 and failed to have regard to (a) the fact  that
         peacetime regulations would now apply and "penalties for  desertion
         would be less severe"; (b) the appellant  has  visited  Vietnam  on
         several occasions; (c) the penal code was replaced in 2015  and  it
         was submitted that the penalty for desertion was now "non custodial
         reform" that would not meet the definition of persecution.

Decision and reasons

8.    We have considered the grounds of appeal and the submissions  made  by
    both parties. It is a borderline decision, but  we  conclude  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law  in
    relation to the first ground of appeal.

9.    It is axiomatic that  a  judge  must  give  reasons  for  his  or  her
    decision. It is not necessary for a judge to deal with every aspect  of
    a case if sufficient reasons are given for  the  parties,  particularly
    the losing party, to understand the basis of the decision in respect of
    the key elements that need to be  determined:  see  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

10.   Our summary of the judge's findings relating to his  assessment  under
    section 72 of the NIAA 2002 shows that  he  considered  the  sentencing
    remarks, the  seriousness  of  the  offence,  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's evidence and the risk assessment  contained  in  the  OASys
    report in assessing whether the appellant rebutted the presumption that
    he was a danger to the community.  These  were  all  relevant  matters.
    However, having considered his findings as a whole, and  in  particular
    the overarching findings in [41] of  the  decision,  we  conclude  that
    First-tier Tribunal did not explain adequately why  the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to the community in light
    of the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  We  come  to  this
    conclusion for the following reasons:

      i) The judge quoted the sentencing remarks. We  also  quoted  them  in
         some detail because they contained important information about  the
         sentencing  judge's  views  of  the  appellant's  criminality.   In
         particular, the sentencing judge thought that the appellant must be
         involved at some level in Vietnamese  organised  crime  gangs.  The
         evidence surrounding the commission of the offence  suggested  that
         the gang was  likely  to  be  involved  in  human  trafficking  and
         exploitation in cannabis factories in the UK.  The  fact  that  the
         appellant was convicted and sentenced to  15  months'  imprisonment
         for producing cannabis in 2008, which on the face of it was not  an
         offence relating to his own drug use, was relevant to  the  overall
         assessment of whether the appellant  had  a  history  of  offending
         linked to organised crime and was likely to pose a  danger  to  the
         community. Although it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the
         lesser offences committed prior to 2008 were likely to be linked to
         the appellant's personal drug use, the evidence indicated that  the
         more serious offences of 2008 and 2011 were likely to be linked  to
         organised  criminal  activities  surrounding  the   production   of
         cannabis and were not necessarily "an isolated  escalation  in  the
         appellant's offending". The fact that the appellant claimed that he
         no longer took drugs was  not  necessarily  relevant  to  the  more
         serious offences. In the circumstances, it was not  sufficient  for
         the judge simply to quote the sentencing remarks  without  tackling
         the import of  the  sentencing  judge's  findings.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge's findings at [40-41] lacked any meaningful analysis
         of relevant considerations that should  have  formed  part  of  the
         assessment.


     ii) We agree with Mr Wilding's submission  that  the  finding  at  [41]
         relating to the appellant's assertion that "he had no intention  of
         committing offences in the future" lacked sufficient reasoning.  It
         is open to a judge who has heard evidence from a witness to  assess
         their credibility and state whether they find them to be  truthful.
         However, the level of reasoning required to  explain  why  a  judge
         finds a witness credible will depend on the circumstances  of  each
         case. If there has been little challenge to the  credibility  of  a
         witness perhaps little more needs to be said than a brief statement
         of the kind made at  [41]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
         However, in this case, the judge had  already  made  findings  that
         undermined the overall credibility of the appellant as  a  witness.
         At [36] the judge did not accept the appellant's explanation as  to
         why he committed the serious offences in 2011. At  [37]  the  judge
         noted that the appellant had a history of using aliases  and  false
         instruments. He concluded that the appellant had a  "propensity  to
         be untruthful in the past". In light of those findings we  conclude
         that the judge needed to give adequate reasons to  explain  why  he
         then accepted the appellant's assurance that he  would  not  commit
         further offences. The bare finding at [41] failed to explain why he
         found the appellant to be sincere on this matter when he found  him
         to be untruthful in relation to other matters.


    iii) We make clear that the third reason why the judge's  findings  were
         inadequate does not form a central plank of our  reasoning  because
         it was not argued or canvassed  at  the  hearing.  However,  having
         noted this point we do not think that we can ignore it  because  it
         is a relevant matter. On more detailed consideration of  the  OASys
         report that was referred to at the hearing we find that  the  judge
         also made a factual error relating to the risk of  reoffending.  It
         is unsurprising given the rather  dense  and  technical  nature  of
         OASys assessments. We know the exact sections  of  the  report  the
         judge considered because he crossed referenced them at [38] of  the
         decision. He correctly identified the fact that the  appellant  was
         recently assessed to present a 'low'  risk  of  reoffending  and  a
         'medium'  risk  of  serious  harm  to  known  adults  involved   in
         "Vietnamese drug culture". Closer inspection of section R4.4 of the
         OASys report shows that the low risk assessment related to the "OVP
         risk of reoffending", which relates to the probability  of  violent
         reoffending. However, the summary  sheet  on  pg.35  of  the  OASys
         report outlined the predictor scores for other types of  offending.
         The "OGRS3 probability of proven reoffending" was  assessed  to  be
         'medium' with a 56% probability of reoffending  within  two  years.
         The "OGP probability of proven non-violent  reoffending"  was  also
         assessed to be 'medium'  with  a  62%  probability  of  reoffending
         within two years.  In other words, the judge made his findings on a
         partial assessment of the risk of reoffending without reference  to
         the summary of conclusions in the OASys report  which  showed  that
         the appellant posed a 'medium' risk of reoffending in  relation  to
         non-violent crime.

11.   Having found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons to explain why the appellant rebutted the  presumption
    that he was a danger to the community it is not  necessary  for  us  to
    consider the second ground of appeal in any detail. We simply note that
    the second ground, as originally drafted, did not demonstrate an  error
    of law. Mr Wilding accepted that the assertions about the penal code in
    Vietnam were not argued before the First-tier Tribunal or supported  by
    evidence. Although he made submissions on the judge's findings relating
    to cessation at the hearing, none of the points  were  pleaded  in  the
    original grounds of appeal.

12.   We therefore conclude that the findings relating  to  the  section  72
    certificate are unsustainable and will need to be remade.  The  outcome
    of the decision on the section 72 certificate  will  determine  whether
    Refugee Convention issues can be determined. Because  the  judge  found
    that the presumption under section 72 was  rebutted  he  did  not  make
    alternative findings with reference to Article 3 so the whole  decision
    must be set aside. The extent of the judicial  fact  finding  necessary
    for the decision to be re-made is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date   07 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
