
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00137/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2019                 |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     C M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
     (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who  allowed  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds the appeal  of  CM  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 5 September 2018 refusing his protection and  human  rights
    claim.

2.   I shall refer hereafter to the Secretary of State as "the  respondent",
    as she was before the judge, and to CM as "the  appellant"  as  he  was
    before the judge.

3.   The appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 12 April 2007 at  the
    age of 9 with indefinite leave  to  remain  under  the  Family  Reunion
    Scheme as a dependant of his father.

4.   On 1 August 2016 he was convicted  of  robbery  and  sentenced  to  two
    years and six months' imprisonment at a young  offenders'  institution.
    He also has a conviction for battery on 4 October 2013 for which he was
    sentenced for a referral order for six months, and  convictions  on  25
    April 2016 for possessing an offensive weapon in a  public  place,  for
    which he was sentenced to 145 days in a  young  offenders'  institution
    and of possessing a knife/blade/sharp pointed article in a public place
    and sentenced to 28 days concurrent in a young offenders' institution.

5.    The  Secretary  of  State  applied  section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, having concluded  that  the  appellant
    had been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and  that  he
    constituted a danger to the community.  It was not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had rebutted the presumption in accordance with section 72(6)
    of the Act.

6.   The appellant argued that his protection concerns  remained,  referring
    to the fact that he was granted refugee status on the basis of  a  fear
    of persecution due to his and his father's  mixed  Hutu/Tutsi  heritage
    and imputed support for the Hutu rebel activity.   He  originated  from
    Kinshasa in the DRC.

7.   With regard to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the  appellant
    has a girlfriend who at the time was expecting a child.  The respondent
    did not accept that his removal from the United  Kingdom  would  breach
    his right to family life with his partner,  nor  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to his integration into the DRC.

8.    The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  from  one  of  the
    appellant's sisters, from his partner, a social  worker  who  has  been
    working with him at the young offenders including  the  appellant,  and
    from a care worker at Birmingham Children's Trust.

9.   As  regards  the  section  72  issue,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant was guilty of a particularly serious crime, bearing  in  mind
    the sentence and the impact on the victim  and  the  interests  of  the
    community.

10.  The judge however concluded,  bearing  in  mind  the  evidence  of  the
    social workers which he said was very  positive  about  the  appellant,
    that on the evidence before him  the  appellant  was  not  currently  a
    danger to the community and  had  therefore  rebutted  the  presumption
    raised under section 72(2) of the 2002 Act.
11.  Having concluded that the certificate was not to be upheld,  the  judge
    went on to consider the implication of Article 1C(5) of  the  cessation
    clause.  He noted that the respondent recognised that any change in the
    circumstances in respect of which the appellant had been recognised  as
    a refugee had to be significant and non-temporary and that his fear  of
    persecution had no  longer  to  be  regardable  as  well-founded.   The
    respondent had noted the  UNHCR's  view  that  there  had  not  been  a
    fundamental change in regard to security in the DRC.  He noted that, as
    pointed out by Ms Solanki, who also appeared below,  the  Secretary  of
    State did not refer to any country guidance case  and  how  this  might
    have applied to the appellant.

12.  The judge also noted expert evidence from Dr Kodi  and  the  fact  that
    the respondent in the decision letter observed that  whilst  there  was
    ethnic violence prevalent in some  areas  of  the  DRC,  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest  that  this  was  the  case  in  Kinshasa  and  the
    appellant could return to that area.  Dr Kodi  whose  credentials  were
    not challenged, did not think the appellant would be safe in  any  part
    of the country if people knew that he was of mixed Hutu/Tutsi heritage.
     Dr Kodi had also had  discussions  with  human  rights  activists  who
    confirmed that returned asylum  seekers  of  Rwandan  descent  were  at
    greater risk of victimisation than others because of  entrenched  anti-
    Rwandan feelings amongst the majority of  the  Congolese  people.   The
    expert noted also the problems the appellant would face  on  return  in
    obtaining accommodation, lack of knowledge of  the  Congolese  language
    and absence of family or social network and his past criminal record as
    further difficulties he would experience.

13.  In light of what was said  in  the  refusal  letter  and  the  expert's
    opinion and the view of the UNHCR, the judge concluded that  there  was
    not a significant change in regard to the  appellant's  position  as  a
    refugee.  He concluded that the appellant's  fear  of  persecution  was
    still applicable and that there had been no fundamental and significant
    change in the DRC to revoke his refugee status.

14.  The judge went on to  consider  the  position  as  regards  Article  8.
    Applying paragraph 399 of HC 395, he found that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He considered it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's
    partner to live in the DRC, and also unduly harsh for her to remain  in
    the United Kingdom without the appellant.

15.  As regards paragraph 399A, the respondent accepted that  the  appellant
    had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life.
    With regard to whether he was socially and culturally  integrated  into
    the United Kingdom, the judge  bore  in  mind  the  fact  that  he  had
    committed a number of offences and took into account such other matters
    as  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been  taken  into  care,  was
    vulnerable, had little memories of the DRC, bore in mind  his  criminal
    record and also the evidence of the social workers that the signs  were
    that he had learned from his mistakes and on  balance  considered  that
    the life he had lived in the United  Kingdom,  including  his  remorse,
    showed that he was culturally and socially integrated into  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  judge  also  considered  that  there  would   be   very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  the  DRC,
    bearing in mind that he was still a refugee and therefore faced risk as
    someone of mixed ethnicity there.  The appeal was therefore allowed  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.

16.  The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  country
    guidance in AB and DM [2005] UKIAT 00118 and NA [2008] UKAIT 00071; had
    failed to give adequate reasons for the finding  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into the DRC;  had
    erred in law in finding that the appellant was socially and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom and, finally, that the reasons given
    for finding that the effect  of  the  appellant's  deportation  on  his
    partner would be unduly harsh or inadequate.

17.  In his submissions Mr Walker adopted the points raised in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  The judge had failed to engage with the  analysis  required
    by the country guidance in the two country guidance cases.  A  thorough
    analysis of risk on return to the DRC had not been  carried  out.   The
    judge could have quoted more from the expert report.  It was not  clear
    how he had analysed the information before him and the risks on return.
     Perhaps the  strongest  point  was  ground  4  with  regard  to  undue
    harshness, bearing in mind that the appellant's partner  had  been  the
    main carer for the child and given the particular  crime  in  question.
    The reasoning was inadequate.

18.  In her submissions Ms Solanki  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response  and
    developed the points set out there.  She  argued  that  the  judge  had
    given full and proper consideration to the issue of risk on return  and
    the context of the correct test in a certified case,  having  borne  in
    mind the expert report and the views of UNHCR.  In the  refusal  letter
    from paragraph 26  onwards  it  was  accepted  that  there  was  ethnic
    violence and  the  respondent  had  said  the  appellant  could  go  to
    Kinshasa, so the judge had looked at that issue and the  expert,  whose
    evidence had not been challenged, spoke of risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return there.

19.  With regard to the country guidance cases, Kinshasa was  considered  as
    an issue with AM and DM, where it was said at  paragraph  39  that  the
    evidence of the expert of the current dangers for  Tutsis  in  Kinshasa
    was accepted, the great majority of Tutsis being  unable  generally  to
    obtain the protection of either  MONUC  or  the  authorities.   In  NA,
    though the appellant there was  of  Hema  ethnicity,  it  was  said  at
    paragraph 38 that Hema would be treated in the same light as  those  of
    Tutsi or Rwandan origin and he would be at  risk  in  Kinshasa  or  any
    other Government controlled area.   The  judge  had  applied  the  test
    correctly on the basis of the evidence before him.

20.  With regard to ground 2,  the  judge  had  made  detailed  findings  in
    respect of very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration
    into the DRC.  He had addressed all aspects of the case.  His  findings
    about language were not confused as could be seen  in  particular  from
    paragraph 51 which contained the judge's conclusions.  The reference to
    Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 was irrelevant  as  the  test  in  destitution
    cases was different.
21.  The point at ground 3 had been considered in detail  by  the  judge  in
    paragraphs 50 to 53.   Ground  4  was  probably,  it  was  agreed,  the
    Secretary of State's strongest ground, but the matter was addressed  by
    the judge and made no difference if the Tribunal were in agreement with
    Ms Solanki as to the other matters.

22.  Mr Walker had no points to make by way of reply.

23.  I reserved my decision.

24.  As regards ground 1, country guidance cases were  not  referred  to  by
    the respondent either in the decision letter or in submissions  to  the
    judge.  It is a point that the judge  noted  at  paragraph  52  of  his
    judgment.  He took into account the test of the  change  having  to  be
    significant and non-temporary, and bore in mind the UNHCR's  view  that
    there had not been a fundamental change with regard to security in  the
    DRC, and also noted the detailed report of Dr Kodi and considered  that
    there was a place in the DRC in which the appellant would  be  safe  if
    people knew he was of mixed Hutu/Tutsi heritage.  It is  relevant  also
    to note the points made today by Ms Solanki concerning what was said in
    the country guidance cases in any event about risk in Kinshasa, bearing
    in mind the fact that in the decision letter  the  respondent  accepted
    that ethnic violence was  prevalent  in  some  areas  of  the  DRC  but
    considered there was no evidence to suggest that that was the  case  in
    Kinshasa.  The judge considered the submissions made  of  the  evidence
    and came to conclusions  which  were  properly  open  to  him  and  his
    findings  were  not  contradictory  to  the  country  guidance.   As  a
    consequence I consider that it has not been shown that  he  erred  with
    regard to the certification and his decision in that regard is  upheld.
    I should add that there was no challenge  to  the  findings  about  the
    appellant not constituting a danger to  the  community  of  the  United
    Kingdom.

25.  As regards the human rights issues, in essence ground 2 falls  away  in
    light of my findings that the judge did not err with regard to risk  on
    return to the DRC.  Clearly, if  the  decision  to  cease  his  refugee
    protection is wrong, then it follows almost  automatically  that  there
    would be significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  the  DRC.   As
    regards ground 3, the judge gave careful consideration to  this  issue,
    and no evidence of any materiality as brought to his attention was  not
    considered  in  the  examination  of  the  issues  in  this  regard  at
    paragraphs 50 to 54 of his judgment.  Again, I  see  the  challenge  to
    this is a matter of disagreement only.

26.  There is more strength to the challenge set out  in  ground  4  to  the
    findings on undue harshness.  These are thin findings and  in  my  view
    inadequately reasoned.  I think that the challenge in  that  regard  is
    made out, and  indeed,  in  an  e-mail  provided  subsequently  to  the
    hearing, the appellant withdrew his opposition to ground  4.   However,
    for the reasons set out above, since the judge did not err in law  with
    regard to the issue  of  risk  on  return  or  the  certification,  the
    decision  as  regards  the  issue  of   international   protection   is
    maintained.


Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 8 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
