
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00004/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision promulgated         |
|on 1 May 2018                                 |on 4 May 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RCD
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gardner instructed by Hesi & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Gribble, promulgated on  23  October  2017,  in
        which the Judge allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.




Background


     2. The appellant was born on [ ] 1989 and is a citizen of Somalia.  He
        arrived in the United Kingdom with his  twin  brother  and  younger
        sister on 16 July 2003 aged 13 and claimed  asylum.  The  appellant
        was initially granted a  period  of  discretionary  leave  although
        succeeded on appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
        refusal of refugee status as a result of which, on 6 July 2004, the
        appellant was granted refugee status and indefinite leave to remain
        in the United Kingdom.

     3. The Judge sets out the appellant's background and evidence provided
        by both parties to the appeal before setting out findings  of  fact
        from [37] of the decision under challenge.

     4. The Judge correctly identified the first issue to be considered was
        the section 72 certificate in light of  the  appellant's  offending
        which triggered the automatic deportation provisions. At  [42]  the
        Judge writes "taking these factors into account  I  find  that  the
        section 72 presumption is successfully rebutted". The Judge did not
        find that the  appellant  constituted  an  ongoing  danger  to  the
        community of the United Kingdom.

     5. The Judge makes further relevant findings as follows:

               i) at [44] that he was  satisfied  the  appellant  could  not
                  return to his home area because he would  be  at  risk  of
                  persecution for his imputed religious opinion.

              ii) at [45] the Judge therefore needed to consider whether the
                  appellant could relocate to avoid persecution and,  if  he
                  could, whether relocation in his  circumstances  would  be
                  unduly harsh.

             iii) at [49] it is  found  the  appellant  is  likely  to  find
                  himself living in makeshift accommodation as an internally
                  displaced person and is therefore  a  person  entitled  to
                  protection under Article 3  ECHR  because  he  would  face
                  inhumane or degrading treatment on return to Mogadishu.

              iv) in the section of the decision headed "notice of decision"
                  the Judge allows the appeal under article 3 and article  8
                  ECHR only.

     6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  asserting  the  Judge
        failed to determine two the grounds  of  appeal,  namely  that  the
        section 72 certificate was unlawful and that  the  appellant  is  a
        refugee.

Error of law


     7. There is no cross-appeal by the Secretary of State meaning the fact
        the appellant has been recognised as a person entitled to rely upon
        an exception to the deportation provisions remains unchallenged, as
        do the factual findings made by the  Judge.  This  is  therefore  a
        'status appeal'  for  the  purposes  of  ascertaining  whether  the
        appellant is entitled to be recognised as a refugee and to leave on
        that basis rather than under article 3 ECHR.

     8. I find the Judge erred in failing to determine a matter  which  was
        before the First-tier Tribunal  namely  whether  the  appellant  is
        entitled  to  refugee  status,   contrary   to   section   86(2)(a)
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     9. The Judge deals with the section 72 certificate and found that  the
        presumption was rebutted.

    10. I set the decision aside as the obligation upon the  Judge  was  to
        deal with all matters before the tribunal.  The findings set out in
        the determination are all preserved. The Upper Tribunal is able  to
        remake the decision today.

    11. Mr Mills accepted that the Judge appears  to  have  considered  the
        question of whether the appellant is entitled to be recognised as a
        refugee in relation to his home area only and then to have gone  on
        to consider whether the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Mogadishu,
        which the Judge  finds  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh,
        without considering the correlation between these two findings.

    12. The appellant's home area is outside Mogadishu. It is  accepted  by
        the Judge that the appellant faces a real risk  of  persecution  in
        his home area as a result of an imputed religious opinion [44]. The
        appellant is entitled to be recognised as a refugee in the  absence
        of a sufficiency protection or viable internal flight option.

    13. The issue in this case  related  to  whether  the  appellant  could
        reasonably internally relocate to Mogadishu. It was found he  could
        not meaning he has no viable internal flight option away  from  his
        home area.

    14. On this basis the appellant makes out his case that he is  entitled
        to be recognised as a refugee.

    15. The Upper Tribunal substitutes a decision allowing  the  appeal  on
        asylum grounds.

    16. Mr Mills confirmed that a letter had been  sent  to  the  appellant
        following the decision of the  Judge  confirming  he  will  not  be
        removed from the United Kingdom and that his  indefinite  leave  to
        remain will be reinstated. This was not acceptance of the merits of
        the appeal as the respondent awaits the decision of  this  tribunal
        to ascertain  the  nature  of  the  appellant's  entitlement.  This
        decision now provides confirmation of the same.

Decision

    17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

   Anonymity.

    18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 May 2018


