
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00042/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 8 January 2018                      |On: 24 January 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             jeylani ali hussein
                          (no anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 22 January 1974. Following  a
grant of permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
his protection and human rights claims, it was found, at  an  error  of  law
hearing on 1 November 2017, that the Tribunal had made errors of law in  its
decision and the decision was set  aside,  to  the  extent  set  out  below.
Directions were made for the decision to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


Background

The appellant is from Mogadishu in Somalia. He  arrived  in  the  UK  on  15
November 2001 and claimed asylum on 28 November 2001 on the  basis  that  he
feared persecution in Somalia as a member of the Shekhaal clan, part of  the
Reer Hassan, a sub-clan of the Benadiri. He claimed  that  his  family  were
shopkeepers and were targeted by the Hawiye militia and that he was  stabbed
in June 2001, his parents shot and his sisters raped. His asylum  claim  was
refused but he was subsequently granted refugee status  on  30  August  2002
after a successful appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

On 21 October 2011 the appellant was convicted of  aggravated  burglary  and
sentenced to five years'  imprisonment.  It  was  decided,  because  of  the
situation in  Somalia  at  the  time,  not  to  pursue  deportation  action.
Following his conviction on 1 July 2015 for  wounding/  inflicting  grievous
bodily harm, whilst on licence for his previous  conviction,  the  appellant
was sentenced to two years and three  months'  imprisonment.  On  12  August
2015  it  was  decided  that  his  case  met  the  criteria  for   automatic
deportation in accordance with section 32(5) of  the  2007  Act  and  on  26
August 2015 he was served with a decision to make a deportation order  under
section 32(5). The respondent also, in a letter of the  same  date,  invited
the appellant to seek to rebut the  presumption  under  section  72  of  the
Nationality,  Immigration  Act  2002  that  he  had  been  convicted  of   a
particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to the community.


On 3 August 2016 the appellant was notified of  the  respondent's  intention
to cease his refugee status under Article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention
and  paragraph  339A  of  the  immigration  rules  on  the  basis  that  the
circumstances in connection with which he had been recognised as a  refugee,
namely on the basis of risk on return as a member of the  minority  Shekhaal
clan, had ceased to exist. On 23 August 2016  the  respondent  notified  the
UNHCR of the same and invited a response, which was  received  in  a  letter
dated 14 October 2016. In a decision  dated  9  March  2017  the  respondent
decided to revoke the appellant's protection refugee status and refused  his
human rights claim and maintained the decision to deport him. A  deportation
order was issued the same day pursuant to section 32(5) of the 2007 Act.

The respondent, in making that decision, considered that the  appellant  had
failed to rebut the presumption under section 72(2)  of  the  2002  Act  and
accordingly certified that the presumption applied to him, with  the  effect
that he was excluded from protection under the Refugee  Convention.  He  was
also excluded  from  humanitarian  protection  for  the  same  reasons.  The
respondent then went on to consider the issue  of  cessation  and  concluded
that the situation regarding minority clans, which was the basis upon  which
he had been granted  refugee  status,  had  since  changed.  The  respondent
considered that the appellant could safely return  to  Mogadishu,  where  he
was born. The respondent relied  on  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ  &  Ors
(Return to Mogadishu) (Rev 1) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 in regard to the  current
improved situation in Mogadishu and considered that the appellant no  longer
required  international  protection  on  the  basis  of  his  minority  clan
membership and that he could rely on support  from  friendships  established
in the UK, from clan members and  from  his  relatives  in  Canada  who  had
helped him come to the UK and could also seek employment in  Mogadishu.  The
respondent therefore decided to revoke the appellant's refugee  status.  The
respondent went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR and concluded that  the
appellant could not meet the requirements in paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  or
399A and that there were no very compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
public interest in his deportation. The respondent found that the  appellant
could not meet any of the exceptions to automatic deportation in section  33
of the 2007 Act.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  Judge
Gurung-Thapa in the First-tier Tribunal on 26 May 2017 and was dismissed  in
a decision promulgated on 19 June 2017. There was evidence before the  judge
of the appellant's problems with alcohol which led to him being homeless  at
one point and to his criminal offending. It was  noted  that  the  appellant
had one sister who had been granted refugee status and who was a  widow  and
on benefits. His other sister was deceased.  The  appellant's  evidence  was
that he had no one to turn to for support in Somalia.  His  aunt  in  Canada
was deceased and he had no contact with her direct family  members.  He  had
no financial support in the UK but was reliant on benefits. The  appellant's
evidence was that his home in Somalia was occupied by militia and  he  would
be in danger as they would think that he was  seeking  reoccupation  of  his
home.


The judge considered the circumstances  of  the  appellant's  offending  and
noted the lack of evidence to show  that  he  had  addressed  his  offending
behaviour after being sentenced to five  years'  imprisonment.  His  current
offence had been committed whilst he was on licence. He  was  released  from
prison on 14 September 2016 but was recalled on 21  October  2016  owing  to
his failure to comply with the condition to stop drinking. The  judge  found
that the appellant had failed to rebut the presumption in section  72(2)  of
the 2002 Act and upheld the certificate. She found that  the  appellant  was
excluded from humanitarian protection. As regards Article 3  and  cessation,
the judge found that the appellant could return to  Mogadishu  and  did  not
fall within the risk factors in MOJ. She noted that the UNHCR's response  to
the proposed cessation was based on the appellant  having  left  Somalia  at
the age of seven, whereas he had in fact left at the age of  27.  The  judge
found there to be no evidence that the appellant would be persecuted  merely
on the basis of being a minority clan member  and  considered  that  he  had
fabricated his claim to be at risk from family  members  of  the  person  he
injured in the UK as part of his criminal offending. The  judge  noted  that
the appellant had spent his formative years in Somalia and was aware of  the
customs, culture and language. She found that the appellant  had  failed  to
provide an adequate explanation as to why his family in the UK would not  be
able to assist him in terms of financial support in  Somalia.  She  did  not
accept the appellant's evidence that he had no contact  with  his  relatives
in Canada and America who had previously arranged his trip to  the  UK  from
Ethiopia and she concluded that they would be able to assist with  financial
support. The judge also found it reasonably likely that the appellant  would
be able obtain some form of employment in Somalia and that he could rely  on
his clan members in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood  in
Mogadishu. The judge concluded that the appellant would be  at  no  risk  in
Somalia, that the reasons for  the  previous  grant  of  refugee  status  no
longer existed and that the appellant's removal would not breach  Article  3
of the ECHR.


With regard to Article 8, the judge found that the appellant could not  meet
the criteria in paragraph 399 on the basis of family life and  that,  whilst
he had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, he had  failed
to establish that he was socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK  and
had failed to establish that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
his integration into Somalia for the purposes of paragraph 399A.  The  judge
found that there were  no  very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
public interest  in  his  deportation.  She  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision in relation  to  the
judge's findings on family support from the UK and America and her  findings
on clan support and in relation to her approach  to  the  question  of  very
significant obstacles to integration. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on
15 September 2017.


At the error of law hearing the Upper Tribunal, sitting as  a  panel,  found
the judge's determination to be materially flawed in regard to the  findings
as to financial support from the UK and America and as to clan support.  The
panel considered that the judge had made  no  finding  as  to  the  possible
source of funds from the UK and was not entitled to reject  the  appellant's
evidence that he had no contact with family in America on  the  basis  of  a
statement made in 2002.  The  panel  found  the  judge's  findings  on  clan
support to be inconsistent with the  country  guidance  in  MOJ.  The  panel
accordingly set aside the judge's decision and directed that it would be re-
made, at a resumed hearing, on that limited basis.


Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 8 January 2018. The appellant adopted  his
statement in which he stated  that  his  sister  was  unable  to  offer  him
financial support as she was in receipt of state benefits and  that  he  had
no means of support in Somalia.  He  confirmed  that  he  spoke  Somali.  In
response to my questions he said that  he  had  worked  in  Somalia  in  his
parents' shop. He had worked in the UK, but a long time ago. He worked in  a
warehouse doing manual work for seven to eight months.  He  had  taken  some
courses in prison including  English  literacy,  numeracy,  hospitality  and
catering but had not managed to obtain any certificates of qualification  as
he was transferred to a different prison before receiving the  certificates.



Both parties made submissions. Mr Lindsay relied on  paragraph  (x)  of  the
headnote to MOJ and submitted that the appellant would be able to find  work
in Mogadishu. He had failed to show that he could not receive any  financial
assistance at all to get  by  initially.  He  had  previously  worked  as  a
shopworker, he was fluent in Somali and he had worked for a short period  of
time in the UK and he had  taken  courses  in  English  literacy,  numeracy,
catering and hospitality,  all  of  which  would  enable  him  to  secure  a
livelihood in Somalia. He was  in  a  better  position  than  other  Somalis
already living in Mogadishu. He was not at real risk of ending up in an  IDP
camp.


Mr Lee submitted that the Upper Tribunal, in the error of law  hearing,  had
found that it was highly unrealistic to expect  the  appellant's  sister  to
support him financially in Somalia as  she  was  a  widow  on  benefits  and
barely managed to support herself. The nub of the  case  was  therefore  the
appellant's ability to secure employment.  It  was  relevant  to  take  into
account the appellant's circumstances in Mogadishu before leaving there.  He
had left Mogadishu over 16 years ago, at which time his  property  had  been
taken over by militia, his parents had  been  shot,  his  sisters  had  been
raped and he had been shot. He had no family or clan ties,  no  prospect  of
remittances from abroad, he had been on benefits in the UK for a  long  time
and it was unlikely the  courses  he  had  undertaken  in  prison  would  be
transferrable to Somalia in a meaningful way to enable  him  to  find  work.
The appellant could not, therefore,  meet  the  criteria  in  (xii)  of  the
headnote to MOJ. Given his lengthy absence from  Mogadishu  he  was  in  the
same position as someone who had never lived there before and who was  being
required to relocate there. Mr Lee also relied on the  two  reports  in  the
appellant's objective bundle in regard to the  situation  in  Somalia,  from
which it could be concluded that the appellant was likely  to  find  himself
in an IDP camp in Somalia. The appellant fell within  the  risk  factors  in
MOJ and the appeal should be allowed.

Consideration and findings


The only challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  in
relation  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the  availability  of  support  in
Mogadishu and it is on that basis only that the decision is to  be  re-made.
I set out the relevant passages of the headnote of MOJ as follows:

    "(vii)           A person returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
    absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living  in  the
    city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
    livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his  clan
    members who are not close relatives, such help is  only  likely  to  be
    forthcoming for majority clan  members,  as  minority  clans  may  have
    little to offer.

    (viii)         The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
    changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
    assist with access to livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a  protection
    function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,  no
    clan violence, and no clan based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
    minority clan members.

    (ix)              If it is accepted that a person facing  a  return  to
    Mogadishu after a period of absence has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
    relatives in the city to  assist  him  in  re-establishing  himself  on
    return, there will need to be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
    circumstances. These considerations will include, but are  not  limited
    to:

         .       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
         .       length of absence from Mogadishu;
         .       family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
         .       access to financial resources;
         .        prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
    employment or self employment;
         .       availability of remittances from abroad;
         .       means of support  during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom;
         .       why his ability to fund the journey to the West  no  longer
         enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

    (x)               Put another way, it will be  for  the  person  facing
    return to explain why he would not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
    opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom,  especially
    as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are  taking  jobs  at
    the expense of those who have never been away.

    (xi)             It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or
    family support who will not be in receipt of  remittances  from  abroad
    and who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
    return who will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

    (xii)            The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply
    those who originate from Mogadishu that may  now  generally  return  to
    live in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)  risk  or
    facing a real risk of destitution. On the  other  hand,  relocation  in
    Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links to  the
    city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or  social
    support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of  means  to
    establish a home and some form of ongoing financial support there  will
    be a real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
    accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of
    having  to  live  in  conditions that  will  fall  below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards."

MOJ remains the relevant and authoritative country guidance. Mr  Lee  relied
on various country information reports, in  particular  the  UNHCR  position
paper of 23 May 2016 and the Rift Valley Institute  report  of  17  February
2017 in regard to the situation in Somalia. I note that the  latter  relates
in particular to IDPs resettling in Mogadishu from other parts  of  Somalia.
The former pre-dates the Home Office Country  Information  and  Guidance  of
July 2016 relied upon by the respondent in the cessation decision.  In  that
report, consideration was given to various other human rights  reports  with
a conclusion at section 2.3.21 that the situation had continued  to  improve
since 2014 and that there was no reason to depart from the existing  country
guidance. I do not find any evidence produced by the  appellant  to  provide
any justification for departing from the  guidance  in  MOJ.  Accordingly  I
have considered the risk on  return  to  the  appellant  in  line  with  the
assessments made in MOJ.

It is the appellant's case that he falls within (xii) as being in  the  same
position as someone who was relocating to Mogadishu  from  another  part  of
the  country  and  a  person  with  no  clan  or  family  support,  with  no
remittances from abroad and  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
livelihood, such that he would be forced to live in an IDP  camp  in  breach
of Article 3. However I do not agree that he should  be  considered  on  the
same basis as a person who  has  never  lived  in  Mogadishu.  The  relevant
considerations are therefore  those  in  paragraphs  (ix)  to  (xi)  of  the
headnote to MOJ. This is not the case of a person  who  left  Somalia  as  a
child but the appellant departed in 2001 as a 27 year old man who  was  born
and grew up in Mogadishu  and  whose  parents  were  born  there.  He  would
without any doubt have retained ties in terms of  familiarity,  culture  and
language, as well as ties based on his clan, as detailed at [9] and [10]  of
the cessation decision, even considering the limited nature of  the  support
that could be offered from a minority clan and even if he no  longer  had  a
home in that city. It is also highly unlikely, having spent the majority  of
his life  in  Mogadishu,  and  despite  the  situation  in  that  city,  the
circumstances leading to his departure and his  16  year  absence,  that  he
would not retain  any  social  ties  and  would  find  himself  without  any
support, at least  for  a  minimal  period  of  time  until  he  could  find
employment. I accept, from the error  of  law  decision,  that  no  reliance
could be placed upon financial support from the appellant's  sister  in  the
UK or relatives in Canada/ America, but I do not consider  the  evidence  to
demonstrate that the appellant would return  to  Somalia  and  remain  there
completely empty-handed without resources to accommodate  and  feed  himself
until he could find work.

As Mr Lee  submitted,  the  crux  of  the  appellant's  case  and  the  most
significant aspect of the risk assessment is indeed the appellant's  ability
to secure a livelihood for himself in Mogadishu as a means  of  support.  As
(x) makes clear, the burden of proof lies upon the appellant  to  show  that
he would not be able to  access  economic  opportunities,  or  indeed  other
means  of  support,  in  Mogadishu.  Whilst  the  appellant's   unchallenged
evidence is that he spent most of his time in the  UK  reliant  upon  public
benefits, it is the case that he has worked for a limited period of time  as
a manual worker in a warehouse and has undertaken courses  in  literacy  and
numeracy, catering and hospitality, and  he  speaks  English.  He  has  also
worked in Mogadishu in his family's shop. He  is  a  fit  and  healthy  man.
Although he may not be highly skilled or educated, there is  no  basis  upon
which to conclude that he would be unable to find  some  form  of  unskilled
work in Mogadishu. Paragraphs [344] to [352] of MOJ provide details  of  the
opportunities available to returnees as  a  result  of  the  economic  boom,
referring to opportunities in unskilled work such as  building  labour,  and
emphasising at [351] the advantages for returnees from the West  in  seeking
employment. There is nothing in  the  evidence  provided  in  MOJ  in  these
paragraphs or the preceding paragraphs  dealing  with  the  significance  of
clan membership  to  support  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  would  have
difficulty finding employment.


Accordingly, it seems to me that the appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate
that he would not be able to establish himself in  Mogadishu  and  secure  a
livelihood for himself, irrespective of a lack  of  financial  support  from
family or clan members. The evidence does not  suggest  that  the  appellant
would find himself in an IDP camp  and  there  is  therefore  no  basis  for
concluding that his deportation would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.


As for Article 8, it was not argued before me  that  there  was  a  separate
case to be made  for  concluding  that  there  would  be  'very  significant
obstacles  to  integration'  in  Somalia,  or   that   the   appellant   had
demonstrated  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those   in
paragraph 399A and, for the reasons  I  have  given  above  in  relation  to
Article 3, I find that  there  are  none.  As  I  have  already  found,  the
appellant spent his formative years in Somalia and, whilst  returning  after
a lengthy absence would no doubt present its difficulties, he  would  be  at
no risk on return to that country and would be able to re-establish  himself
there. I do not find that he is able  to  meet  any  of  the  exceptions  to
automatic deportation.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law in relation to its findings on Article 3,  and  the  decision
has accordingly been set aside in that respect. I re-make  the  decision  by
dismissing the appellant's appeal on  Article  3  grounds,  as  well  as  on
Article 8 grounds and on all other grounds.

Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 10 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
