
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00151/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th September 2017                |On 10th October 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                babyraj mohan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Polpitiya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  13th  April  1987.  He
    appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kaler
    dismissing his appeal, against the refusal of his protection claim  and
    the decision to make a deportation order and cease refugee  status,  on
    23rd June 2017.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that the judge erred  in
    law in finding that there had been a fundamental,  stable  and  durable
    change in Sri Lanka, such that it was safe for this Appellant to return
    there. The judge failed to deal with the background evidence relied  on
    and attached to the  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  and  to  properly
    assess the effect of the Appellant's criminal conviction in the  UK  on
    his perceived connection to the LTTE and the risk on return. There  was
    also  a  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  in  relation   to   the
    significance of the visits of  the  Appellant's  family  to  Sri  Lanka
    subsequent to their grant of refugee status.

3.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  on  the
    grounds that it was arguable that the judge may have  given  inadequate
    attention to the evidence  of  continuing  problems  in  Sri  Lanka  as
    summarised in counsel's skeleton argument and that  this  evidence  may
    indicate an ongoing risk to the Appellant.

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal
    and submitted that the judge directed himself appropriately. There  was
    nothing in the grounds to show that there were any family links to  the
    LTTE or that the Appellant was  actively  seeking  to  destabilise  the
    integrity of the single state of Sri Lanka. There  was  nothing  in  GJ
    (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 319 to suggest that the focus in risk groups
    is limited solely to Tamil men. Furthermore, GJ clearly identified that
    being asked questions at the airport  did  not  amount  to  a  risk  on
    return.

The Appellant's Immigration History

5.   The Appellant entered the UK with his parents and other family  members
    in 2000 when he was 13 years  old.  His  father  was  recognised  as  a
    refugee on  10th  October  2001  and  the  whole  family  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  All  other  members  of  the  family  were
    subsequently naturalised as British citizens. The Appellant applied for
    naturalisation on 10th October 2005 and was refused on grounds of  poor
    character.

6.   The Appellant was convicted of kidnapping, wounding with intent  to  do
    grievous bodily harm and violent disorder at Isleworth Crown  Court  on
    2nd October 2006. The date of the offence was 7th August 2005.  He  was
    sentenced to an indeterminate prison sentence with a minimum tariff  of
    four years. He has been on licence since 10th  December  2013  and  was
    released from immigration detention shortly  thereafter.  He  has  been
    living with his parents  since  then.  He  is  a  single  man  with  no
    dependants and works as a customer assistant at Boots Chemist.

7.   The Respondent has issued previous notices informing the  Appellant  of
    his liability to deportation on 23rd October 2008 and 14th  July  2009.
    A deportation order made in October 2009 was invalidated on 23rd  April
    2013. The Appellant was informed, in June 2013, that consideration  was
    being given to ceasing his refugee status. The UNHCR had been  informed
    and their response was issued on 22nd July 2013.

8.   The Appellant's father was granted refugee status  on  the  basis  that
    his brother had joined the LTTE in 1987. The Appellant's father  was  a
    businessman  selling  vegetables  and  groceries  in  Vanni.  The  LTTE
    detained the Appellant's father in a camp  for  ten  days  and  he  was
    released after  paying  a  ransom.  The  Appellant's  father  moved  to
    Vavuniya in 1996 and continued  his  business.   He  was  compelled  to
    deliver goods to the LTTE. The Sri Lankan  Army  arrested  one  of  his
    drivers  in  March  2000  and  the  Appellant's  father  left   Colombo
    immediately with his family. The army raided the family home in  August
    2000 and the family left Sri Lanka and came to the UK.

The Judge's Findings

9.   The judge made the following findings at paragraphs  18  and  19  which
    are the subject of this appeal:

         "18. I conclude from the guidance in GJ that  this  Appellant  with
             his particular profile does not fall within those  categories.
             There is nothing in the subsequent  background  material  that
             leads me to depart from the guidance in GJ. My  conclusion  is
             supported by the fact that members of the Appellant's  family,
             including the Appellant's father have returned to  Sri  Lanka.
             The Appellant's father was detained once with others  as  they
             were making their  way  from  the  airport,  but  he  was  not
             questioned.  That  the  father  was  not  subjected   to   any
             questioning about any past activities for the  LTTE  or  about
             his intentions does lead me to conclude that  he  was  not  of
             interest to the authorities. I note  that  he  has  a  British
             passport, but that would not have  prevented  the  authorities
             from asking  the  question  about  his  past,  they  were  not
             concerned about his past profile and so there would be  little
             reason for them to be alerted to any connection  between  this
             Appellant  and  his  father's  or   uncle's   past   political
             activities. The father's account is that he was not asked  any
             questions at all.  The  Appellant's  siblings  were  not  even
             stopped.

         19.  This Appellant would be returning on his Sri Lankan  passport.
             There is no reason why the authorities would wish to look into
             his criminal convictions in the UK. He has not  been  involved
             in any activities against the  Sri  Lankan  government  or  in
             favour of the separatist movements. He may be questioned about
             what he was doing in the UK, but the investigations would  not
             show that he is wanted  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  for
             anything or that they have any adverse interest  in  him.  His
             criminal conviction in  the  UK  is  unrelated  to  separatist
             activities. The Respondent has satisfied  me  that  there  has
             been a fundamental, stable and durable change in the situation
             in Sri Lanka such that it is  now  safe  for  this  particular
             Appellant to return there. The peace  agreement  has  been  in
             force for many years and the changes that have been brought in
             satisfy me that this Appellant will not  be  at  risk  of  the
             adverse attention of the authorities."

Submissions

10.  Ms Iqbal submitted that in coming to the conclusions, at paragraphs  18
    and 19, the judge failed to consider the background evidence. The judge
    had not considered  any  of  the  evidence  of  events  postdating  the
    decision of GJ. There was specific evidence submitted and  referred  to
    in the Appellant's skeleton argument which was  not  considered.   This
    evidence showed that Tamils were targeted despite the end of the  civil
    war. The judge had also failed to take into account the  expert  report
    of Dr Chris Smith and she made no reference to it whatsoever.

11.  Ms Iqbal referred me to the following paragraphs of Dr Smith's report:

         "61. The Client appears to have arrived in the UK using a valid Sri
             Lankan passport in or around 2000.  However,  his  Sri  Lankan
             passport is now out of date. If he cannot access a genuine and
             legal passport upon which to return, he would be returned on a
             document, issued by the Sri Lankan High Commission in  London.
             It is known as an Emergency Travel Document, which is  a  hand
             written Non-Machine Readable  Passport  (NMRP).  In  order  to
             acquire this document, proof  of  Sri  Lankan  citizenship  is
             required. An interview is also  required  on  arrival  in  Sri
             Lanka but the NMR passport holder is allowed  to  retain  this
             passport but it is not an  acceptable  ID  document  once  the
             holder enters Sri Lanka. The Client would have to acquire this
             documentation from the Sri Lanka High Commission in London. As
             part of this application process, which is mandated by the  UK
             Home Office, returnees must fill  in  a  form  to  assist  the
             authorities in both the UK and Sri  Lanka  to  ascertain  that
             they are being returned to the correct country of  origin.  In
             order to complete the  form  correctly,  the  Client  will  be
             obliged to provide a considerable amount of detailed  personal
             and family information. Based upon other  cases  for  which  I
             have written reports, it  is  the  case  that  interviews  are
             extremely detailed and will include  probing  questions  about
             criminal records. This information would then be placed in the
             hands of the Sri Lankan authorities  in  anticipation  of  his
             return.

         ...

         65.  If the authorities believe that the  Client  is  of  potential
             adverse interest, a  straightforward  search  on  Google  will
             identify the Client and the nature of the crime for  which  he
             is currently imprisoned. (Indeed, a Google search for 'Babyraj
             Mohan' brings up a media report  on  his  gang  as  the  first
             result.) The fact that the Client  was  a  member  of  a  gang
             comprising  mainly  Tamil  youths  will  be  of   considerable
             interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   Also,   it   is
             conceivable that the Sri Lankan  High  Commission  would  have
             been informed that a Sri Lankan national, albeit with  refugee
             status  in  the  UK,  not  least  as  a  diplomatic  courtesy.
             Alternatively, the High Commission could be already sighted on
             this case if they monitor the relevant newspapers and,  as  an
             intelligence measure, the local Tamil newsletters and websites
             are sure to be monitored as a matter of course.

         ...

         67.  Sri Lankan Tamils in the  UK,  London  especially,  have  been
             heavily involved in gang-based crime and organised  and  semi-
             organised criminal activity. It had been widely  assumed  that
             these criminal gangs were operating on behalf of the LTTE,  to
             raise money for the cause - Eelam, sometimes by  sophisticated
             credit card fraud, at other times through  extortion  and  the
             threat of violence. The majority of the Tamils  involved  were
             from the North of the country and Colombo, as is  the  Client.
             However, on closer analysis, the allegiance to the LTTE is far
             from clear-cut. The modus operandi  of  these  gangs  involved
             deliberate ambivalence over the motivation for their  actions,
             often invoking the LTTE's need  for  money  to  justify  their
             actions.  Some of  these  activities,  including  credit  card
             fraud, could have been managed and directed by  the  LTTE  but
             British intelligence and  security  officials  were  genuinely
             ambivalent as  to  the  direct  extent  of  LTTE  involvement.
             However, if the LTTE may not have been completely  in  control
             of  these  activities,  it  is  clear  that  there  was   some
             involvement, the only question being how much?

         68.  The Sri Lankan authorities harbour no such ambivalence.   They
             remain resolutely convinced that the LTTE was and  potentially
             remains  a  highly  criminalised  organisation   involved   in
             trafficking of all kinds and other illegally  revenue  raising
             activities.

         69.  As such, if the Sri Lankan authorities are made aware  of  the
             Client's conviction  for  gang-related  violence,  significant
             adverse interest will result and, if not  already  there,  his
             name will be placed on the electronic database,  which  covers
             individuals who are of adverse interest  to  the  authorities.
             This could certainly be an outcome of his interview at the Sri
             Lankan High Commission to obtain travel documentation."

12.  Ms Iqbal submitted that the Appellant is Tamil with a criminal past  of
    associating with a Tamil gang. This was sufficient to bring him at risk
    within GJ. He also had past links to the LTTE through his uncle who was
    a member and the arrest of his father's driver/employee. The judge  had
    erred in law in failing to consider the background  evidence  that  the
    Appellant would be identified and  would  be  questioned.  The  judge's
    justification that the Appellant's father had  returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    with no difficulties did not mean that the Appellant would  not  be  at
    risk on return. The Appellant's father did not have a  criminal  record
    and had no profile which was of interest to the  authorities.  However,
    the Appellant's profile was entirely different and more likely  to  put
    him at risk. The judge had not looked  at  all  the  evidence  and  his
    reasoning at paragraphs 18 and 19 was inadequate.

13.  Mr Tufan submitted that there was no evidence before the judge to  show
    that the Appellant's father had been  treated  differently  because  he
    held a British passport.  The Appellant had refugee status as a  family
    member. Although returnees continued to be  arrested  at  the  airport,
    they would not  be  at  risk  of  harm  unless  they  fell  within  the
    categories set out in GJ.  The  Appellant's  activities  did  not  come
    anywhere near those referred to in any of the categories set out in GJ.
    The Appellant may well be subject to screening, as his father was  when
    he returned, but that in itself was not sufficient to put the Appellant
    at risk. The Appellant's father was detained for a matter of hours  and
    there was no reason to think that the Appellant would not be treated in
    the same way.

14.  Mr Tufan accepted that there was no reference  to  the  opinion  of  Dr
    Chris Smith in the decision, however Dr Smith had given evidence before
    GJ and his current report was not based on any further evidence that he
    had gathered since GJ.  The report was assessing the situation in  2010
    soon after the end of the conflict. The situation was  quite  different
    now. The report of Dr Smith was dated 28th October 2011 and  relied  on
    matters which were simply out of date in relation to the assessment  of
    return today. The judge's failure  to  refer  to  the  report  was  not
    material to the decision because there was nothing in the report  which
    affected the judge's conclusions at paragraph 18. The Appellant did not
    come within any of the risk categories in GJ and therefore would not be
    at risk on return.

Discussion and Conclusions

15.  Ms Iqbal  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  background
    material which post dated GJ, in particular the evidence set out in the
    skeleton argument. The Country Information and Guidance  -  Sri  Lanka:
    Tamil separatism, May 2016 stated:

         "In May 2015 it was reported that at least 16 Tamil  men  from  the
         Batticaloa district had been arrested at  Katunayake  International
         Airport over a period of  around  100  days  after  returning  from
         working abroad at Middle Eastern countries. TamilNet reported that,
         'Almost all the victims were ex-LTTE members who had  undergone  SL
         military 'rehabilitation' and released earlier.' ...

         In June 2015 thirty-year-old Tamil and ex-LTTE member  Konesapillai
         Kugadasan was arrested having returned from  Bahrain  and  detained
         for rehabilitation.

         The International Crisis Group noted in an August 2015 report that:
         'Tamils returning from abroad continue to be arrested under the PTA
         [Prevention of Terrorism Act] on suspicion of old LTTE involvement.
         According to some reports, after police detention, many are sent to
         the military-run  rehabilitation  program.  Tamil  politicians  and
         activists allege that secret detention centres established  by  the
         old government continue, though officials deny this.'"


16.  According to an August 2015 study  of  148  Sri  Lankan  torture  cases
    perpetrated since the end of the Sri Lankan civil war in May 2009,  the
    majority of those arrested were of Tamil ethnicity  (94%)  and  had  an
    association with the LTTE at some level (96%).   More  than  one  third
    (37%) were detained and tortured in Sri Lanka after returning from  the
    UK following the end of the armed conflict:

         "Most had been in the UK as students but three had  claimed  asylum
         and were forcibly removed after their asylum claims were  rejected.
         All but seven of these people were detained within weeks  of  their
         arrival  in  Sri  Lanka  and   the   majority   were   specifically
         interrogated about  their  reasons  for  being  in  the  UK,  their
         activities and/or their contacts in the UK. Twenty-one people  were
         accused of attending particular protests and demonstrations in  the
         UK and eleven were shown photographs taken at these events".

17.  In a report  of  January  2016  on  survivors  of  torture  and  sexual
    violence, the ITJP documented the experiences of 20 Sri  Lankan  Tamils
    and stated:

         "In some cases the interrogators showed the victims print  outs  of
         photographs of themselves or people close to them attending  recent
         Tamil diaspora commemorative events  abroad.  ...  Some  had  spent
         periods in  hiding  in  southern  India  and  it  was  clear  their
         interrogators regarded this with great suspicion when they returned
         home".

18.  Ms Iqbal submitted  that,  had  the  judge  considered  the  background
    material and the expert report from Dr Chris Smith,  which  dealt  with
    the Appellant's previous conviction,  then  the  Appellant  would  come
    within one of the risk categories in GJ.

19.  I find that the background material relied on  by  the  Appellant  does
    not disclose a risk on return and does not justify a departure from the
    risk categories in GJ for the following reasons.

20.  The interest  in  Tamils  returning  from  the  UK,  which  results  in
    detention and interrogation, was  of  those  who  were  either  ex-LTTE
    members or had some association with  the  LTTE.   This  Appellant  has
    never been a member of the LTTE and has no association with them. It is
    submitted that the link would be made because of his criminal  activity
    in the  UK.   However,  this  too  is  not  associated  with  any  LTTE
    involvement in separatism. The Appellant had been part of  a  group  of
    Tamil youths who had kidnapped and assaulted an individual.  There  was
    no connection to any LTTE fundraising, nor could it be  said  that  the
    crime would  link  the  Appellant  to  any  separatist  movements.  The
    Appellant had not attended any demonstrations in the UK.

21.  The Appellant has been convicted of a  serious  crime  which  may  well
    come to the attention of the authorities in Sri  Lanka  either  through
    his application for a travel document, if he is unable to renew his own
    travel document, or by virtue of a Google search of his name.  However,
    the crime, although committed as part of a Tamil group, was not  linked
    to any separatist activities or demonstrations in the UK.

22.  The two pieces of evidence relied on by the  Appellant,  that  referred
    to in the skeleton argument and the opinion of Dr Chris Smith, are  not
    sufficient to bring the Appellant within the  risk  categories  in  GJ.
    The Appellant's profile is such that his uncle  was  a  member  of  the
    LTTE, his father was not a member of the LTTE, but he  ran  a  business
    and had been detained previously by the LTTE and forced to provide them
    with food. One of his drivers had been arrested whilst delivering  food
    to the LTTE. The Appellant's father had returned to Sri  Lanka  on  his
    British passport and had been detained for a short while, but asked  no
    questions. Therefore, the Appellant's father was clearly of no interest
    to the authorities. The Appellant would  not  be  of  interest  to  the
    authorities because of his father's so-called links to the LTTE on  the
    basis that the authorities had no interest in his father. The Appellant
    would not be at risk because of his uncle's links on  the  same  basis.
    The Appellant was not a member of the LTTE and had no connection to the
    LTTE prior to his arrival in the UK.

23.  The Appellant left Sri Lanka during the conflict.  The  LTTE  had  been
    defeated in May 2009. The Appellant was not a  member  of  one  of  the
    prescribed  Tamil  diaspora  organisations,  nor  associated  with  any
    separatist movements or anti-Government regimes. His  criminal  offence
    in the UK was not  politically  motivated  and  would  not  lead  to  a
    perception that the Appellant was working for Tamil separatism in order
    to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state. The Appellant was not on a
    stop list.  He would not be perceived to be a threat to  the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state because he did not  have  a  significant
    role in the post-conflict Tamil separatism  within  the  diaspora.  The
    Appellant has no connection to the LTTE in Sri Lanka or in the UK.  The
    authorities are clearly not interested in his father's former arrest by
    the LTTE or the Government arrest of one of  his  employees,  nor  were
    they interested in the uncle's membership of the LTTE in  1987  because
    the Appellant's father was not at risk on return and had not been asked
    any questions during his  short  detention.  Many  of  the  Appellant's
    siblings had returned to Sri Lanka without any difficulties whatsoever.



24.  The only matters which make the Appellant different from  the  rest  of
    his family is his criminal conviction in the UK and his lack of British
    citizenship. These matters were insufficient to put him at risk because
    he was not connected to any Tamil separatist movement. It could not  be
    said that the Appellant was associated with raising  money  to  support
    Tamil separatism. The fact that he had committed a particularly serious
    assault on another person as  part  of  a  Tamil  gang  in  itself  was
    insufficient to put him at risk when  assessed  in  the  light  of  the
    background material referred  to  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  the
    opinion of Dr Chris Smith.

25.  The judge took into account the fact that the Appellant's  father  held
    a British passport when he was detained on return  to  Sri  Lanka.  His
    conclusion that this did not prevent the Appellant's father from  being
    questioned was open to him on the evidence before him.

26.  Dr Smith's report is dated  October  2011,  which  is  relatively  soon
    after the cessation of the conflict and it predates GJ. His opinion  is
    that, if the Appellant cannot access a genuine and legal passport  upon
    his return, he would be returned on a document issued by the Sri Lankan
    High Commission in London known as an "Emergency Travel Document".  The
    Appellant has not shown that he is unable  to  renew  his  current  Sri
    Lankan passport, but even if his  criminal  conviction  becomes  known,
    either because of his application for a travel document or because of a
    Google search by the authorities, then it is clear from  those  reports
    on the internet that the Appellant is not involved in Tamil  separatism
    and there would be no reason for the authorities to  suspect  as  much.
    The Appellant's criminal convictions and his lack  of  links  with  the
    LTTE in Sri Lanka mean that the Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return.

27.  The judge's findings at paragraphs 18 and 19 were open to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. His failure to refer to the expert  report  of  Dr
    Chris Smith was not material given that report was dated  October  2011
    and predated GJ. The judge properly applied the risk categories  in  GJ
    and it was not suggested that the report of Dr Chris  Smith  or  indeed
    the background material justified a departure from the  application  of
    the risk categories GJ. The evidence in those reports would not lead to
    a conclusion that the Appellant was at risk following GJ.

28.  Accordingly, there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraphs 18 and 19.  There was  no  challenge  to  the
    deportation order or the refusal of the human rights claim on Article 8
    grounds. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 9th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

