

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00040/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st January 2016                      |On 15th March 2016               |
|And 18th February 2016                    |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between


                           BILAL AHMAD ABDULKADIR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ahmad, instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood on 21st January 2016 and Mr I Jarvis
                    on 18th February 2016, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. By a decision promulgated on 11th November  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge E B Grant dismissed the appeal of Mr Abdulkadir, date  of  birth
      14th April 1993, against his removal to Somalia on  asylum  and  human
      rights grounds consequent upon the making of the deportation order  on
      3rd July 2015. Permission to appeal was  sought  and  granted  on  the
      grounds that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  consider
      adequately the OASys report in her conclusions as to serious harm- s72
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("s72 point"); failed  to
      apply correctly the  Country  Guidance  judgment  of  MOJ  (return  to
      Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 0042 (IAC) ("MOJ point"); failed  to
      consider the UNHCR  report  of  June  2014  and  failed  to  grant  an
      adjournment to enable an expert report to be obtained  to  update  the
      Tribunal  on  the  situation  since  MOJ  was  reported  ("report  and
      adjournment point").


   2. At the commencement of the hearing we indicated to  the  parties  that
      having considered carefully the grounds  of  appeal,  our  provisional
      view subject to submissions was that the s72 point and the report  and
      adjournment points were unlikely to be successful. We referred to  the
      detail in the OASys report of  the  nature  of  the  offence  and  the
      percentage likelihood of re-offending and violence and indicated  that
      although the First-tier Tribunal judge had not used the words "serious
      harm" it appeared difficult to see that  there  could  have  been  any
      other outcome.  We  also  drew  attention  to  the  June  2014  report
      referring to circumstances outside Mogadishu ie Central  and  Southern
      Somalia and not to Mogadishu; that the reference to Mogadishu  in  the
      footnote describing the report continued to refer to risk  and  danger
      faced in particular parts of the city (government  and  administrative
      centres) and that these were issues that had been considered  in  MOJ.
      We intimated that the decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to
      refuse the adjournment appeared to be reasonable and  unlikely  to  be
      faulted as there was no indication that any additional material  would
      be forthcoming that would justify departure from MOJ.


   3. Ms Ahmad withdrew reliance on her grounds of appeal on the  s72  point
      and the report and adjournment points and relied solely on her  ground
      that the judge had failed to consider properly and take account of MOJ
      in reaching her conclusion that the appellant would not be subject  to
      Article 3 illtreatment if returned to Mogadishu.


   4. Ms Ahmad referred particularly to headnotes (ix) to (xii) of MOJ.  She
      submitted that given the specific factual matrix of Mr Abdulkadir, the
      judge had not given adequate consideration to his likely circumstances
      on deportation to Mogadishu and thus the judge had erred in  law  such
      that the decision should be set aside to be remade. Ms Isherwood  went
      through  the  elements  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   decision   and
      identified  what  she  submitted  were  the   relevant   elements   of
      consideration and thus although not specifically phrased by  reference
      to the particular paragraphs of MOJ, there was no  material  error  of
      law.

   5. Ms Isherwood and Ms Ahmad were content for us to remake the  decision,
      in the event that we found there had been a  material  error  of  law.
      Both made submissions on what the outcome should be if  we  set  aside
      the First-tier Tribunal decision on the MOJ point.

   Error of law


   6. The findings of fact with regard to Mr Abdulkadir with which there  is
      no dispute are as follows:

   i. He left Mogadishu as a very small child and was largely brought up  by
      his paternal grandmother in Nairobi until he arrived in  the  UK  aged
      13.
  ii. He has been absent from Mogadishu for most of his life  (he  was  aged
      22� years old on  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal).
 iii. He is Bajuni.
  iv. His father has returned to 'Africa'.
   v. He is married and his wife is in Mombasa, Kenya.
  vi. He has worked whilst in the UK - he obtained employment as an engineer
      for Railtrack doing track maintenance after release from  custody;  he
      worked shifts, all over the UK.
 vii. He has 8 GCSEs including Maths, English and Science. He has worked  as
      a sales advisor for EDF energy, in a warehouse and as a fundraiser for
      a charity. He was one of 12 out of 5000 who applied  taken  on  as  an
      apprentice at Caterpillar UK which employment he lost when remanded in
      custody for the index offence.


   7. The grounds relied upon take issue with the finding of the judge  that
      the appellant's father has "more  likely  than  not  ...gone  back  to
      Somalia or  to  Kenya".  The  grounds  take  issue  with  the  judge's
      conclusion that the appellant could, if he so wished, travel to  Kenya
      to be with his wife - the grounds assert there was no evidence  before
      the Tribunal which disclosed whether the appellant would  be  admitted
      to Kenya as a spouse or at all.


   8. The appellant's evidence to  the  Tribunal  was  that  he  spoke  only
      Kibajuni (a dialect related to Swahili) and English. The  reasons  for
      the deportation letter dated 3rd July 2015 states

             61.  It was noted in the letter of 16 February 2015, that  you
             speak and  write  English.  When  your  father  was  initially
             interviewed in regard to his asylum claim, he was  interviewed
             in Kibajuni but he also demonstrated that he knew  the  Somali
             language. When your mother was interviewed in August 2004  she
             was interviewed in Swahili and  confirmed  that  Kibajuni  was
             spoken where she lived in Koyama. It is noted that  you  lived
             with your grandparents and siblings in a refugee camp in Kenya
             along with other Somali refugees. When you and  your  siblings
             arrived in the United Kingdom, you lived with your parents. It
             was then considered that in all probability, you speak  or  at
             least understand some Swahili, Kibajuni and Somali.




   9. AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673(IAC)  considers
      the circumstances of a young man being deported to Mogadishu.  AAW  is
      from the minority clan Benadiri. AAW records (in [47]) that AAW  faced
      the prospect of being returned after 17 years' absence, that he has no
      nuclear family or other close relatives in the city and that he  is  a
      member of a minority clan. [47] goes on to state that  an  enquiry  is
      required of all the circumstances including:

   a. His circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
   b. The length of absence from Mogadishu;
   c. The clan associations he may be able to call upon in Mogadishu;
   d. Access to financial resources;
   e. The prospects of him securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
      or self employment;
   f. The availability of remittances from abroad;
   g. His means of support during the time spent in the UK;
   h. Why his ability to fund the journey to the west no longer enables  the
      appellant to secure financial support on return.


        [47] of AAW also reminds the Tribunal that
             "...it is for the appellant to explain why  he  would  not  be
             able to access  the  economic  opportunities  that  have  been
             produced by the economic boom, especially as there is evidence
             to the effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense of
             those who have never been away. The country guidance concludes
             that it will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms."


   10. We deal first with the evidence that was not agreed and  upon  which
       the appellant takes issue with the judge's findings:


       a) The OASys report states that the appellant says he is in  contact
          with his wife and has a good  relationship  with  her.  There  is
          reference in the report to the appellant's intentions to  be  re-
          united with her. This was contrary to the evidence he gave to the
          First-tier Tribunal and no explanation for  that  difference  was
          provided. We are satisfied that the decision by  the  judge  that
          the appellant was in contact with his wife and that  they  had  a
          good relationship was a finding that  was  open  to  her.  We  do
          accept however the submission that it was not open to  the  judge
          to find that the appellant could, if  he  so  wished,  travel  to
          Mombasa to be with his wife. There was  no  evidence  before  the
          First-tier Tribunal that the appellant would be  able  to  obtain
          any necessary visa to enable him to lawfully relocate.
       b)  The appellant's father is Somali. He has returned  to  "Africa".
          The applicant challenges the finding of the judge that the father
          is in Somalia on the grounds that there was no evidence  to  that
          effect. We are satisfied that it was open to the  judge,  on  the
          evidence before her, to find that the father, a Somali  national,
          had more than likely returned to Somalia. As  a  Somali  national
          that is a reasonable finding to reach. The judge found  that  the
          appellant is in contact with his father; that was not  challenged
          and in any event was a finding that was open to the judge on  the
          evidence before her.
       c) According to the OASys report the appellant said his  mother  had
          left the family home when he was aged about 14 and that  she  was
          'somewhere in London'. The appellant  is  initially  recorded  as
          saying that he has no contact with his mother but subsequently is
          recorded as saying he had seen her in February 2013 and  that  he
          is in contact with her and she is a support to him. The appellant
          does not seek to resile from that.
       d) The appellant states that he  speaks  Kibajuni  and  English.  He
          states that he does not speak Somali. The judge does not  make  a
          finding on his language abilities. The  reasons  for  deportation
          letter refers to a British, Danish and Dutch fact-finding mission
          which visited Nairobi in September 2000 and refers to the  elders
          stating that most Bajuni speak Somali but that younger Bajuni who
          have lived in exile may have only a  very  limited  knowledge  of
          Somali although they would know key  words  in  Somali.  Although
          that report is now 15 years old,  nothing  has  been  offered  to
          suggest that it is  still  not  the  position.  The  reasons  for
          deportation letter also stated that the appellant


             "...would [in all probability]  be  able  to  understand  some
             Swahili, Kibajuni and Somali..."


         The appellant denies he can speak Somali. The  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge did not make a finding on the appellant's language ability or
         the possible effect this might  have  on  his  ability  to  support
         himself.




   11. There was no finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge on  access  to
       remittances from the UK or financial support from those in  Somalia.
       We are also satisfied that it was not open to the judge to find that
       he could relocate to Kenya. On this basis  alone  we  are  satisfied
       that the findings of the judge that  he  could  adequately  maintain
       himself in Mogadishu was an assessment predicated upon errors,  such
       errors amounting to errors of law requiring the decision to  be  set
       aside to be remade. It is also clear that the judge should have made
       findings of fact in  respect  of  the  appellant's  Somali  language
       abilities. But in view of our findings, if that was an error of  law
       it was not material to the outcome.


       Remaking of the decision.


   12. Taking the undisputed findings  referred  to  above  ([6])  and  our
       conclusions as  regards  findings  made  by  the  judge  which  were
       disputed by the appellant ([10]) we are additionally satisfied as to
       the following:


       a)  Whatever  the  appellant's  circumstances  were  when  he   left
          Mogadishu, he was a young child and  he  will  have  no  personal
          memory of Mogadishu other than what  he  has  been  told  by  his
          grandmother and the Somali community in Kenya and his family  and
          the Somali community whilst in the UK
       b) He has been absent from Mogadishu for virtually the whole of  his
          life - he was aged 22 at the date of the hearing before the First-
          tier Tribunal and is now nearly aged 23;
       c) Whilst in the UK he has worked in a variety of jobs and  obtained
          academic qualifications.


   13. Having reached a conclusion that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal should be set aside to be remade we also concluded that  we
       required further information on  issues  regarding  the  appellant's
       ability  to  access  employment,  finance  and   a   livelihood   on
       deportation to Mogadishu. The evidence that had been produced to the
       First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  included  evidence  in  relation  to
       language and ability to find employment. In particular given that it
       appeared that the languages spoken by the appellant were limited  to
       English and Kibajuni and possibly a smattering of Somali,  this  may
       be of relevance  in  determining  the  extent  and  ability  of  the
       appellant to find employment in Mogadishu. On 27th January  2016  we
       made the following directions:


         1. This appeal was heard on 21st January 2016 and we  reserved  our
            decision. We did not indicate whether we found there  to  be  an
            error  of  law  but  both  parties  were  content  to  and  made
            submissions on the appeal in the event that  we  set  aside  the
            decision of the FtT to be remade.
         2. We would now be assisted in our deliberations on this appeal  to
            hear from the parties on the issue of language. The appellant is
            Bajuni and stated that he speaks Kibajuni and English only.  The
            reasons for deportation letter refers (paragraphs 63 and 71)  to
            the  likelihood  of  the  appellant  being  able  to  speak  and
            understand at least limited Somali.
         3. This matter will now be listed for one  hour  on  18th  February
            2016 to enable the parties to make oral submissions on the issue
            of language and in particular the extent  to  which  English  is
            used, if at all, in Mogadishu and any hindrance there  would  be
            in having limited or no Somali.
         4. Leave to adduce documentary evidence is given, such evidence  to
            be filed and served at least five  working  days  prior  to  the
            hearing. If one or both parties would  prefer  to  give  written
            submissions  with  attached   documentary   evidence   that   is
            acceptable to the Tribunal,  such  a  course  of  action  to  be
            notified to the Tribunal and the other party within 48 hours  of
            the sending of these directions and the written  submissions  to
            be received by the Tribunal and the other party  no  later  than
            three days before the hearing.


   14. We are grateful to the parties for responding to the directions  and
       providing us with as much evidence as they could find on this point.


   15. Mr Jarvis, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  submitted  written
       submissions with an accompanying bundle of documents. The appellant,
       through his solicitor, did not  make  any  written  submissions  but
       submitted a bundle of documents. On 18th February 2016 we heard oral
       submissions from both representatives.


   16. The first issue for us to determine is whether and  to  what  extent
       the appellant speaks Somali. Ms Ahmad relied upon reports quoted  in
       the 2012 COI report on Somalia which themselves were some  15  years
       old. These reports indicated that Bajuni would  tend  not  to  speak
       Somali although elders may well speak Somali. It seems to us that it
       is unlikely that the appellant speaks Somali or if he does, then  he
       speaks only a few words. Although his grandmother, mother and father
       may, because of their age, speak Somali we are  satisfied  that  the
       appellant's language  at  home  (whether  with  his  grandmother  or
       mother/father)  would  not  be  Somali  but  would  more  likely  be
       Kibajuni. After his arrival in the UK and his attendance  at  school
       and other education facilities, his first  language  would,  to  all
       intents and purposes, be English although we are satisfied  that  he
       retains a good working knowledge of Kibajuni because of  his  family
       background. On the basis of the evidence before us we are  satisfied
       that if the appellant speaks any Somali at all it is  no  more  than
       basic and rudimentary  and  insufficient  to  conduct  any  kind  of
       meaningful conversation.

   17. Ms Ahmad relied upon a LandInfo report dated July 2011 in support of
       her contention that the appellant would need at least a good working
       knowledge of Somali in order to be  able  to  access  employment  in
       Mogadishu. This report commences by stating  that  LandInfo  has  no
       linguistic expertise in Somali and no linguistic academic experts in
       Norway; that their report  had  been  produced  through  referencing
       existing academic literature  and  from  consultation  with  foreign
       expertise. The report considered Somali dialects and refers  to  the
       categorisation of Somali into a number of dialect groups -  four  in
       1919 and an  additional  four  in  research  carried  out  in  1986.
       Migration, nomadism and clan relationships are described  (in  1986)
       as contributing to influencing and changing the dialects of Somalia.
       The LandInfo report considers the  current  language  situation  and
       concludes

         "Several hundred thousands of internally displaced persons and  new
         patterns of settlement among certain clans,  the  collapse  of  the
         education system and lack of basic education amongst  a  generation
         may have influenced the language in different  ways.  Thousands  of
         young  men  (and  some  young  women)  have  been  affiliated  with
         militias, both in the capital Mogadishu  and  in  other  towns  and
         areas. Several members of such groups are said to  have  their  own
         jargon,  which  developed  into  a  dialect  that  is   practically
         incomprehensible  to  outsiders  (CRD  [Centre  for  Research   and
         Dialogue] 2004 p29). "


        This is not the correct page reference to the CRD report and nor  is
       it a strictly          accurate summary. The relevant page is p40 and
       the reference is to some   members of armed  criminal  gangs/militias
       developing a slang that is virtually incomprehensible  to  outsiders.
       Also in the CRD report is reference to the language of  education  at
       that time -  English  and  Arabic  both  in  primary,  secondary  and
       tertiary education. The report sets out the different types of school
       available in the 'modern education system'.


   18. A 2015  report  published  by  the  Heritage  Institute  for  Policy
       Studies, Mogadishu relied upon by Mr Jarvis, states


         "Language policy


         Medium of instruction


         Our findings indicate that schools use a mixture of languages  with
         English and Arabic the languages of choice for the majority. In the
         schools that took part in our study, English was the  most  popular
         language followed by Arabic. A limited number of schools  that  are
         under the full control of the government reportedly use the  Somali
         language, but their number is negligible compared  to  the  private
         schools that are growing in numbers every year......worth  pointing
         out, however, is that even schools that use foreign languages still
         teach Somali literature to pupils in the Somali language.
         ......
         Studying in English at a basic education level would  help  pupils'
         future employability according to some participants.  "You're  more
         likely to find employment  if  you  can  speak  English"  said  one
         headteacher, adding that the Somali language was "limited"  to  the
         number who speak it."


   19. Other anecdotal documents  produced  by  Mr  Jarvis  referred  to  a
       returning  diaspora  and  general  increased  economic  activity   -
       confirming the detailed consideration given in MOJ. He  referred  to
       the NIS Project Profile 2013: Hamerweyne Fish Market  Rehabilitation
       Project and drew attention to the information in the LandInfo report
       2013 which confirmed Hamar-Weyne  districts  mixed  status  and  its
       attraction to 'foreigners' (the returning diaspora).


   20. Ms Ahmad relies upon an  email  from  Dr  Markus  Hoehne  dated  3rd
       February 2016 in which he says

         "English is definitely NOT a language  used  in  everyday  life  in
         Mogadishu. Somali is the predominant language.  One  could  try  in
         some circley(sic), to get through with Arabic, and a few old people
         would still know Italian (from colonial times until 1960  and  some
         post colonial education projects).  But  English  is  not  strongly
         anchored in dayly (sic) life. Of course some members of  the  local
         elite plus some returnees form the UK or US diaspora  would  speak.
         But this is a small and particular group".


       Mr Jarvis urged us to place little if any weight upon this email.  He
       pointed out the lack of expert declaration and also drew attention to
       Dr Hoehne's evidence to the Tribunal in MOJ that he had never been to
       Mogadishu   ([106]   of   MOJ),    that    Dr    Hoehne's    evidence
       "generally...consistently presents the least positive  interpretation
       of the source material he draws upon ([158] of MOJ) and that  he  was
       not a linguist and did not produce linguistic reports. Mr Jarvis also
       drew support from the 2012 Somalia: Language & Culture report  relied
       upon by the appellant and in particular:


             "...A small percentage of Somalis also speak  Italian,  and  a
             growing number speak English. Educated young adults from well-
             to-do urban families may speak five  or  more  languages.   In
             addition to the languages  mentioned  above,  there  are  many
             other languages spoken in Somalia, as  follows:  Aweer,  Boon,
             Dabarre, Garre, Jiddue, Maay, Mushungulu,  Oromo  Borana-Arsi-
             Guji, Swahili, Tunni....."



   21. The appellant had not given evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
       that he would be unable to find employment in Mogadishu. Although it
       was asserted in submissions that he would have difficulty in finding
       employment, in our judgment that was not established by the evidence
       before us. His academic achievements  and  that  he  has  previously
       worked (including the  apprenticeship)  are  all  testament  to  his
       abilities. We have considered the  documentary  evidence  before  us
       with particular regard to the  possible  adverse  consequences  that
       being unable to speak Somali may have on his  employment  prospects.
       We do not accept Dr Hoehne's analysis of the language issue. We  are
       satisfied that English is used in everyday life. The combination  of
       the development of education in English, the  increasing  number  of
       British Somalis returning to Somalia, the  evidence  that  returnees
       are preferred as employees to 'locals' and the evidence of  economic
       activity all reinforce that conclusion. English is a  language  that
       is used by increasing numbers of people in everyday life;  the  lack
       of Somali, whether fluent or basic, is not,  on  the  basis  of  the
       evidence before us, likely to be a hindrance to  finding  employment
       or a handicap in accessing economic  opportunities.  The  increasing
       economic activity as considered in detail in MOJ,  the  more  recent
       evidence of the development of  Hamar-Weyne  are  both  issues  that
       indicate that the absence of an  ability  to  speak  Somali  is  not
       likely to be an obstacle to finding employment in Mogadishu today  -
       a finding we would have reached even if he had said in evidence that
       he would not be able to find employment - which he did not.


   22. We have also considered three other matters. Firstly the whereabouts
       of the appellant's father and the consequent assistance  he  may  be
       able to give - if any - secondly the support provided by his  mother
       and thirdly the possibility of support from  other  members  of  the
       family.

   23. In so far as his father is concerned  it  appears  that  his  father
       travelled  to  Kenya  sometime  during  2015  because  of  his  (the
       father's) mother's illness. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that
       the appellant was in contact with his father and  that  finding  has
       not been challenged before us. We note (from the letter produced  by
       the respondent from the father's file in which he requests a  travel
       document) that the father has both a mobile and two email addresses.
       The appellant has chosen not to share the whereabouts of his  father
       with us. Whilst as  a Somali national his father could  be  expected
       to be in Somalia if not in the UK, we do  note  that  he  was  on  a
       'refugee travel document' and thus he  may  not  have  travelled  to
       Somalia but actually gone to Kenya as intimated in his letter to the
       respondent. The appellant did not give any evidence  as  to  whether
       his grandmother was still in Kenya. Although the  exact  whereabouts
       of his father are  unknown  we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant
       remains in contact with him.


   24. The  appellant  gave  no  evidence  as  to  his  father's  financial
       situation wherever he is. He gave no evidence that  his  father  had
       not been supporting him financially or that he was unable to  do  so
       in the future. The burden is upon the  appellant  to  establish  the
       facts upon which he seeks to rely and in the absence of evidence  to
       the contrary we are satisfied that the father  remains  a  potential
       source of at least  some  financial  and  other  assistance  to  the
       appellant.


   25. The appellant is in contact with his mother. According to the  OASys
       report she provides support to him. He has given no evidence  as  to
       her financial situation. Again, the burden is upon him and there  is
       no evidence that she would not be able  to  provide  some  financial
       assistance.

   26. We note from the extract from the appellant's father's file that  it
       was the appellant's maternal uncle who paid  for  and  arranged  the
       family's travel to the UK.  The  appellant  has  given  no  evidence
       whatsoever about this uncle: where he is, why he would not  be  able
       to support him on his return to Mogadishu or why he could  not  look
       to him for support. The appellant was aware, from the filing of  the
       respondent's bundle and skeleton argument that this was  before  the
       Tribunal but did  not  seek  to  file  any  evidence  in  connection
       therewith.

   27. The appellant has not established that he would  have  no  financial
       support available to him from remaining family  members  whether  in
       the UK, Somalia or Kenya. He is  in  contact  with  his  mother  and
       father and although he may not  be  in  personal  contact  with  his
       maternal uncle, there is no reason to suppose that  having  assisted
       the family previously, he would not provide assistance again.

   28. Although clan membership is not particularly relevant  in  terms  of
       security, it can be relevant in terms of assistance  on  relocation.
       There has historically been an established Bajuni community in Hamar-
       Weyne. Although the applicant may not have familial ties that he can
       call upon there was no evidence that he would not be able to  obtain
       some assistance through his clan  membership.  The  evidence  relied
       upon by the respondent that post-dated MOJ confirms  and  elaborates
       the extensive regeneration of Hamar-Weyne.


     29. Taking all of these matters into account  in  accordance  with  the
         guidance in MOJ together with the evidence that  postdates  MOJ  we
         are  satisfied  that  this  appellant  will   not   be   materially
         disadvantaged  because  of  his  inability  to  speak  Somali.  His
         personal attributes  are  such  that  he  would  be  able  to  take
         advantage of the diaspora driven economic climate in Mogadishu.


     30. We dismiss his appeal on human rights grounds.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     We set aside the decision and re-make the decision by dismissing it.






                                    Date  4th March 2016
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
