
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00009/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 29th September 2016               |On 2 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    f a h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Dicksons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Somalia born on  9th  October  1976.
    He arrived in the UK in May 2002 and successfully applied for asylum on
    the basis that he was a member of a minority clan,  namely  the  Ashraf
    Reer Hamar.  He was granted refugee status on 18th July 2002.   However
    on 8th November 2012 the Appellant was  convicted  of  the  offence  of
    causing grievous bodily harm with intent and sentenced to  four  years'
    imprisonment.  As a  consequence  on  30th  July  2013  the  Respondent
    decided to remove the  Appellant  and  gave  a  certificate  under  the
    provisions of Section 72 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.
    Subsequently and on 9th June 2014 the  Respondent  further  decided  to
    cease the Appellant's refugee status under paragraph 339A(v) of HC  395
    on the basis that Article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention  applied  to
    him.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 2nd  September
    2015.  On 28th September 2015 the Judge allowed the appeal.  She  found
    that the Appellant had rebutted the statutory presumption  provided  by
    Section 72 of the 2002  Act,  but  that  the  Respondent  had  shown  a
    revocation exception to the refoulement principle.  However,  she  also
    found that the Appellant's removal to Mogadishu would  be  contrary  to
    his rights given by Article 3 ECHR and on that basis the Judge  allowed
    the appeal.  The reasons for her decision were given  in  the  Decision
    dated 28th September 2015.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal  that
    decision, and on 16th February 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. I first decide that  the  Respondent's  challenge  to  the  Section  72
    decision is immaterial.  This is because the  Judge  only  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds and Section 72 has no  application  to
    such a decision.

 4. Otherwise, the Judge allowed the appeal on Article 3 ECHR  grounds  she
    was satisfied that if returned  to  Mogadishu,  being  a  member  of  a
    minority clan, the Appellant would be unable to secure the  necessities
    of life and being without family or  clan  support  or  connections  he
    would almost inevitably be reduced to destitution in the IDP camps.

 5. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni referred to the grounds  of  application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to  this  conclusion.
    This was because the Judge had relied upon objective evidence contained
    in reports which predated the Country  Guidance  decision  of  MOJ  and
    others (return to Mogadishu) CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  Further,  the
    Judge had given inadequate reasons for her finding that  the  Appellant
    was something more than an ordinary  citizen  and  that  he  could  not
    reintegrate into life in Mogadishu.  For example,  the  Judge  had  not
    explained her finding that the Appellant would  not  be  able  to  find
    employment in Mogadishu.  In response, Ms Rutherford  referred  to  the
    Rule 24 reply and submitted that there was no such error of law in  the
    decision of the  Judge.   The  Judge  gave  detailed  reasons  for  her
    conclusions.   The  evidence  of  the  Appellant  as  to  his  personal
    circumstances including those in Somalia prior to  his  departure  were
    not contested by the Respondent.  The Judge had conducted a careful and
    thorough  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  circumstances  as  she  was
    required to do by the decision in MOJ and others.  She  had  considered
    all the relevant factors given in that case.  The Judge  had  correctly
    given weight to  the  facts  that  the  Appellant  had  no  family  and
    connections in Mogadishu, and had been absent from  that  city  for  an
    extended period of time.  MOJ and others confirmed that  members  of  a
    minority clan could expect no assistance  on  return.   The  Judge  had
    therefore been right to conclude that it was  inevitable  that  on  his
    return the Appellant would have to live in an IDP  camp.   It  was  not
    disputed by the Respondent that the  destitution  experienced  in  such
    camps amounted to inhumane and degrading treatment.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the Judge.   I  have
    already dealt with the  Section  72  2002  Act  issue.   The  remaining
    question is whether the Article 3 ECHR decision contained an error on a
    point of law.  I find that it did not.  It is clear  from  reading  the
    Decision that the Judge took full account of the decision  in  MOJ  and
    others, and set out that decision in detail  in  paragraphs  71  to  74
    inclusive of the Decision.  The Judge acknowledged that  the  situation
    in  Somalia  had  improved  since  the  decision  in  AMM  and   others
    (humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC).
     The Judge considered  the  risk  of  return  in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant's clan membership  and  his  circumstances  in  Mogadishu  in
    accordance with paragraphs 407(f) and (h) of MOJ and others.  The Judge
    made relevant findings of fact concerning the Appellant's circumstances
    and gave a number of cogent reasons for finding  that  if  returned  to
    Mogadishu the Appellant would have to  live  in  an  IDP  camp.   Those
    reasons are adequately set out in paragraphs 90 to 98 inclusive of  the
    Decision.  It is not in dispute  that  returning  to  an  IDP  camp  in
    Somalia would amount to treatment contrary to the Appellant's Article 3
    ECHR rights.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

