
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00036/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Monday 5 March 2018               |On Friday 16 March 2018              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 HASSAN [F]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent appeared in person


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Although  the
appeal concerns the  revocation  of  protection,  the  Respondent  does  not
contend that he is at risk on account of his identification  on  return.   I
do not consider it necessary or appropriate to make an  anonymity  order  in
this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  For ease of reference, though, I refer to the  parties
         as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The Respondent appeals against a decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Colvin promulgated  on  24  November  2017  ("the  Decision")
         allowing the Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision dated 8 February 2016 making a deportation  order  against
         the Appellant and her decision dated 24 February  2017  refusing  a
         protection and human rights  claim  and  revoking  the  Appellant's
         protection status.

      3. As an appeal  under  the  provisions  of  section  82  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  post-dating  the
         amendments made by the Immigration Act 2014, strictly  it  is  only
         the second of those decisions which is under appeal and the grounds
         available to the Appellant are also thereby  limited  (although  it
         does not appear that the  Judge  necessarily  appreciated  that  in
         finding that the appeal against the deportation order  should  also
         be allowed).

      4. The Appellant is a national of Somalia now aged  thirty-six  years.
         He came to the UK aged twenty-two years  in  March  2003.   He  was
         granted status as a recognised refugee in May  2003  based  on  the
         fact that he is a member of a minority clan.  His  wife  and  three
         children joined him here in March 2006 with family  reunion  visas.
         The couple had a further child in the UK.   The  Appellant  remains
         married although now  estranged  from  his  wife.  He  has  a  good
         relationship  with  his  wife  and  remains  in  contact  with  his
         children.  All are now British citizens.

      5. Since coming to the UK, the Appellant has formed a new relationship
         with a Swedish national and he now has  three  children  with  her.
         They have lived together since 2014 (although  some  doubt  may  be
         cast on the present position by the statement of Kevin  Holland  to
         which I refer below).

      6.  The  Appellant  also  has  two   further   children   from   other
         relationships with two separate British citizens.   Those  children
         live with their mothers but  the  Appellant  retains  contact  with
         those children.

      7. In May 2012, the Appellant was convicted of conspiracy  to  defraud
         and sentenced to thirty months in  prison.   The  offence  involved
         buying cheap Ryanair tickets from a person who obtained  them  with
         credit cards obtained by fraud (although the record of the  offence
         as contained within the Decision may understate the  level  of  the
         Appellant's involvement if one looks at  the  sentencing  remarks).
         The Appellant used the tickets to visit his partner then in Sweden.
          He was also charged with contempt of court  for  failing  to  give
         evidence at a trial as he said he had been threatened  but  he  was
         released after fourteen days having disclosed the  threats  to  the
         police and Judge.

      8. It is expressly stated at [9] of the Decision  that  the  Appellant
         has not offended further although it is not clear whether that  was
         based on direct evidence or an assumption based on an  omission  of
         evidence in that regard.  Whatever the position, that statement  is
         inaccurate as, on 10 January 2018, the Appellant pleaded guilty  to
         an offence of  being  knowingly  concerned  in  the  evasion  of  a
         prohibition or restriction on the importation  of  Class  C  drugs.
         The Appellant says that the drug was Khat and was for his  personal
         use.  According to the statement of the NCA Investigation  Officer,
         Kevin Holland, however, the Appellant played a significant role  in
         the offence. The Appellant has yet  to  be  sentenced  as  his  co-
         defendants have still to be tried, having entered not guilty pleas.
          That trial is due to take place in June 2018.  I  will  deal  with
         this offence further when considering the  Respondent's  additional
         grounds.

      9. The Respondent issued the Appellant with a  deportation  order  and
         decision  to  revoke  protection  status  in  October  2014.    The
         Appellant's appeal was allowed  to  the  extent  of  requiring  the
         Respondent to reconsider the decisions in accordance also with  The
         Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006.    The
         reconsideration led to the decision(s) now under appeal.

     10. The Judge allowed the appeal on this occasion, making the following
         findings.  First, she refused  to  uphold  the  certificate  issued
         under section 72 of the 2002 Act ("section 72") on the  basis  that
         she did not consider that the Appellant continues to be a danger to
         the public ([23]).  Second, she found that the Appellant remains in
         need of international protection under the  Refugee  Convention  in
         relation to Somalia ([29]).  She therefore refused  to  uphold  the
         decision revoking protection status.  Finally,  she  said  she  was
         satisfied that the Appellant's removal  would  breach  the  Refugee
         Convention and Article 3 ECHR ([30]).  Although she indicated  that
         she was satisfied that there would be very significant obstacles to
         the Appellant's integration in Somalia  for  essentially  the  same
         reasons as she found the Appellant to be at risk on return  ([32]),
         she declined to make findings  about  the  Article  8  family  life
         issues ([34]).

     11. The Respondent's original grounds raise the following issues  which
         I will deal with in detail in the discussion section below:-

                . The Judge fails to identify any Convention reason for  the
                  risk which the Appellant claims to face on  return  or  to
                  explain why such a reason arises on her findings;

                . The Judge has misapplied the guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return
                  to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) ("MOJ");

                . The Judge has failed to  consider  whether  the  Appellant
                  should be excluded from humanitarian protection.

     12. By an application dated 20 February 2018, the Respondent sought  to
         vary her grounds of appeal to add two further grounds.   The  first
         is that the Judge erred in fact in finding that the Appellant is no
         longer a danger to the public for the purposes of section 72  based
         on his most recent charge to  which  he  has  pleaded  guilty.  The
         Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  committed  further
         offences is therefore open to doubt, although it is  fair  to  note
         that neither the Respondent nor the Appellant  were  aware  of  the
         charge at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  because,  at
         that time, the Appellant had not been charged.

     13. The second ground deals with what is said by the Judge at  [22]  of
         the Decision, that she was not required to consider the section  72
         certificate as the Appellant  has  already  been  recognised  as  a
         refugee and continues to have status.  It is there said  that  this
         issue does not arise.  The Respondent contends that  this  approach
         is  inconsistent  with  Mugwagwa   (s.72   -   applying   statutory
         presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00338 (IAC) ("Mugwagwa").

     14. I permitted Mr Kotas to argue those grounds.  I agreed that it  was
         appropriate to permit the Respondent to vary her  grounds  in  that
         regard.  Mr Kotas confirmed that those two grounds are in  addition
         to rather than in substitution of the original grounds raised.

     15. Permission to appeal was granted on the original grounds by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on  11  December  2017  in  the
         following terms (so far as relevant):-

             "...

             [2] It is arguable that the Judge has erred  in  law  and  has
             misdirected himself by (a) allowing the Appellant's appeal  by
             finding him to still  require  protection  under  the  Refugee
             Convention.  The  Appellant  was  originally  granted  refugee
             status as the member of a minority clan which is noted by  the
             Judge at paragraph 21 of the Decision & reasons.  However  the
             Judge goes on to find at paragraph 29 that the Appellant still
             qualifies for refugee protection without  failing  to  outline
             [sic] the Convention reason or, if one is to assume it is  for
             the same  reason  it  was  granted,  to  resolve  the  obvious
             conflict between this and the guidance in MOJ & others (Return
             to Mogadishu) Somalia CG v SSHD [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  which
             found that there is  no  longer  any  clan-based  violence  or
             discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.  The
             Appellant is a healthy adult male who has transferable  skills
             from his time in the UK and  financial  remittances  from  his
             family which will all assist with return;  and  (b)  where  at
             paragraph 24 the Judge quotes  MOJ  at  length  and  finds  at
             paragraph 27 the evidence presented by the Appellant does  not
             justify  departure  from  it,  yet  still  appears   to   have
             misapplied its guidance."

     16. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law and, if so,  to  re-make  the  decision  or
         remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

    Decision and Reasons

     17. It is convenient to consider the  Decision  in  the  order  of  the
         findings made by the Judge rather than following the way  in  which
         the Respondent has framed her grounds.  This is  because,  although
         certain of those grounds may  be  made  out  in  principal,  it  is
         necessary to consider the extent to which they are material to  the
         overall outcome.

     18. Before I turn to consider the substance of the Decision, it is also
         necessary to say something about the nature of the appeal  and  the
         issues which arose for determination.  As I have already  indicated
         this was an appeal under the provisions of the 2002 Act post-dating
         amendment.  The Respondent's decision under  appeal  is  termed  as
         both a revocation of refugee  status  and  a  decision  refusing  a
         protection and human rights claim.  As is clear from section 82  of
         the 2002 Act as amended, a revocation  decision  is  of  protection
         status and therefore encompasses both status as a refugee and as  a
         person entitled to humanitarian protection.  The grounds  available
         to  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  revocation   are   that   the
         Respondent's decision breaches either of the UK's obligations under
         the Refugee Convention and/or those obligations in  relation  to  a
         person's eligibility for a grant of humanitarian protection.

     19. Since the Respondent's decision was also  one  refusing  protection
         and human rights claims, the Appellant could  also  appeal  on  the
         basis that the  decision  breached  the  same  obligations  as  for
         revocation but in addition that  removal  would  breach  section  6
         Human Rights Act 1998 as being contrary to the ECHR (here Article 3
         in relation to protection and Article 8 in relation to  family  and
         private life). Although  not  particularised  in  any  detail,  the
         grounds of appeal lodged by the Appellant's then  solicitors  raise
         all of those issues.

     20. The issues for the Judge to determine, therefore, were whether  the
         revocation of protection status breached obligations  either  under
         the Refugee Convention  or  on  the  basis  of  an  entitlement  to
         humanitarian protection  and  also  whether  removal  would  breach
         obligations under the Refugee Convention, obligations  in  relation
         to eligibility for a grant of humanitarian  protection  and/or  the
         Human Rights Act 1998 (under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR).

    Section 72 certificate

     21. I readily accept the proposition  apparent  from  the  headnote  in
         Mugwagwa that the Tribunal is  required  to  consider  of  its  own
         motion whether section 72 applies even if the  Respondent  has  not
         raised this in her decision.  That is though a  slightly  different
         proposition to that raised by the Respondent in the second  of  her
         additional grounds whether the certificate is relevant at all  when
         one is dealing with removal of status.  I do not need to  determine
         that issue though because, although the Judge said at [22]  of  the
         Decision that the issue did not fall for determination, she in fact
         went on to determine it at [23] of the Decision.

     22. In relation to the second of the grounds, the Judge found  at  [23]
         of the Decision that the Appellant is no longer  a  danger  to  the
         public and that, accordingly, the rebuttable presumption  contained
         in section 72 was rebutted.  The Respondent relies  in  her  second
         additional ground on evidence post-dating the  hearing  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  indeed  post-dating  the  Decision
         itself  that  the  Appellant  has  pleaded  guilty  to  an  offence
         involving the importation of Class C drugs.

     23. Neither the evidence nor the charge concerned were in existence  at
         the time of the hearing or the Decision.  This is not a case  where
         evidence of that charge could have been produced but was not due to
         some failing by one or other of the parties.

     24. Mr Kotas relied on the case of Ladd v Marshall [1954] EWCA  Civ  1.
         I accept that on the face of it the three criteria for the adducing
         of further evidence as outlined by Denning LJ in that case are met.
          Although there is a distinction to be drawn between that case  and
         this appeal in that the charge underlying the new evidence was  not
         in being at the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge, the offence was committed, according to the evidence between
         February and  March  2017  and  the  Appellant  knew  that  he  had
         committed that offence. The facts  underlying  the  further  charge
         were therefore already in being.   The  Judge  therefore  erred  in
         finding that the Appellant had not committed  any  further  offence
         since his release in 2013, based either on his evidence that he had
         not done so or an assumption based on the Appellant not  mentioning
         this.

     25. I turn to consider whether the  further  evidence  could  make  any
         material difference to the finding that  the  Appellant  is  not  a
         danger to the public given his statement that he  was  involved  in
         the importation of drugs only for his own  personal  use.  However,
         doubt is cast on that explanation by the statement of the  National
         Crime Agency Investigation Officer Kevin Holland. He says that  the
         Appellant's involvement was not as he claimed.  He  says  that  the
         Appellant played a significant role  in  the  coordination  of  the
         importation by three Romanian nationals.

     26. The Judge's finding may not be material if  the  Appellant  is  not
         entitled to the protection of the Refugee Convention in  the  first
         place. That is the point raised in one of the Respondent's original
         grounds.  I will come to that after dealing  with  another  of  the
         original grounds also concerning exclusion namely  that  the  Judge
         has not considered whether the Appellant should  also  be  excluded
         from humanitarian protection. The Judge has undoubtedly  failed  to
         consider that issue.

     27. The basis for exclusion from humanitarian protection is set out  at
         paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  The  criteria  there  set
         out are similar in terms to  exclusion  under  Article  1F  of  the
         Refugee Convention.  The only  sub-paragraph  of  that  Rule  which
         could conceivably apply in this case is  paragraph  339C(iii)  that
         "there are serious reasons for considering that  he  constitutes  a
         danger to the community or to the security of the United  Kingdom".
         That paragraph clearly does not contain  the  same  presumption  as
         section 72.  It is though conceivable  on  the  evidence  that  the
         criteria  could  be  met  depending  on  the  evidence  about   the
         Appellant's most recent offence.  Again, though, the materiality of
         the  Judge's  error  depends  on  the  Appellant   qualifying   for
         humanitarian protection in the first place and the  basis  for  the
         Judge's finding as to risk on return.  I therefore turn to consider
         that issue.

    Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection and risk on return

     28. A refugee is a person who has a well-founded fear of persecution in
         his home country on account of  a  Convention  reason  and  who  is
         unable or unwilling to seek the protection of his home  authorities
         against that risk.  Article 1C(5) of the Convention provides that a
         refugee's status can  be  revoked  only  where  there  has  been  a
         fundamental and durable change in the refugee's country  of  origin
         to the extent that the person will no longer  have  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution on return.

     29. Here, the Judge had before her a letter from UNHCR dated 4 May 2016
         which set out the reasons why the UNHCR did not consider  that  the
         cessation clause should be applied to the  Appellant.    The  Judge
         had regard to that letter and to other  background  evidence.   She
         concluded however at [27] of the Decision that  "[w]hilst  I  fully
         acknowledge that the recent background information  and  events  in
         Mogadishu refers  to  a  deteriorating  security  and  humanitarian
         situation with civilians being at risk of directly being  targeted,
         I do not find that on the evidence before me I am in a position  to
         justify departing from the CG decision of MOJ  and  others  at  the
         present time."  She therefore directed herself as  being  bound  to
         apply the guidance in MOJ.

     30. Having set out the headnote in MOJ at [24]  of  the  Decision,  the
         Judge went on at [28] and [29] to provide  reasons  why  she  found
         that the Respondent was not  entitled  to  revoke  the  Appellant's
         protection status.  Those are as follows:-

             "[28]     In considering the circumstances of  the  appellant,
             it is accepted after hearing his oral evidence that he has  no
             family members left in Somalia.  His elder brother and  sister
             are in the UK and his youngest brother remains in  Kenya.   He
             says that he had an uncle who was killed in  the  recent  bomb
             blast in October 2017 and that this  was  his  last  remaining
             relative living there as his parents are dead.   There  is  no
             evidence that he has any clan associations  to  call  upon  in
             Mogadishu.  He has been living away from the  country  for  14
             years  since  the  age  of  22.   The  chances  of   financial
             assistance  from  abroad  if  he  returns  is  very   unlikely
             particularly as he states that he and his family are seriously
             struggling financially at the present time including the  risk
             of being homeless.  He has worked in the UK and says  that  he
             is now well enough to work again after  a  period  of  medical
             problems, the chances  of  him  obtaining  employment  without
             family assistance in Mogadishu is again limited.  He  will  be
             returning as a person who has been 'westernised'  which  could
             also place him at  some  risk  of  forced  recruitment  to  Al
             Shabaab.

             [29]      The burden is on the respondent  to  show  that  the
             cessation of the protection clauses apply.  When the  personal
             circumstances of the appellant are also put in the context  of
             the  deteriorating  security  and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Mogadishu, I have reached the conclusion that  the  respondent
             has not shown that there has been a change of circumstances of
             a durable and fundamental nature in  order  to  say  that  the
             grant of  asylum  to  the  appellant  in  2004  is  no  longer
             necessary.  Indeed I find on the lower standard of proof  that
             the appellant remains  in  need  of  international  protection
             under the  Refugee  Convention  in  relation  to  Somalia.   I
             therefore do not uphold the respondent's  decision  to  revoke
             his protection status."

     31.  There  are  a  number  of  errors  contained  in   this   section,
         particularly at [29] of the Decision.  First, given the  acceptance
         at [27] of the  Decision  that  the  background  evidence  did  not
         provide reason to depart from MOJ, the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         security situation had not changed in a  durable  way  is  directly
         contrary to the guidance at (ii) of the headnote in MOJ which finds
         that there has been a durable change  and  (i)  that  an  "ordinary
         civilian" does not face a real risk of persecution or harm.

     32. Second, following on directly from this, the Judge  has  failed  to
         explain at [29] why the Refugee Convention applies rather than this
         being a case for humanitarian protection if based  on  the  general
         security situation.  Although the UNHCR letter refers to  the  need
         to carry out an individualised assessment of risk based on what  it
         sees as a deterioration in the security situation in Somalia, there
         is no indication that the Judge found there to be  a  risk  to  the
         Appellant based  on  his  individual  circumstances.   Furthermore,
         since the Judge was avowedly applying MOJ, she has also  failed  to
         explain why (viii) of the headnote in MOJ  does  not  apply.   That
         provides that "[t]here are no clan militias in Mogadishu,  no  clan
         violence and no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
         minority clan members".

     33. The Respondent's submission that the Judge has failed  to  consider
         whether there remains a Convention reason for the risk on return is
         therefore made out.

     34. The finding in the last sentence of [28] of the Decision  that  the
         Appellant might run the risk of forced recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab
         because he would be returning from the West is directly contrary to
         the guidance at (vi) of MOJ that "[t]here is no real risk of forced
         recruitment to Al  Shabaab  for  civilian  citizens  of  Mogadishu,
         including for recent returnees from the West."

     35. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Respondent has also made
         out her ground that the Judge failed properly to apply MOJ.

     36. I have given careful consideration to whether it can be  said  that
         those errors are immaterial having regard to the findings  at  [28]
         of the Decision which,  other  than  the  last  sentence,  are  not
         challenged.  In particular, I  have  carefully  considered  whether
         those findings give rise to an inevitable conclusion that  (xi)  of
         the guidance  in  MOJ  is  met  which  would  itself  lead  to  the
         conclusion that the Appellant would  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
         protection.  The difficulty in that regard is that  the  Judge  has
         not considered whether the Appellant is  a  person  who  should  be
         excluded from humanitarian protection and, given the  new  evidence
         which undermines  the  Judge's  conclusion  about  the  section  72
         certificate, I cannot simply read across the finding there  to  the
         humanitarian protection context.

     37. I have also considered whether the Judge's findings about both  the
         Refugee  Convention  protection  and  humanitarian  protection  are
         material to the essential question whether the Appellant will be at
         risk of inhuman and degrading treatment on  return.   At  (xi)  and
         (xii) of the headnote in MOJ the Upper Tribunal says this:-

             "[xi]     It will, therefore, only be those with  no  clan  or
             family support who will not be in receipt of remittances  from
             abroad and who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

             [xii]     The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply
             those who originate from  Mogadishu  that  may  now  generally
             return to live in the  city  without  being  subjected  to  an
             Article 15(c) risk or facing a real risk of  destitution.   On
             the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu  for  a  person  of  a
             minority clan with no former links to the city, no  access  to
             funds and no other form of clan, family or social  support  is
             unlikely to be realistic  as,  in  the  absence  of  means  to
             establish a home and some form of  ongoing  financial  support
             there will be a real risk of having no alternative but to live
             in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
             real possibility of having to live  in  conditions  that  will
             fall below acceptable humanitarian standards."

     38. It may well be, in light of that guidance and the findings made  at
         [28]  of  the  Decision  (excluding  the  final  sentence)  that  a
         conclusion that the Appellant would be at real risk  of  Article  3
         mistreatment is one which would be open to a Judge.   The  findings
         at [28] of the Decision are not  however  detailed.   Further,  the
         Judge has recorded  evidence  which  potentially  undermines  those
         findings.  For example, the Appellant's evidence  is  that  he  has
         acquired various qualifications in the  UK  and  had  worked  in  a
         variety of jobs before he was imprisoned.  Although he says that he
         has been unable to get work since being  released  because  of  his
         immigration status, it is unclear on the  evidence  how  the  Judge
         reached the conclusion at  [28]  that  the  Appellant's  chance  of
         obtaining work in  Mogadishu  is  limited.   Similarly,  given  the
         evidence that the Appellant's partner is an EU national entitled to
         work and who has been working and  that  the  Appellant  has  other
         family in the UK, it is unclear how the Judge reached  the  finding
         at [28] that the Appellant could not obtain financial support  from
         any of his family  in  the  UK  while  he  establishes  himself  in
         Somalia.

     39. The issue whether deportation breaches the  Appellant's  Article  3
         rights  also  requires  prior  consideration  whether  he   remains
         entitled to the protection of the  Refugee  Convention  and/or  the
         grant of humanitarian protection and whether he  is  excluded  from
         such protection.  The findings at [28] and [29] of the Decision are
         simply inadequate to deal with those questions.

     40. For the above reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does
         contain a material error of law.  I therefore set it aside.

     41. I indicated at the hearing that, if I found an error of law, I  was
         minded to re-make the decision in this Tribunal.   However,  having
         given more detailed consideration to the findings made and in light
         of what I say at [38] and [39] above, I consider it appropriate  to
         remit the appeal.  Consideration will need to be given to  the  new
         evidence regarding the further offending and whether  that  impacts
         on  exclusion   from   Refugee   Convention   and/or   humanitarian
         protection.  Findings are also required as to whether the Appellant
         remains  entitled  to  either  Refugee  Convention  protection   or
         humanitarian protection.  More detailed findings are also  required
         concerning the issue of  risk  on  return  and,  depending  on  the
         outcome of consideration of those issues, findings may need  to  be
         made on the issue whether deportation will breach Article 8 ECHR.

     42. There is one further matter and that is  the  basis  on  which  the
         appeal  against  the  earlier  deportation  decision  was  allowed.
         Although  there  is  a  question   mark   about   the   Appellant's
         relationship with his Swedish national partner and although  he  is
         not married to her (and therefore not a family member), it  appears
         that there has still been no consideration of the  case  under  the
         EEA Regulations as required by the  earlier  appeal.   This  aspect
         does not appear to figure in the Respondent's decision or therefore
         the Appellant's grounds but consideration  ought  to  be  given  to
         whether this issue arises on the facts given the Tribunal's earlier
         determination.

         DECISION

         I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of  law.
         I therefore set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Colvin promulgated on 27 November 2017.  The appeal is remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


         Signed   [pic]      Dated: 15 March 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
