
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th November 2019                |On 28th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                             MOHAMED ALI NASSIR
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
    Judge Pooler ("the judge") promulgated on 12th June 2019.


 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia. He arrived in the United
    Kingdom in December 2005 with a family reunion visa and, upon arrival,
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.  In October 2013 the applicant
    applied for naturalisation, but the application was refused on 6th
    February 2014 due to his character and criminal history. The appellant
    continued offending and on 16th January 2015 he was convicted at
    Kingston upon Thames Crown Court for possession of a Class A drug
    (Heroin) with intent to supply, possession of a Class A drug (Crack
    cocaine) with intent to supply, and Affray.  He was sentenced to a
    total of 36 months imprisonment.  On 21st September 2016, the appellant
    was convicted of battery at Central London Magistrates Court and was
    sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. He has one further conviction.  On
    19th December 2017 he was convicted at West London Magistrates Court
    for using threatening/abusive words or behaviour, or disorderly
    behaviour likely to cause harassment/alarm or distress. He was fined
    �100.


 3. Following consideration of representations made on behalf of the
    appellant, on 24th August 2018, the respondent made a deportation
    decision under s32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on the grounds that
    the appellant is a foreign national who has been convicted in the UK of
    an offence and has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least 12 months. The respondent concluded that the exceptions set out
    in s33 of the Act do not apply, and the appellant's deportation was
    considered to be conducive to the public good.


 4. The respondent also certified the matter under s.72(2) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') on the
    basis that the appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious
    crime and constitutes a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.
    The respondent claimed that the consequence of this decision is that
    the appellant's refugee status no longer prevents his return to Somalia
    in light of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.


 5. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pooler for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 12th June 2019.
     The appellant claims that at [27], the judge found the appellant
    remains at risk of persecution on return to Mogadishu as a member of a
    minority clan.  It is said that the finding at [27] should have been
    determinative of the appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds, but the
    judge erroneously determined the Article 3 claim solely on the basis of
    whether the appellant is likely to be destitute and forced to live in
    an IDP camp.  The appellant claims the judge failed to have regard to
    the fact that the appellant is a member of a minority clan and the clan-
    based violence and persecution that the appellant would be exposed to,
    in determining the Article 3 appeal.


 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 8th
    August 2019.  She observed: "... It is arguable, given the unchallenged
    evidence that the appellant and his mother were recognised as refugees
    on the basis of their minority clan status, that the judge ought to
    have considered this matter to be relevant in assessing the appellant's
    Article 3 claim.".


The decision of FtT Judge Pooler


 7. At paragraph [11] of his decision, the Judge notes that although there
    was no documentary evidence in relation to the basis upon which the
    appellant had been granted asylum, the respondent did not dispute the
    evidence of the appellant and his mother that he was a member of the
    minority Reer Hamar - Bandhabo clan.


 8. It was uncontroversial that the appellant has been convicted of a
    particularly serious crime. For reasons set out at paragraph [19], the
    judge concluded at [20], the appellant has not rebutted the statutory
    presumption in s72(2) of the 2002 Act and his asylum appeal must be
    dismissed.


 9. The judge went on to consider the respondent's decision to revoke
    refugee status upon making the s.72(2) certification, under the heading
    'Cessation'. The judge referred to the Country Guidance set out in MOJ
    & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), and
    other background material that was before the Tribunal.  The judge
    concluded, at [27] as follows:


         "It is for the respondent to prove that there has been a
         significant and non-temporary change in the circumstances in
         Somalia and particularly in Mogadishu, the city from which the
         appellant came. Although the country guidance indicated that there
         would not be a real risk to a returnee by reason of clan-based
         violence in Mogadishu, the evidence before me of continuing
         discrimination and human rights abuses, which in some circumstances
         may amount to persecution, persuades me that the respondent has not
         discharged the burden which rests on him."

10. At paragraphs [29] to [36], the judge addressed the appellant's Article
    3 claim.  The Judge refers to the decision in MOJ.  The judge accepted
    the evidence given by the appellant and his mother that they have no
    relatives who remain in Mogadishu.  At paragraph [31], the Judge said:


         "In these circumstances, the country guidance in MOJ indicates that
         there must be a careful assessment of all the circumstances.
         Relevant considerations are listed in paragraph (ix).  My attention
         was not drawn by either representative to evidence of the
         circumstances of the appellant's family in Mogadishu before they
         left Somalia. All that can be said is that they were minority clan
         members. I accept that the appellant has no relatives in Mogadishu
         on whom he may call. As the member of a minority clan, any clan
         membership would be of very limited assistance to him. The
         appellant was aged 16 when he entered the UK and will have limited
         personal recollection of his time in Somalia."

11.  The judge accepted the unchallenged evidence that the appellant's
    parents have been dependent in the UK on state benefits. He accepted
    they would be unable to make any significant contribution towards the
    appellant's living expenses in Somalia.  The judge noted that in MOJ,
    the Tribunal made it clear that Somalia, and Mogadishu in particular,
    were enjoying a period of economic upturn.  At paragraphs [35] and
    [36], the judge concluded:


         "35. In evidence the appellant said that he had previously been
         employed in the UK, both in a business which refilled printer ink
         cartridges and in a retail establishment. He said that in prison he
         had taken courses including, painting and other areas.

         36.  Against the background evidence of economic improvements in
         Mogadishu, I find that the appellant has failed to persuade me that
         he would be unable to obtain employment such that he could maintain
         himself and remain in accommodation of his own rather than having
         to resort to an IDP camp.  He began the hearing by using the
         services of a Somali interpreter, illustrating that he retained the
         ability to speak the Somali language. His appeal by reference to
         Article 3 was not put on any other basis and so falls to be
         dismissed, issues of risk having previously been considered by
         reference to the asylum appeal."

12. The judge then addressed the appellant's Article 8 claim at paragraphs
    [37] to [49] of the decision. The judge noted the appellant does not
    rely upon his relationship with his child's mother.  The judge found
    that it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in Somalia but was
    not persuaded that it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
    the UK without the appellant. At paragraphs [48] to [49], the Judge
    concluded as follows:


         "48. As I have recorded above the appellant has not proved that he
         would be at real risk of destitution in Somalia. As for his private
         life, its nature and extent are unclear except insofar as it
         encompasses his relationships with his immediate family. He was not
         in education or employment at the time of the hearing. There is no
         evidence of other relationships which might properly be considered
         under the heading of private life.

         49.  I take account of these matters and have regard to the
         cumulative effect. Against them must be balanced the public
         interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal. This is a
         weighty consideration, not least because the appellant's three-year
         sentence was significant. Weighing these matters in the balance I
         am satisfied that the public interest in deportation outweighs the
         matters on which the appellant relies, and that the decision was
         and remains proportionate. The appeal on Article 8 grounds must
         therefore also fail.

The appeal before me


13. In summary, the sole ground of appeal is that the FtT judge materially
    erred in his assessment of the risk that the appellant will be
    subjected to upon return. It is said the appellant will be subjected to
    treatment in violation of the Article 3 prohibition against torture,
    due to the effects of inter-clan militia violence on him, as a member
    of a minority clan.


14. The appellant claims the judge found, at [27], the appellant remains at
    risk of persecution on return to Mogadishu as a member of a minority
    clan. It is said that that conclusion should be determinative, in the
    appellant's favour, of his Article 3 claim.  The appellant claims the
    judge erred in determining the Article 3 claim solely on the basis of
    whether the appellant is likely to be destitute and forced to live in
    an IDP camp, and in his belief that the Article 3 claim was not put on
    any other basis.  The appellant had claimed that it was his personal
    characteristics that placed him at risk over and above the risk of
    destitution in an IDP camp.


15. Ms Jones submits the appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed because
    the Judge found that the appellant has not rebutted the statutory
    presumption is section 72(2).  However, she submits the judge found, at
    [27], the evidence of continuing discrimination and human rights abuses
    which in some circumstances may amount to persecution, persuaded him
    that the respondent has not discharged the burden which rests on him in
    relation to cessation.  She submits, the respondent has not challenged
    that finding and that finding was relevant to the consideration of the
    Article 3 claim.


16. Ms Jones submits the appellant's refugee status was granted in the
    context of the difficulties encountered by the family because they are
    from a minority clan. She referred to the answers given by the
    appellant's mother when she was interviewed by the respondent in
    support of her claim for international protection on 27th April 2004.
    She had referred to various occasions upon which the family were
    attacked at home by the militia, who were asking for money and
    valuables, and during which she was beaten.  The attacks had caused her
    husband and children to leave the area. That was the background to the
    grant of refugee status.


17. Ms Brown submits the judge accepted the objective material establishes
    continuing discrimination and human rights abuses, which in some
    circumstances may amount to persecution.  She submits the judge
    considered the Article 3 claim and at [36], the judge noted that the
    issues of risk had previously been considered by him, by reference to
    the asylum appeal.  She submits, if the appellant remains a refugee,
    that must be relevant to the consideration of the Article 3 claim, and
    the judge has failed to have regard to the risk that was referred to at
    paragraph [27], regarding continuing discrimination and human rights
    abuses, in his consideration of the Article 3 claim.  She submits,
    given the unchallenged evidence that the appellant and his mother were
    recognised as refugees on the basis of their minority clan status, the
    judge ought to have considered that as relevant, in assessing the
    Article 3 claim.


18. For the respondent, Mr Lindsay submits it was not in issue that the
    appellant is from a minority clan.  He submits that at paragraph [27],
    the judge was addressing Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention and
    the question of cessation.  That is, whether the appellant can no
    longer, because the circumstances in connection with which he has been
    recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.


19. Mr Lindsay accepts that an Article 3 claim was advanced by the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and was referred to in the
    skeleton argument relied upon by the appellant.  However, he submits,
    the submissions referred to were directed to the Article 3 risk that
    the appellant would be exposed to if he lived in an IDP Camp.  There is
    an unchallenged finding by the judge at [36], that the appellant will
    not have to resort to an IDP Camp, and the Article 3 claim could not
    succeed.


20. He submits the judge was entitled to have regard to the country
    guidance decision in MOJ when considering the Article 3 claim and it
    was not suggested by the appellant or found by the judge, that the
    country guidance should not be applied.  Mr Lindsay submits the
    background material referred to by the judge confirms that there are
    clan tensions, and some evidence of minority clans being at a
    disadvantage and facing some discrimination.  However, that background
    material could not in itself establish an Article 3 claim, or a real
    risk of a breach of Article 3. At its highest, there was some evidence
    that members of minority groups are likely to face political, social,
    economic discrimination and human rights abuses "which in some
    circumstances may amount to persecution".  This serves to demonstrate
    that an assessment of the individual circumstances is needed. The
    background material referred to by the judge, at paragraphs [24] to
    [26] of his decision was not sufficient to justify a departure from the
    country guidance that there is in general, no Article 3 risk and
    insufficient to establish a breach of Article 3 on the facts found by
    the judge following an assessment of the individual characteristics of
    the appellant.


Discussion


21. The effect of the certification under s72(2) of the 2002 Act and the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Poole that the appellant has not
    rebutted the statutory presumption under s72(2) is that the appellant
    cannot benefit from the prohibition from expulsion or return, set out
    in Article 33 of the Refugee Convention, and the Tribunal was obliged
    to dismiss the appeal in so far as the appellant claimed that removal
    of the appellant from the UK, or a decision to revoke the appellant's
    protection status, would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee
    Convention.


22. It is convenient to set out the relevant Articles of the Refugee
    Convention.  Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention states:


         "C:  This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling
         under the terms of section A if:

         ...

         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
         which he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist,
         continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of the
         country of his nationality ..."

23. Article 33 of the Refugee Convention is headed, 'Prohibition of
    expulsion or return ('refoulement') and states:


         "1.  No Contracting State shall expel or return ('refouler') a
         refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories
         where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his
         race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
         group or political opinion.

         2.  The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be
         claimed by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for
         regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he
         is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of a
         particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community
         of that country.".

24. The judge found, at [27], the respondent has not established that there
    has been a significant and non-temporary change in the circumstances in
    Somalia and particularly in Mogadishu.  Ms Brown submits the conclusion
    that the appellant continues to have a well-founded fear of persecution
    if he is returned to Somalia, that is not challenged by the respondent,
    is determinative of the consideration of the appellant's Article 3
    claim.


25. I do not accept that submission.  In Dang (Refugee - query revocation -
    article 3) [2013] UKUT 00043, the Upper Tribunal emphatically rejected
    the argument relied upon by Ms Brown.  The Upper Tribunal said:


         "4.  [Counsel for Dang] did not refer us to any authority for the
         proposition that, for as long as an individual has refugee status,
         there is a presumption that his or her removal would be a breach of
         article 3 . We reject this proposition, which we consider is simply
         wrong. The extracts we quote below from decided cases of the
         European Court of Human Rights (to which we were not referred)
         settle the issue so clearly that no further discussion is required
         on our part."

26. The Upper Tribunal referred to Saadi v. Italy [2008] ECHR 179 (Case No:
    377201/06) and Sufi & Elmi v. United Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1045, in
    support of the proposition that a Tribunal or Court considering the
    matter looks at the Article 3 risk prospectively at the date of the
    proceedings, and not by reference to the historical position, although
    the historical position may be relevant.  At paragraph [42], the Upper
    Tribunal said:


         "However, where an individual was recognised [as] a refugee at some
         point in the past, the past may be relevant in shedding light on
         the current situation and the prospective article 3 risk but it
         remains the case that the question whether there is a risk of
         article 3 ill-treatment must be answered at the date of the
         proceedings before the court and is forward looking."

27. The burden was on the respondent to establish changes of a significant
    and non-temporary nature, such that the appellant's fear of persecution
    could no longer be regarded as well-founded. I accept, as Mr Lindsay
    submits, paragraph [27] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    concerned with Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention and 'cessation'.
      Having found, at [27], that the respondent has not established that
    there has been a significant and non-temporary change in the
    circumstances in Somalia, the judge was required to consider whether
    the appellant's deportation will infringe his rights under the ECHR and
    in particular, Article 2, 3 and 8.


28. The Article 3 claim was addressed, as Mr Lindsay accepts, by the
    appellant in the skeleton argument that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  At paragraph 14(d) of the skeleton argument, the Article 3
    issue was summarised as follows:


         "Article 3 ECHR which applies regardless of the issues under the
         convention.  This will require consideration not just of the
         general country conditions in Mogadishu on the objective evidence
         today, but of the particular features of the appellant's case and
         the reality for him if sent there. It will require consideration of
         these issues both in a "paradigm" sense (i.e. a risk of harm caused
         by state or nonstate actors) and in a wider sense, applying the
         principles in GS and Said."

29. The appellant elaborated at paragraphs [37] and [38], and at [39], set
    out four submissions:


         "(a) First, returning the appellant to Mogadishu is reasonably
         likely to result in his being destitute and accommodated in an IDP
         camp.

         (b)  Second, the conditions he would suffer in an IDP camp are
         sufficiently connected to acts or omissions by individuals or group
         actors (including the Somali state) that he is not required to meet
         and "elevated threshold" in order to make good his claim; and

         (c)  Third, in any event, the Appellant's individual
         characteristics - including that he has no connections at all to
         Mogadishu, is effectively a British man in his late twenties in all
         but nationality law, does not speak the language like a native of
         Mogadishu and is unlikely in practice to be able to establish
         membership of even a minority clan - amount cumulatively to
         "exceptional circumstances" which do meet that elevated threshold.
         It would not be the mere destitution and poverty suffered generally
         by the Somali population.

         (d)  Fourth, those characteristics equally give rise to a real risk
         that the appellant will be targeted and subjected to prohibited
         treatment on return to an IDP camp in a "paradigm" sense, in
         particular of kidnap and ransom, but also to indiscriminate
         terrorist violence.".

30. It is well established that the nature of the prohibition imposed on
    states by Article 3 ECHR is absolute, irrespective of the conduct of
    the individual.  At paragraph [21] of his decision, in considering the
    issue of 'cessation', the judge stated:


         "... Consideration of the evidence relied on by the parties will
         also inform the Tribunal in relation to the human rights appeal
         insofar as the appellant relies on Article 3."

31. The judge clearly recognised that his decision as to whether the
    respondent has established that there has been a significant and non-
    temporary change in the circumstances in Somalia, would be relevant to,
    but not determinative of the Article 3 appeal.


32. Contrary to what is said by the appellant, the judge did not simply
    focus upon whether the appellant faces the prospect of life in an IDP
    camp on his return.  In addressing the appeal on Article 3 grounds, the
    judge clearly had regard to the appellant's individual characteristics
    and addressed the matters relied upon by the appellant in the skeleton
    argument.  The judge had noted the appellant had previously been
    granted asylum on the basis that he was a member of a minority clan.
    The judge referred to paragraph [420] of the decision in MOJ, in which
    the Upper Tribunal had recognised that it is likely that those who do
    find themselves living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in an IDP
    camp will be experiencing adverse living conditions such as to engage
    the protection of Article 3. The judge also referred to paragraphs
    [421] to [423] of the country guidance.  The Upper Tribunal stated, at
    [422]:


         "The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a real risk
         of persecution or serious harm or ill treatment to civilian
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no Somali National can
         succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection or article 3 claim.
         Each claim will fall to be decided on its own facts. As we have
         observed, there will need to be a careful assessment of all the
         circumstances of a particular individual."

33. The judge had found, at [27], that although the country guidance
    indicated that there would not be a real risk to a returnee by reason
    of clan-based violence in Mogadishu, the evidence of continuing
    discrimination and human rights abuses "which in some circumstances may
    amount to persecution", had persuaded the judge that the respondent had
    not discharged the burden that there has been a significant and non-
    temporary change in the circumstances in Somalia.


34. The appellant was granted refugee status as a member of a minority
    clan.  The judge accepted, at [30], the evidence of the appellant and
    his mother that they have no relatives remaining in Mogadishu.  The
    judge noted, at [31], that there must be a careful assessment of all
    the evidence, and he accepted the appellant has no relatives in
    Mogadishu on whom he could call.  The judge accepted that as a member
    of a minority clan, any clan membership would be of very limited
    assistance to the appellant and as the appellant was 16 when he arrived
    in the UK, he will have limited personal recollection of his time in
    Somalia.  The judge accepted, at [33], the appellant's parents would be
    unable to make any significant contribution towards the appellant's
    living expenses in Somalia.  The judge however noted the 'economic
    boom' in Somalia, and in Mogadishu in particular.  The judge considered
    the employment the appellant has previously had in the UK.


35.  It was in my judgement open to the Judge, having carefully considered
    all of the relevant evidence to conclude, at [36], that against the
    background evidence of economic improvements in Mogadishu, the
    appellant has failed to persuade the Tribunal that he would be unable
    to obtain employment such that he could maintain himself and remain in
    accommodation of his own rather than having to resort to an IDP camp.
    The judge noted the appellant has retained the ability to speak the
    Somali language.  Properly read, the reference at paragraph [36], to
    the Article 3 appeal not being put on any other basis, must in my
    judgement, be read as, not being put on any other basis than the
    individual characteristics of the appellant that the judge referred to
    and addressed.


36. It was in my judgement open to the First-tier Tribunal judge to dismiss
    the Article 3 claim for the reasons given.  Having noted the appellant
    had been granted refugee status in the past as the member of a minority
    clan, it was in my judgement open to the Judge to conclude that the
    historical position does not assist the appellant now, in light of the
    relevant country guidance, and a consideration of the individual
    characteristics of the appellant insofar as they are relevant to the
    assessment of the Article 3 claim.


37. It follows that the appeal before me is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


38. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          14th January 2020


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                14th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

