
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00068/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2017                  |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                         |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [a a]
                       (anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in his proceedings is the Secretary of State,  I
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born in 1988.  He arrived in the
    UK on 7 June 2005 and was granted asylum in the  same  month.   He  was
    further granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") on 27 November 2011.

 3. On 26 April 2016 in the Crown Court  at  Isleworth  the  appellant  was
    convicted of offences of assault occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  and
    common assault. He received a sentence of 16 months'  imprisonment  for
    the assault occasioning actual bodily harm and two months' imprisonment
    consecutive for the common assault.  As a result of  those  convictions
    the respondent wrote to the appellant notifying him of her intention to
    revoke his refugee status.  Thereafter, in  a  decision  dated  12  May
    2017, she decided to  refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights  claim,
    effectively being a decision to make a deportation  order  against  him
    under the UK Borders Act 2007.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell ("the FtJ") on 14 August 2017.   The
    FtJ allowed the appeal against the decisions to cease  the  appellant's
    refugee status and consequently the decision to refuse the human rights
    claim.

 5. The respondent challenges the FtJ's decision on a number of bases.   It
    is argued in the grounds that the FtJ had failed to make  any  findings
    on the evidence of the appellant, and thus the respondent  cannot  know
    whether or not the appellant's evidence was accepted.

 6. It is further argued that with  reference  to  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), the  FtJ  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the appellant could  not  now  be  returned  to  Somalia.
    Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ failed properly to consider  the
    question of conditions on  return  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances.

 7. In addition, it is contended  that  the  FtJ  had  not  considered  the
    returns package available to the appellant on return, and was in  error
    in concluding that such  a  package  would  not  be  available  to  the
    appellant because he would not be returning voluntarily.

 8. It is additionally argued that the FtJ was wrong to conclude  that  the
    situation in Mogadishu does  not  indicate  a  sufficient  and  durable
    change.

 9. There is in this appeal an issue of principle in terms of  whether  the
    respondent is entitled to rely  on  a  change  in  circumstances  in  a
    particular part of the country in order to invoke paragraph 339A(v) and
    Article 1C(5) to cease a person's  refugee  status.   However,  it  was
    accepted by the parties that if  the  FtJ  was  correct  in  his  other
    conclusions, that it  to  say  that  the  change  of  circumstances  in
    Mogadishu was not such as to bring  into  play  the  cessation  of  the
    appellant's refugee status, then the issue of principle to which I have
    referred does not need to be decided.

    Submissions

10. Mr Wilding relied on the written grounds.  It was contended that it was
    not clear what was  decided  in  terms  of  the  appellant's  evidence.
    Further, the FtJ had not made a  finding  on  the  facilitated  returns
    package.  Additionally, it was not clear why the FtJ said at [37]  that
    the appellant has no relatives living in Mogadishu,  or  no  access  to
    funds or remittances.

11. Similarly, although the  FtJ  said  in  the  same  paragraph  that  the
    appellant has no obvious skills, he speaks English and has worked in  a
    kitchen.  It is clear from MOJ & Ors that clan affiliation is different
    now.

12. If it is the appellant's case that there is not a significant change in
    Mogadishu, the burden shifts to the appellant to establish  that  fact,
    or that the situation has changed for the worse.  It was submitted that
    the FtJ may have had in mind the decision in AMM and others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445  (IAC)
    in concluding that there was no durable change.  This appellant is  not
    from Mogadishu and the Secretary of State relies on  MOJ  &  Others  to
    demonstrate that there is such a change in Mogadishu and that it  would
    be reasonable for the appellant to live there.  It was AMM  and  others
    that decided that as of August 2011 the change  in  Mogadishu  was  not
    sufficiently durable.  However, MOJ & Ors took  into  account  evidence
    three and a half years after the decision in AMM and others.   Although
    it was true that some individuals may not be covered by the decision in
    MOJ & Ors, the FtJ's consideration of this issue was erroneous.

13. It was further said in MOJ & Ors that it  was  for  the  person  facing
    return to explain why they would not be able  to  have  access  to  the
    economic opportunities afforded  in  Mogadishu  now.   It  was  however
    accepted that it was for the Secretary of State to establish  that  the
    circumstances had changed.

14. In submissions, Mr Slatter argued that the factual findings made by the
    FtJ are largely uncontentious and were findings that were open to  him.
    It was plain that the FtJ did consider MOJ & Ors, for example  at  [36]
    and [37] of his decision.  He also considered the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note ("CPIN") on Somalia version 2.0 dated June 2017  which
    he set out  at  [39].   He  had  before  him  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, and he made findings at [40].  It  was  submitted  that  the
    facts underpinning the appellant's case were not disputed,  save  to  a
    limited extent in the respondent's decision dated 12 May 2016 on page 5
    (there are no paragraph numbers) in terms of his being able  to  obtain
    support from relatives in the UK.  However, this was a matter that  the
    FtJ considered at [34], referring to the relatives that he has  in  the
    UK and the limited assistance that they have  previously  provided  for
    him.  He concluded that there  was  no  evidence  that  they  had  ever
    provided him with financial assistance or would be willing to do so  in
    the future, either in the UK or in Mogadishu.

15. Furthermore, at [40] the FtJ  pointed  out  that  there  was  no  "real
    dispute" about the contention that he has no relatives in Mogadishu.

16. As to any assistance he might be able to expect from his minority clan,
    at [342]-[343] of MOJ & Ors it  was  said  that  assistance  from  clan
    membership should not be overstated.

17. It was finally  submitted  that  for  this  appellant  the  changes  in
    Mogadishu have not been significant.

18. In reply, Mr Wilding contended that the submissions on  behalf  of  the
    appellant rely solely on [37] of the FtJ's decision.  Those submissions
    simply gloss over the questions that need to be asked,  as  illustrated
    by the FtJ's quotations at [38] and [39] from MOJ & Ors and the CPIN.

19. Although the FtJ had said at [40] that the appellant's asylum claim was
    based primarily on not having any family in Somalia,  that  was  not  a
    basis for a grant of asylum.  The FtJ's decision failed  to  take  into
    account the economic boom and the huge amount of inward  investment  in
    Mogadishu, as set out at [345] of MOJ & Ors.  In that case the Tribunal
    concluded that it was not just the wealthy elite  that  benefited  from
    the investment.

    Conclusions

20. Article 1C(5) of the 1941 Convention provides  one  of  the  conditions
    under which a refugee ceases to be  a  refugee.   Article  1C  provides
    that:

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of section A if:

         ...

         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
             which he has been recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality ...".

21. This mirrors the terms of paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules which
    at 339A(v) contain an identical provision.

22. Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive") at Article
    11, sub-paragraph (e) is again in identical terms.

23. Both the Rules and the Qualification Directive  contain  the  identical
    provision that the Secretary of State (or  member  state)  "shall  have
    regard to whether the change of circumstances is of such a  significant
    and non-temporary nature that the refugee's fear of persecution can  no
    longer be regarded as well-founded".

24. Paragraph 135 of the UNHCR Handbook  explains  that  the  circumstances
    referred to in Article 1C(5)  refer  to  "fundamental  changes  in  the
    country",  but  a  mere,  possibly  transitory,  change  in  the  facts
    surrounding the individual's fear which does  not  entail  "such  major
    change of circumstances"  is  not  sufficient  to  make  Article  1C(5)
    applicable.  It makes the point that a person's refugee  status  should
    not in principle be subject to frequent review to the detriment of  his
    sense of  security,  which  international  protection  is  intended  to
    provide.

25. The respondent's Asylum Policy Instruction on the revocation of refugee
    status, version 4.0 dated 19 January 2016 at  Section  4.5,  emphasises
    the point that the changes must be significant and non-temporary.

26. Now, it is true that in  MOJ  &  Ors  a  change  in  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu is identified  and  described  in  detail.   However,  it  is
    important to recognise that MOJ & Ors was not a case  on  cessation  of
    refugee status.  The guidance that it gives does refer  to  a  "durable
    change" but it seems to me to  be  clear  that  the  Tribunal  was  not
    intending to provide any steer in terms of whether or not the situation
    in Mogadishu was such as to  bring  into  play  Article  1C(5)  or  its
    domestic equivalent in terms of the Rules at 339A(v).  The Tribunal  in
    MOJ & Ors refers to a "durable change" but is careful to  qualify  that
    phrase in the remainder of the sentence of that guidance beginning  "in
    the sense that the Al Shabaab withdrawal from  Mogadishu  is  complete"
    etc.

27. In this case, the FtJ noted  at  [29]  that  it  was  accepted  by  the
    respondent that the appellant could not return to  his  home  area  (of
    Qoryooley) and that the respondent's position was  that  the  appellant
    could return to Mogadishu notwithstanding his minority clan status.

28. The FtJ gave an extensive summary  of  the  evidence  indicating  that,
    putting aside the question of Mogadishu for  the  moment,  the  general
    security situation in southern and central  Somalia  remains  volatile.
    He concluded, and was entitled to conclude on the evidence before  him,
    that the situation in Somalia as a whole was unstable.

29. With specific reference to Mogadishu, and the security situation there,
    the FtJ referred to various aspects of MOJ & Ors and the prospects  for
    its being a viable place of return for this appellant.  He referred  to
    the CPIN dated June 2017, quoting  paragraphs  2.3.6  to  2.3.12  which
    itself summarises aspects of MOJ & Ors.

30. At [43] the FtJ referred to the UNHCR's materials which  indicate  that
    violence is continuing on a regular  basis  indiscriminately  in  large
    parts of Somalia but including Mogadishu and in the outskirts where the
    IDP camps are located.  For example, the UNHCR letter dated  9  January
    2017 refers to the Home Office Country Information and Guidance  Report
    dated 15 March 2016 which, the  UNCR  letter  states,  "highlights  the
    precarious security situation in Mogadishu".

31. The FtJ recognised at [44] that there had been a significant change  in
    Mogadishu, but concluded that it had not always been for the better.

32. Considerations of internal relocation and cessation of  refugee  status
    are not the same.  Apart from anything else,  in  cessation  cases  the
    burden of proof is on the respondent to establish  that  the  necessary
    conditions for cessation exist.

33. Furthermore, it  does  seem  to  me  that  the  FtJ  was  justified  in
    concluding that neither the background evidence nor the decision in MOJ
    & Ors indicated that the changes in Mogadishu are "significant and non-
    temporary".  One only has to consider what was said in MOJ & Ors  about
    the position of persons in IDP camps, for example at  [411].   In  case
    there is any doubt that consideration of IDP  camps  comes  within  the
    exploration of the availability of return to Mogadishu,  at  [411]  the
    Tribunal referred to  Mogadishu's  IDP  camps  (as  well  as  tents  or
    makeshift shelters).  It is not the case therefore, that it was decided
    in MOJ & Ors that there was such a wholesale  change  in  circumstances
    that anyone could be returned to Mogadishu.  That is  plainly  not  the
    case.

34. As to what could be called the more fact-specific complaints about  the
    FtJ's assessment of the appellant's circumstances, it is plain that the
    FtJ was well aware of the considerations that needed to be  taken  into
    account in  assessing  the  viability  of  the  appellant's  return  to
    Mogadishu, although it seems to me that it is  not  strictly  necessary
    for me to explore this further given the FtJ's  sustainable  conclusion
    that the situation in Mogadishu is not such as would  bring  into  play
    the cessation clauses.  However, for completeness, I am  not  satisfied
    that there is  any  error  of  law  in  the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's circumstances and the viability of his return.

35. The facts were barely in dispute.  The FtJ accepted that the  appellant
    has no relatives in Mogadishu, and that he would not be in  receipt  of
    remittances from relatives in the UK.  He was entitled to come to those
    conclusions on the basis of the evidence before him.  He noted that the
    relatives in the UK in fact did not attend the hearing or  provide  any
    letters of support for the appellant.  He concluded that the  appellant
    would not appear to have any form of social network and does  not  have
    access to  funds.   Whilst  it  could  be  said  that  the  appellant's
    prospects for employment were not quite as bleak as the FtJ  suggested,
    the FtJ was entitled to point out that the  appellant  has  no  obvious
    skills and that what work he has done in the UK  has  been  limited  to
    working as "a kitchen hand".  It is also  to  be  remembered  that  the
    appellant is from a minority clan and whilst the significance  of  clan
    membership has been found to have changed, it was said  in  MOJ  &  Ors
    that the significance of support that could be derived from a  minority
    clan should not be over  emphasised.   The  FtJ  referred  to  relevant
    paragraphs of MOJ & Ors, namely [424]-[425].

36. Whilst it is true that the FtJ, contrary to what was decided in AN & SS
    (Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00063,  decided
    that the appellant would not have access to any  grant  from  the  Home
    Office on return (as described in MOJ & Ors) because he  would  not  be
    returning voluntarily, I cannot see that that  error  of  itself  could
    have made a material difference to the  FtJ's  conclusions  bearing  in
    mind the other factors he took into account, i.e. lack  of  connections
    with Mogadishu, lack of availability of remittances  from  the  UK  and
    lack of family support there.  Whilst it is true  that  unskilled  work
    does appear to be available in  Mogadishu,  the  FtJ  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant has no obvious skills that would  make  him
    an attractive employment prospect.

37. I am not satisfied therefore, that there is any error  of  law  in  the
    FtJ's  assessment  of  the  viability  of  the  appellant's  return  to
    Mogadishu and his conclusion that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant would end up in an IDP camp which was found in MOJ &  Ors  to
    be a situation that fell below acceptable humanitarian standards.

38. I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in the FtJ's decision
    in any respect.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 21/03/18

