
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                                  |On 3 June 2019                |
|                                                  |                              |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr D Sellwood, instructed by Birnberg Pierce & Partners
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).




 1. This is a decision to which both judges have contributed.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated  22.11.18,  dismissing  on
    asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of 6.2.17 to terminate his refugee status  and  to
    deport him from the UK, but allowing the appeal on articles 3 & 8  ECHR
    grounds. For ease of reference I will refer to the Secretary  of  State
    (who was the original respondent) as "the Secretary of State" and to FA
    (who the original respondent) as the "claimant."

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted permission  to  appeal  to
    the Secretary of State on 12.12.18.

 4. The claimant cross appealed against the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on
    refugee grounds but permission was refused in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by Designated First-Tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft on 7.1.19 and in  the
    Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 8.3.19.

 5. It follows that the only valid appeal before the Upper Tribunal is that
    of the Secretary of State against the decision allowing the  appeal  on
    articles 3 and 8 grounds. However, the claimant has served  a  Rule  24
    reply, which we have carefully considered.

 6. Whilst the claimant was legally represented at the appeal  hearing,  he
    chose not to attend.

 7. At the conclusion of the  oral  submissions  before  us,  both  parties
    sought and were granted permission to lodge and serve  within  14  days
    further legal case authorities touching on the issue as to  whether  it
    is open to a tribunal to find that a potential  deportee  would  be  at
    risk on return of treatment infringing article 3 rights  because  of  a
    claimed reasonable likelihood that he would go on  to  commit  criminal
    offences, thereby resulting in his punishment and  incarceration  in  a
    country of return where the treatment of detained persons has been held
    to be inhuman and infringing article 3 ECHR. The claimant  also  sought
    and was  granted  permission  to  cite  further  legal  case  authority
    relevant to the issue of delay raised by the Home Office in argument at
    the hearing but not foreshadowed in its submitted grounds.

 8. The claimant's further submissions, dated 13.5.19, were received by the
    tribunal  on  14.5.19.  The  appellant's  further  submissions,   dated
    14.5.19, were received by the tribunal on 14.5.19.  The  claimant  then
    made  yet  further  submissions,  dated  15.5.19,  we  have   carefully
    considered the respective submissions.

Error of Law

 9. In an otherwise careful and  detailed  consideration  of  the  relevant
    issues by the First-tier Tribunal, for the reasons  set  out  below  we
    have found such error of law in the making of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal as to require it to be set aside and remade by  remitting
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the  articles  3  and  8  ECHR
    issue only.

10. We remind ourselves that the issue is not whether we or  another  judge
    would have made the  same  decision  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    whether  the  decision  made  in  relation  to  Articles  3  and  8  is
    sustainable.

11. Having  heard  detailed  submissions  from  both  Mr  Lindsay  for  the
    Secretary of State as appellant and Mr Sellwood  for  the  claimant  we
    find as follows.

Late Issue

12. Mr Lindsay relied on the details grounds of application for  permission
    to appeal, which he accepted may not have been as clear as  they  could
    have been. He also sought  to  rely  and  to  make  submissions  on  an
    additional issue not addressed in the grounds but which appears to have
    been relied on by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  [144]  of  the
    decision, namely the apparent delay between the index offence committed
    in 2009 and the deportation decision  of  6.2.18.  At  [36]  the  judge
    recorded the submission on behalf of the Secretary of State that  there
    was no evidence to suggest that either the public interest had lessened
    or that the claimant's private and family life had strengthened  during
    the intervening period. Mr Lindsay argued that that submission had  not
    been addressed by the judge and thus there was an error of law  in  the
    reliance on delay made at [144] of the decision.

13. Mr Sellwood objected to the late introduction of the delay  issue  when
    it  had  not  featured  in  the  details  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal. Whilst he accepted  that  he  would  be  able  to
    address the issue in his oral submissions, he made the fair point  that
    he had not been able to prepare a detailed response, or to research any
    relevant authorities on the point. After hearing both  parties  on  the
    matter, we considered that in a detailed consideration as to whether  a
    person was  to  be  deported  to  the  DRC,  with  potentially  serious
    implications, we should enable all  relevant  issues  to  be  addressed
    rather than enforce  a  strict  procedural  adherence  to  the  pleaded
    grounds but would ensure that the claimant was not unfairly  prejudiced
    by the late introduction of the issue. For that  reason,  as  indicated
    above, at the end of the hearing we granted Mr Sellwood the opportunity
    to identify to the tribunal panel any relevant authorities  before  the
    making of the decision on the appeal.

Delay

14. Mr Lindsay raised the new ground of the judge's reliance  at  [144]  on
    delay as a material consideration in reducing the weight to be given to
    the public interest in deportation and  in  allowing  the  appeal.  The
    judge noted that 9 years had elapsed since the commission of the  index
    offence justifying deportation and that consideration of revocation  of
    refugee status began in 2012. The judge continued, "At  that  point  no
    action was taken against him. It must be inferred that having conducted
    a review at the time the Secretary of State did not consider the public
    interest necessitated the appellant's deportation."

15. We accept the submission that the judge was in error  of  law  to  draw
    such an inference, particularly given the wide ranging changes  to  the
    relevant provisions  governing  deportation  considerations  that  have
    taken place since 2012.  To reduce the weight of the public interest in
    this way because of the delay and the drawing of such an  inference  is
    an error of law, particularly as the public interest has not diminished
    over time and it cannot properly be  inferred  that  at  the  time  the
    Secretary of State did not consider the public interest to  necessitate
    the claimant's deportation.

16. In granting leave to make further submissions on the issue, we accepted
    that Mr Sellwood had not prepared the claimant's case to  address  this
    new  issue.  However,  we  find  nothing  in  the  further  submissions
    strengthens his argument or undermines the complaint of  the  Secretary
    of State that reliance on delay was not justified. Reliance is made  on
    RLP (Bah revisited - expeditious justice)  Jamaica  [2017]  UKUT  00330
    (IAC), where it was held  that  in  cases  where  the  public  interest
    favouring deportation  is  potent  and  pressing,  even  egregious  and
    unjustified delay on the part of the Secretary of State in  making  the
    underlying decision is unlikely to tip the balance in the  individual's
    favour in the article 8 proportionality balancing exercise. However, we
    accept  that  delay  is  a   potentially   relevant   factor   in   the
    proportionality exercise. In EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41,  the
    House of Lords held that delay may reduce the weight  otherwise  to  be
    accorded to firm and fair immigration control if the delay is a  result
    of a dysfunctional system which creates unpredictable, inconsistent and
    unfair outcomes. We also accept that, obviously,  during  a  period  of
    delay an applicant may develop closer personal and social ties, thereby
    strengthening a family and private life claim to remain in the  UK.  In
    MN-T (Colombia) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 893, the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that delay may lessen the weight of public interest  considerations  of
    deterrence and societal revulsion.  Further,  during  lengthy  delay  a
    foreign criminal may be able to demonstrate he has rehabilitated. These
    are all relevant considerations but the difficulty  for  Mr  Sellwood's
    argument is that these were not adequately addressed in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, where the judge  proceeds  on  the  assumption
    that it must be inferred from the delay that the Secretary of State did
    not  consider  the  public  interest  necessitated  deportation.   That
    assessment was flawed  and  unsustainable.  It  follows  that  on  this
    additional ground of reliance on delay, we also find  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in error of law.

Article 3

17. Following a lengthy and careful digest of the evidence and the findings
    and conclusions which are not at issue in this appeal,  the  article  3
    considerations are set out relatively briefly between [126]  and  [128]
    of the decision. In essence, the tribunal found that whilst there would
    be no Article 15(c) risk on return and no reason  to  depart  from  the
    Country  Guidance  of  BM  and  others  (returnees   -   criminal   and
    noncriminal) DRC CG [2015] 293 (IAC),  which  is  to  the  effect  that
    those who have been convicted of offences in the UK  are  not  at  real
    risk of  being  persecuted  or  suffering  serious  harm  or  treatment
    proscribed by Article 3 ECHR on return to the DRC, the judge  concluded
    that there was a risk of  destitution  infringing  Article  3  for  the
    following specified reasons set out at [128] of the decision:

      a) In light of the appellant's age when he left the DRC;

      b) The likelihood of there being no family support available to him on
         return;

      c) His lack of fluency in the main languages; and

      d) Obstacles in securing accommodation and  employment,  although  his
         partner confirmed that she would be willing to  financially  assist
         him in the short but not the longer term.

18. In his oral submissions, Mr Lindsay relied primarily on  two  decisions
    from the Court of Appeal, copies of which were provided to the panel:

      a) Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551;

      b) Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442.

19. Mr Lindsay's attack  on  the  destitution  reasons  can  be  summarised
    briefly as follows:

      a) The age when the claimant left the DRC is not determinative of  the
         issue of destitution;

      b) The absence of family support was contradicted by the finding  that
         the claimant's partner would assist him in the short term;

      c) As is clear from [76] the claimant spoke Lingala with  his  mother,
         save for certain words he cannot understand. He would therefore  be
         able to communicate in the DRC and  would  have  little  difficulty
         gaining fluency;

      d) Difficulties in securing accommodation and/or  employment  did  not
         amount to evidence of destitution.

20. Whilst we are satisfied that the judge did not make any mistake of fact
    or reach inconsistent findings in respect  of  these  issues,  we  have
    carefully  considered  whether  any  of  these   (or   other)   factors
    individually or taken together could justify a  conclusion  of  a  real
    risk of destitution sufficient to infringe Article 3  ECHR  bearing  in
    mind the high threshold required. In Said, the  Court  of  Appeal  held
    that to succeed in resisting removal on Article 3 grounds on the  basis
    of suggested poverty  or  deprivation  on  return  which  are  not  the
    responsibility of the receiving country or others, the person liable to
    deportation must show circumstances which bring him within the approach
    of the Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases.

21. Mr Sellwood sought to draw a distinction relying on  [29]  to  [30]  of
    Said, and submitted that the risk of destitution arises because of  the
    state's  indifference  to  circumstances  which  would  amount  to   an
    infringement of Article 3, effectively an  acquiescence  in  harm,  and
    thus submitted that the N threshold did not apply. However, we did  not
    find any such distinction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    applies on the facts of  this  case.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge's
    reasoning  for  finding  a  risk  of  destitution  did  not   rely   on
    indiscriminate violence in IDP camps or because of  the  conditions  of
    the country, or similar such considerations, but  specifically  because
    of the claimant's personal circumstances on return.

22. We find that the  judge  did  not  consider  the  very  high  threshold
    applicable and did not have regard to Said. Further, it is clear to  us
    that even taking the evidence at  its  highest,  the  circumstances  on
    return cannot  justify  such  a  conclusion  even  in  the  challenging
    environment that would face anyone returning to the DRC. In particular,
    as has already been noted, the appellant has a  good  understanding  of
    the language and the judge found  that  he  will  have  some  temporary
    financial assistance from his partner on return. In  the  circumstances
    we are driven to conclude this part  of  the  decision  is  flawed  for
    inadequate reasoning, insufficient to  justify  the  conclusion  of  an
    infringement of Article 3 on the basis of a risk  of  destitution  and,
    therefore, in error of law.

23. Mr Sellwood and the Rule 24 response points out that  the  prospect  of
    destitution was not the only  basis  upon  which  the  judge  concluded
    Article 3 would be infringed. We agree.  As  part  and  parcel  of  the
    Article 3 conclusion, at [128] the judge also found  a  "risk  of  (the
    claimant)  returning  to  drug  use  and  reasonable  risk  of  further
    incarceration in DRC." We also find this  conclusion  problematic  even
    though it is based on the unchallenged expert evidence, in part  of  Dr
    Kofi but to a greater extent of Dr Lackenby, summarised at [127] of the
    decision. Dr Lackenby considered that the appellant would be vulnerable
    to return to drug use, antisocial behaviour and/or criminal activity if
    deported to the DRC. The judge found or accepted, "This gives rise to a
    very real prospect of further detention in abject conditions."

24. We accept that the claimant has an appalling criminal  history,  having
    amassed some 19 separate convictions for 34 criminal  offences  between
    2004 and 2014. In January 2009 he  was  convicted  of  possession  with
    intent to supply Class A (cocaine) and Class  B  (cannabis)  controlled
    drugs, for which he was sentenced to a total term of four  years  in  a
    Young Offender Institute. During and even after his release  from  that
    sentence, he continued to offend, albeit to a  lesser  degree.  He  was
    also a member of a known criminal gang, though the First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that he was not particularly high in  the  hierarchy.  He  had
    also been given an Osman warning in 2017.  The  deportation  order  was
    made on the basis of the four year sentence,  on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation was conducive to the public good.

25. In essence, the argument is that because the  claimant  has  previously
    been convicted of drugs offences, despite all the  suggestions  in  the
    evidence adduced on his behalf that he is now a reformed character  and
    would remain drug-free, he should not be removed from the UK because he
    would go on to commit criminal offences in  the  DRC,  leading  to  his
    prosecution and imprisonment in what are accepted would  be  conditions
    infringing Article 3.

26. The argument is further advanced in Mr Sellwood's post-hearing  written
    submissions. It is not necessary to rehearse the well-established legal
    principles elaborated upon by Mr Sellwood, which are not in contention,
    but we readily accept that if there is a real risk of  a  person  being
    subjected to degrading or inhuman treatment in a particular country  so
    as to amount to an infringement of article 3, that would constitute  an
    absolute prohibition on expulsion, even if the  risk  arises  from  the
    subject's conduct or activity, and even if such activity  is  conducted
    in bad faith. In SSHD v Iftikhar Ahmed [1999] EWCA Civ 3003, the  Court
    of Appeal concluded that if an asylum seeker would in  fact  do  things
    after return which would put them at real risk  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason, there  is  an  entitlement  to  protection,  however
    unreasonable the conduct. In HJ (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31,  the  Supreme
    Court held that attention must be focused on what  the  claimant  would
    actually do if returned to his country of nationality. The fact that he
    could take action to avoid persecution does not  disentitled  him  from
    asylum if in fact he will not act in such a way as to avoid it, even if
    to fail to do so would be unreasonable.

27. We accept that article  3  is  a  non-derogable  right  prohibiting  in
    absolute  terms  torture  and  inhuman  or   degrading   treatment   or
    punishment, irrespective of the conduct of the person seeking  to  rely
    on such protection. However, we find Mr Sellwood's submissions and  the
    supporting legal authorities he cites  fall  short  of  supporting  the
    basis upon which Judge Bart-Stewart allowed the appeal under article 3,
    namely that the claimant would be vulnerable to further  drug  use  and
    criminal behaviour so as to give rise to the prospect of  detention  in
    conditions infringing article 3. We accept as well-made  the  Secretary
    of State's argument that the protection of article 3 cannot properly be
    construed so as to protect those who  freely  choose  criminal  conduct
    that if pursued would give rise to a real risk of treatment  infringing
    article 3. We accept that a distinction must sensibly be drawn  between
    on the one hand those who cannot help but,  or  who  are  alternatively
    entitled to, conduct themselves in a way that gives rise to a  risk  of
    treatment infringing article 3, and on the other those  who  choose  to
    commit crime or  engage  in  other  anti-social  and  illegal  activity
    through personal choice and/or for financial gain. Whilst even the most
    serious public  policy  considerations  cannot  override  the  absolute
    prohibition on treatment infringing article 3, there  is  an  important
    and significant  public  policy  consideration  that  to  construe  the
    protection of article 3 in the way the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    and for which Mr Sellwood contends would incentivise  criminal  conduct
    in the UK by claimants seeking to avoid deportation.

28. We readily understand and accept that the claimant would not  have  the
    same stable support structure available to him as he has in the UK  and
    on any view the risk of recidivism must be greater in the DRC  than  in
    the UK. We also acknowledge that to an extent both parties  are  trying
    to have their cake and eat it. For  example,  the  Secretary  of  State
    relies on the risk the claimant presents  for  the  protection  of  the
    public by reason of his drug dealing convictions as being sufficient to
    deport him but at the same time, in reliance on the suggestion that  he
    would not face a risk of return to offending on return, points out that
    there was no evidence that he is a drug addict or took  anything  other
    than cannabis whilst dealing in the harder drug of cocaine. We note the
    claimant's own evidence, summarised at [119-120] of  the  decision,  is
    that he had relocated away from his gang or peer associations  and  had
    not reoffended since 2014.

29. We find the core argument untenable, unsupported as it is by any  legal
    authority or precedent. This is not  an  argument  of  double  jeopardy
    where the claimant would face further punishment in  the  DRC  for  the
    crimes he committed and for which he was sentenced in the  UK.  Neither
    is this a situation akin to HJ (Iran) principles where  a  returnee  is
    entitled to pursue his political opinion, faith or sexual  orientation;
    we cannot accept that the claimant has the right to protection  because
    he is inherently  criminal  or  might  in  the  future  behave  like  a
    criminal. It is one thing to accept that if imprisoned because  of  his
    past behaviour he would face a real risk of incarceration in conditions
    infringing Article 3, but  it  is  entirely  another  to  suggest  that
    because he is of criminal inclination  or  outlook  the  tribunal  must
    proceed on the  expectation  that  he  would  commit  further  criminal
    offences in the DRC and in due course find himself detained in  inhuman
    conditions. If this argument were to be adopted in principle, it  would
    prove almost impossible to return to a wide range of  countries  around
    the world any person being deported on the basis  of  having  committed
    serious criminal offences in the UK.  We  find  no  authority  for  the
    proposition that one must look to see whether a returnee is  likely  to
    or might commit further offences so as face the risk  of  incarceration
    in unacceptable conditions infringing Article 3. In any event, we  find
    such a risk is speculative and far too remote.

30. It will be the claimant's free choice whether  to  continue  to  commit
    criminal offences on return. In the circumstances,  we  do  not  accept
    that any propensity to reoffend can be equated to an imputed or  innate
    characteristic, such as mental ill-health, or a genuinely held  belief,
    such as political opinion or religious faith. Committing crime  is  not
    central  to  the  claimant's  identity  such  as  to  entitle  him   to
    international protection from the consequences of a  deliberate  choice
    to offend. In our view, he cannot sensibly be entitled to international
    protection against the consequences of any future criminal conduct.  As
    stated in SE (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 256, an offender  cannot
    rely upon his own partially unreformed criminality as a factor relevant
    (in that case) to either his family or private life. Article 3 was  not
    argued in that case.

31. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above,  we  find  each
    aspect of the First-tier Tribunal Article 3 considerations  flawed  and
    as the judge combined them at [128] to reach the  conclusion  that  the
    high threshold had been reached, the decision on Article 3 was made  in
    material error of law.

Article 8 Consideration - Very Compelling Circumstances

32. We also heard Mr Lindsay's detailed arguments as to the Article 8  very
    compelling circumstances considerations set out in  the  decision  from
    [129] onwards. We accept that on the facts of  this  case  there  is  a
    considerable degree of overlap between Articles 3 and 8. At  [134]  the
    judge relied on: the claimant's young age when  he  left  the  DRC  and
    formative upbringing in the UK; a finding  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in the DRC (based on Dr Kodi's
    opinion); that he has no family in the DRC; that he "does not speak the
    language;" and has no accommodation or means of support. The judge went
    on to  note  that  the  claimant  poses  a  moderate  to  low  risk  of
    reoffending, which will remain the case if he continues on the path  of
    rehabilitation and lifestyle change.

33. Mr Lindsay highlighted concern at [134] where  the  judge  stated  "The
    offending history in itself does not prevent  him  being  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK," which does not  seem  to  acknowledge
    that the claimant's long criminal record, including offences before and
    after the index offence as well  as  offences  of  violence  whilst  in
    prison, and the serious nature of his  offending,  runs  counter  to  a
    claim of social and cultural integration in  the  UK.  In  Binbuga  the
    Court of Appeal specifically held that gang  membership  tells  against
    social integration and that integration connotes integration as a  law-
    abiding citizen, referring to a 'discontinuity in integration,' by  the
    commission  of  criminal   offences.   Further,   Binbuga   held   that
    rehabilitation carries little  or  no  weight  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise. The tribunal did not take these considerations into
    account.

34. In his submissions that the First-tier Tribunal failed to carry  out  a
    'broad evaluative judgement,' Mr Lindsay also drew  a  comparison  with
    the facts in Bossade (ss117A-D  interrelationship  with  Rules)  [2015]
    UKUT 00415 (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal found  no  very  significant
    obstacles to integration in circumstances where the DRC citizen came to
    the UK age 4 and lived in the UK for the following 25  years,  did  not
    speak Lingala and had no family in the DRC. It was submitted  that  the
    claimant is in a stronger position on return than Mr Bossade.

35.  Mr  Sellwood's  submitted  that  the  Article  8  conclusion  of  very
    compelling circumstances could survive a finding  that  the  Article  3
    assessment was flawed. His submissions largely sought to  rely  on  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, particularly the reports of Dr
    Kofi and Dr Lackenby. We accept that a holistic approach must be  taken
    to the decision as a whole rather than the piecemeal criticism in  some
    of Mr Lindsay's submissions.  However,  the  issue  before  us  is  not
    whether the available evidence was sufficient to justify  the  findings
    made but whether the findings made were sufficient to justify  allowing
    the appeal on either or both Article  3  or  Article  8,  applying  the
    correct legal principles, or whether the way in which reliance on those
    findings was approached was flawed so as to amount to a material  error
    of law.

36. Having heard from and  taken  into  account  the  submissions  of  both
    counsel, we accept that the Article 8 assessment and the factors relied
    on by the judge did in general  terms  amount  to  a  broad  evaluative
    judgement of the evidence but find that the analysis failed  to  accord
    adequate weight to the public interest, whilst giving undue  weight  to
    factors in the claimant's favour, at least some of  which  were  either
    neutral  factors  or  not  objectively  capable   of   being   accorded
    significant weight,  such  as  rehabilitation  or  the  fact  that  the
    claimant can speak but is not fully fluent in Lingala.

37. Further, it is clear  from  the  wording  of  paragraph  [141]  of  the
    decision that in reaching her conclusions on article 8  the  judge  had
    regard  to  the  circumstances  the  claimant  would  face  on  return,
    including that he was not fluent in the local language, before stating,
    "taken together I consider that these  are  compelling  circumstances."
    Not only did the judge fail to apply the relevant  threshold  of  "very
    compelling circumstances," but it is clear that the  flawed  Article  3
    findings were so entwined with the Article 8 considerations that it  is
    impossible to separate out a decision which we could  find  would  have
    justified  a  judge  allowing  the  appeal   on   Article   8   grounds
    independently of the flawed Article 3 findings.  Mr  Sellwood  accepted
    that given the terms of paragraph  [141],  it  would  be  difficult  to
    sustain  his  argument  that  the  Article  8  findings  could  survive
    independently. It is clear that the entire considerations  in  relation
    to both Article 3 and Article 8 will need to be remade.

38. In the circumstances, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot
    stand and must be set aside to be remade.

Remittal

39. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors infecting the First-tier
    Tribunal  decision  vitiates  all  other  findings  of  fact  and   the
    conclusions from those facts  so  that  there  has  not  been  a  valid
    determination of the issues in the appeal.

40. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    we do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within
    the Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

41. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     We set aside the decision.

                    We remit the appeal to be decided afresh in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        29 May 2019





Consequential Directions

   1)  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
      Birmingham;

   2) The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

   3) The appeal may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  with
      the exception of Judges Bart-Stewart and Woodcraft;



     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                      Dated 29 May 2019
