
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26th July 2018 and 5th November   |On 29th January 2019                 |
|2018                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     OA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as OA.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. The appellant is a Somali citizen, born in 1986. In August 2002  he
         was granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.  He  commenced
         his offending in March 2003. He was  convicted  of  numerous  motor
         vehicle/  driving  offences/theft  offences  which  resulted  in  a
         variety  of  sentences  ranging  from  conditional   discharge   to
         imprisonment. Full details of his offending  are  set  out  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal decision,  promulgated  on  9th
         May 2018. On 27th  August  2014  he  was  sentenced  to  16  months
         imprisonment and notified, for the fourth time, of the Secretary of
         State's intention to deport him. On 10th April 2015  the  Secretary
         of State notified him of an intention to cease his refugee  status.
         The decision to cease his refugee status on the basis that  Article
         1(C)(5) of the 1951  Refugee  Convention  and  paragraph  339(A)(v)
         applied and refuse his human rights claim was made on  9th  October
         2015. There is no statutory appeal  against  a  decision  to  cease
         refugee status. The lawfulness of that decision was not  challenged
         in  judicial  review  proceedings   although   any   challenge   is
         effectively incorporated into the appeal against the refusal of the
         claim for international protection and the  human  rights  claim  -
         Article 3 and 8. It is the appeal against this which led  to  these
         proceedings.

      2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's   appeal   on
         protection and human rights grounds (Article 3 and 8)  for  reasons
         set out in a decision promulgated on 9th May 2018. The Secretary of
         State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  and,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 30th  August  2018,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Kopieczek found material errors of law and set the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal aside to be remade. The essence of  the  errors
         of law found were:

           . Although the First-tier Tribunal found there was a  real  risk
             the appellant would be homeless and consequently  at  risk  of
             discrimination, harassment and arrest she  had  not  explained
             why those risks amounted to persecution;

           . The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to explain the connection
             between the real risk of persecution and a Convention reason.

      3. In 2017 the appellant was convicted of carrying a bladed weapon and
         sentenced to 12 weeks imprisonment.

      4. Before me the following findings were retained:

           . OA was born in 1986;

           . OA belonged to the minority Reer Hamar clan;

           . OA would be returning  to  Somalia  a  someone  'who  has,  in
             effect, cut all ties  with  Somalia  from  a  young  age.  Any
             distant relatives or friends who remained in Somalia would  be
             wary of offering assistance even if they were in a position to
             do so'. OA 'has no family of friends to whom he can  turn  for
             assistance in Somalia';

           . OA's mother would not be able to send much, if any,  money  to
             him in Somalia; it was unlikely that his siblings would assist
             financially.  He  would  have  'minimal,  if  any,   financial
             assistance';

           . OA was  a  former  drug  user  who  had  'some  mental  health
             problems' but would be unable to access the medication that he
             was receiving in the UK;

           . He had no real employment history and  limited  qualifications
             and he would not be able to find employment or accommodation;

           . OA would have difficulty gaining access to an  IDP  settlement
             which would result in  him  being  homeless  on  the  streets,
             having to sleep  on  the  streets  or  to  find  an  abandoned
             building;

           . OA belongs to a particular social group namely a returnee with
             no connections to his clan and a member of the Reer Hamar clan

         Refugee Status

      5. It is OA's case that the evidence and the preserved  findings  made
         by the First-tier Tribunal establish a  real  risk  that  he  would
         suffer treatment amounting to being persecuted and it would be  for
         his membership of the particular social group as identified by  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      6. Physical integrity and the denial of access to the  necessities  of
         life with the risk of violation of socio-economic rights may amount
         to a risk of serious harm. In the Australian case of Chen  Shi  Hai
         (2000) 201 CLR 293 it was  stated  that  the  severe  disadvantages
         imposed  on  the  applicant  "would  deny   the   appellant   basic
         entitlements enjoyed by other children in [China]  and  fundamental
         rights internationally enshrined in standards accepted as universal
         and basic...". At [303]  the  court  said  "Ordinarily,  denial  of
         access to food, shelter, medical treatment  and,  in  the  case  of
         children, denial of an opportunity to obtain an  education  involve
         such a significant departure from the standards  of  the  civilised
         world as to constitute persecution." As said by Hathaway[1]:  "This
         is not to suggest, of course, that the relevance of  socio-economic
         rights to the refugee enquiry means that everyone who  is  poor  or
         who leads a life with  few  material  advantages  can  successfully
         advance a claim to refugee status. The focus is rather  on  whether
         the risk to socio economic rights can be said to  deny  the  person
         concerned that which is required  for  an  "adequate"  standard  of
         living."

      7. The Refugee Convention is engaged where there has been a  breakdown
         in the ability of the State to  provide  the  necessary  protection
         between the individual and the State - persecution = serious harm +
         a failure of state protection.  As discussed in  Hathaway  and  the
         case law he refers to, and the caselaw to which  my  attention  was
         drawn by Mr Toal, there must be a  denial  or  lack  of  access  or
         inability to provide access which  has,  as  a  consequence,  (even
         though not the primary consequence) deprivation,  hunger,  lack  of
         accommodation, lack of medical care.

      8. Mr Toal submits that the appellant will be persecuted by reason  of
         having no connection to his clan and/or for reason of his  minority
         status.  Were it not for that, the appellant would, Mr Toal submits
         be able to access sufficient resources to enable his  socioeconomic
         rights not to be  infringed  such  as  to  lead  to  the  level  of
         deprivation described. Underpinning the  bleak  assessment  of  the
         appellant's predicament and prospects on returning to Mogadishu is,
         Mr Toal submitted, the significance of  having  no  effective  clan
         ties. The Somali government  has,  Mr  Toal  submitted,  failed  to
         ensure a non-discriminatory allocation of resources and has  failed
         to ensure that lack of an effective tie to a clan is  not  a  basis
         upon which resources are allocated or withheld. The primary  source
         of the harm is not, he submits, the  state,  but  the  lack  of  an
         effective tie to his clan; the state does  not  have  an  effective
         mechanism to prevent, or at the very least,  reduce,  that  serious
         harm from occurring. It is, he submits a failure of  the  State  to
         ensure its international obligations to  stop  discrimination  from
         occurring, in this case because the appellant has no effective  tie
         to a clan which, as said in MOJ,  now  enables  a  form  of  social
         welfare support to be provided.

      9. Although an attractive argument on its face, this does not  address
         the requirements of the Refugee Convention  and  the  Qualification
         Directive. In so far as it is relevant to Article 3 ECHR see below.

     10. The submission by Mr  Toal,  in  order  to  successfully  establish
         sufficient nexus between the claimed persecution and the identified
         social group, requires the Somali authorities to  undertake  social
         engineering to change the way in which a clan provides the  support
         he submits they  should  be  providing  in  order  to  provide  for
         protection, the lack of which would amount to persecution. The clan
         structure of Somalia has changed over the years, as set out in  MOJ
         & ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC),
         such that a role of the clans is now to assist  in  social  welfare
         programmes or assistance.    The  clans  no  longer  wage  war  and
         violence  upon  each  other  in  search  of  influence,  power  and
         territory. It cannot be sustainably  argued  that  for  the  Somali
         authorities to be responsible, they are to require a clan to  build
         up its base in order to provide services as deemed appropriate  and
         that the failure of a clan to undertake this lies with  the  Somali
         authorities.  The corollary of that would be that  the  clan  would
         provide  legal   and   policing   mechanisms,   to   enforce   non-
         discrimination policies because to do otherwise would  render  such
         policy and provision meaningless and unenforceable. This  has  only
         to be said to  show  that  the  submission  is  not  only  circular
         (requiring the reintroduction of the power of the  clans  with  the
         possible con-commitant violence) but inherently contradictory. What
         is being demanded is social engineering, to an extent  that  cannot
         reasonably be expected, to  require  non-state  agents  to  provide
         protection that the government is not providing.

     11. In AM & AM (armed conflict:  risk  categories)  Somalia  CG  [2008]
         UKAIT 00091, (considered in HH (Somalia) & Ors v Secretary of State
         for  the  Home  Department  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426),  the  Tribunal
         considered the potential persecution of clan members. The change in
         clan activities was reflected in MOJ. In AM  and  AM  the  Tribunal
         held that the situation at that time in Mogadishu was such that  it
         would  amount  to  persecution,  serious  harm  and  ill  treatment
         contrary to Article 3 to return anyone there unless they had  close
         relationships with powerful actors[2].  [40]  of  MOJ  acknowledged
         that AM and AM considered that the situation in Mogadishu was  such
         that (in parentheses) it would be contrary to Article 1A(2) Refugee
         Convention to  require  anyone  to  return  there  save  for  those
         connected with powerful actors. This is  a  generalisation  of  the
         findings in AM and AM. At [201] in AM and  AM  the  Tribunal  found
         that  persons  who  have  "failed  to  show   any   personal   risk
         characteristics beyond their  nationality  and  home  area"  cannot
         identify a Convention reason at that level. More  was  needed.  But
         the emphasis in AM and AM was  not  protection  as  a  refugee  but
         Article 3 protection.

     12. It is important not to conflate the elements required to  enable  a
         finding that a person is a refugee. That the finding that  OA  will
         be homeless and at risk of violence amounts to serious  harm.  That
         is not persecution without more. As I have set out above,  in  this
         appeal it was found that OA falls within a particular social group.
         But although a particular social group has  been  found  to  exist,
         what has not been established is  that  OA  is  at  risk  of  being
         persecuted. That he will be homeless, without employment and likely
         to be a victim of violence is established given the findings of the
         First-tier  Tribunal  which  have  not  been  disturbed,  but   the
         causative link between that and his social group is not  there.  It
         would only be there if that group could itself be in  the  position
         of being able to and indeed expected to and required to  provide  a
         level of protection that could not exist without such a large scale
         of social engineering as would replace Somali authority with a clan-
         based authority answerable to no-one save other clan members.  Even
         though the causal link does not  have  to  be  a  primary  or  very
         significant link, there has to be some nexus. There is no causative
         link between the serious harm that OA will be likely to suffer  and
         his membership of a particular social group. That he  will  not  be
         able to access  protection  does  not  amount  to  persecution,  as
         required in order to be recognised as a refugee.

         Article 3

     13. Mr Toal submitted that the dire circumstances  in  which  OA  would
         find himself would amount to serious harm and a breach  of  Article
         3. He relied upon the Tribunal's  country  guidance  decisions  and
         submitted that the decision in Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 in  so  far
         as it dealt with IDPs and article 3 was obiter and  should  not  be
         followed because Burnett LJ, who gave the lead judgment, had failed
         to have regard to relevant country guidance. Mr Toal also, however,
         acknowledged that Said was a judgment of the Court of Appeal  which
         has not been subsequently distinguished or rendered inapplicable.

     14. The Court of Appeal identified the different basis of consideration
         for a refugee claim and a claim under Article 3 ECHR and  confirmed
         that an appeal on Article 3 grounds which suggested that the person
         concerned would  face  poverty  on  removal  should  be  viewed  by
         reference to the test in N v UK (2008) 47 ECHR  39  which  followed
         the House of Lords decision in N [2005] UKHL 31.

     15. I do not agree that the references in Said were obiter - they  were
         the fundamental issue before the Court of Appeal. As held [31]:

             "I entirely accept that some of the observations made  in  the
             course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to  suggest
             that if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely
             to end up having to establish himself in  an  IDP  camp,  that
             would be sufficient to engage the protection of article 3. Yet
             such  a  stark  proposition  of  cause  and  effect  would  be
             inconsistent  with  the  article  3   jurisprudence   of   the
             Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic courts.
             In my judgment the position is accurately stated in para  422.
             That  draws  a   proper   distinction   between   humanitarian
             protection and article 3 and recognises  that  the  individual
             circumstances of the person concerned must be  considered.  An
             appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
             would face impoverished conditions of  living  on  removal  to
             Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and
             Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N
             case. Impoverished conditions which were the direct result  of
             violent activities may be viewed differently  as  would  cases
             where the risk suggested is of direct violence itself."

     16. The expert report refers to OA  being  particularly  vulnerable  to
         violence. Mr Toal drew attention to the report's  conclusions  that
         OA would be unlikely to gain access to an IDP camp, that there  was
         a clear and significant risk of violence/detention  by  the  police
         and societal  response  to  drug  abuse  all  constituted  personal
         circumstances  that  crossed   the   threshold   into   article   3
         mistreatment such as to  fall  within  [31]  of  Said.  The  report
         records different views as to  the  risk  of  arrest  or  violence.
         Although they are expressions of opinion validly held,  it  is  not
         possible to conclude from those opinions that the risk likely to be
         faced by OA would approach the threshold in N. I do not accept that
         the report can be seen as bringing,  or  potentially  bringing,  OA
         within the final sentence of [31] of Said.

     17. In so far as reference was made to MSS v Belgium and Greece  (2011)
         53 EHRR 28, the Strasbourg Court decided there would be a violation
         of Article 3 because the dire conditions which MSS  would  face  in
         Greece  whilst  his  asylum   claim   was   considered   were   the
         responsibility of the Greek authorities.  As  set  out  above,  the
         responsibility for the conditions in Somalia do not  lie  with  the
         Somali authorities.

     18. Removal of OA to Somalia will not render him at risk of  breach  of
         Article 3.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 9th January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] The Law of refugee Status, 2nd edition, p230
[2] Summary taken from MOJ [35]

