
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00085/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2016                               |On 11 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Marceline Sisango
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Marceline Sisango, is a  female  citizen  of
    the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and was born on 1 January  1982.
    The appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  26  March  2009  with
    indefinite leave to remain as a refugee having been granted leave under
    a Refugee Resettlement Programme.  She has four daughters with  her  in
    the United Kingdom: Z (born 1989), Y (born 2002), A (born 2008)  and  C
    (born in 2009).  In  2011,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm to  one  of  her  daughters  and  common
    assault on the same daughter over a two year period (2009 - 2011).  She
    received a community order and a six month supervision requirement.  On
    13 August 2013, the appellant was convicted at Norwich Crown  Court  on
    two accounts of cruelty  to  a  child,  assaults  upon  her  two  elder
    daughters (between September 2011 - September 2012).  She was sentenced
    to four years' imprisonment.   On  22  July  2014,  the  appellant  was
    notified by the respondent that  she  intended  to  cease  her  refugee
    status invoking Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The UNHCR was invited to comment  and  duly  did  so.  By  a
    decision dated 16 September 2015, the respondent decided to deport  the
    appellant to DRC.  The appellant appealed against that decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Landes; Mr Sandall)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 February 2016 allowed the appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of  appeal.   First,  the  Secretary  of  State
    challenges the Tribunal's findings as regards Section 72  of  the  2002
    Act.  At [34], the Tribunal found that the appellant had not  "set  out
    deliberately to cause harm however much she should have  realised  that
    was what she was doing".  The grounds point out that the appellant  had
    not accepted that she had done anything wrong and further that she  had
    already committed offences of actual bodily  harm  and  common  assault
    against one of her daughters in 2011.  The  Tribunal  had,  in  effect,
    gone behind the criminal conviction which they were not entitled to do.
     Further, the Tribunal had failed to give any proper reasoning for  its
    conclusion that the appellant "poses no real risk of repetition of  the
    same [offences against  the  children]  or  a  similar  offence."   The
    grounds point out that  the  appellant  will  be  seeking  to  see  the
    children and may be allowed future contact with  them.   The  appellant
    last saw the children in July 2015.  The  children  are  in  long  term
    foster care following a care  order  made  in  March  2014.   There  is
    currently no written contact between the appellant and the children.

 3. I am not satisfied that the  Tribunal  has  gone  behind  the  criminal
    conviction as asserted in the grounds  of  appeal.   The  Tribunal  has
    discussed the motivation of the appellant's offending in the  light  of
    the OASys Report which is part of the evidence before it.  The Tribunal
    has, quite properly, sought to use the report and the other evidence to
    assess the actual risk of  the  appellant  reoffending.   The  findings
    which the Tribunal made at [34] are of vital importance because  it  is
    these findings which rebut the certificate under Section 72 of the 2002
    Act.  The Tribunal noted at [29] that a local authority key worker  (Ms
    Barnard) had written an email which was  copied  in  the  OASys  Report
    stating that "I agree with probations view that [the  appellant]  would
    not be a risk to other children."  The Tribunal made the very  specific
    finding (available to it on the evidence) at [34]  that  the  appellant
    would only "potentially be a risk to the children she  lives  with  and
    exercises parental authority over and who are old enough  to  challenge
    her authority."  A risk might also arise if she were on  her  own  with
    those children or, if not alone, with  someone  who  shared  her  views
    about discipline.

 4. Granting permission Judge Gill, found that it was "arguable  the  panel
    may have erred in that,  in  effectively  discounting  the  risk  to  a
    section of the community," the Tribunal had ignored the fact that  such
    children were "arguably part of the community."  Judge Gill  cites  the
    example of convicted perpetrators of domestic  violence  against  their
    partners as being regarded as posing a  risk  to  women  at  large  (in
    circumstances where the relationship  leading  to  the  conviction  had
    ended).  Whilst I note Judge Gill's comments, I am satisfied  that  the
    Tribunal has correctly considered Section 72. The Tribunal properly had
    regard to EN (Serbia) [2009] EWCA Civ 630 at [45] where  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that, "so far as danger and 'danger to  the  community'  is
    concerned, the danger must be real, but if a person is convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and there is a real risk of  its  repetition
    is likely to constitute a danger to the  community."   I  am  satisfied
    that the Tribunal has considered whether the  actual  circumstances  in
    which the risk posed by the appellant  constitutes  a  "real"  risk  as
    understood in EN (Serbia) terms.  For the reasons that  it  has  given,
    the Tribunal was entitled to regard the risk as  "limited  to  specific
    circumstances."  I do not concur with Judge Gill's observation  that  a
    risk to the appellant's own children (which  is  not  likely  to  occur
    given that they are in care and separated  from  her  and  she  has  no
    unsupervised access to them) still constitutes a risk to the  community
    at large.  I am not satisfied that, in the context of  Section  72  and
    the guidance provided by EN (Serbia) the  Tribunal  has  erred  in  the
    approach which it has taken.  It is therefore entitled to  its  finding
    at [34] that:

         We are satisfied in actual risk terms there  is  no  real  risk  of
         repetition of the same or a similar offence and  we  are  satisfied
         therefore that the presumption of the appellant as a danger to  the
         community has been rebutted.  This is not to minimise  the  serious
         nature of her crime but the provisions are not just  based  on  the
         serious nature of a crime but also on the actual  danger  posed  by
         the appellant and the future risk.

 5. I consider that to  be  an  accurate  and  lawful  application  of  the
    necessary test.  It follows that the Tribunal did not  err  in  law  in
    finding that the appellant had rebutted the Section 72 presumption that
    has constituted a danger to the community.  There is  no  challenge  to
    the Tribunal's findings  [28];  the  appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumption that she was convicted of a particularly serious crime.

 6. The second ground of appeal concerns the cessation of  the  appellant's
    refugee status.  The Tribunal correctly identified that the  burden  of
    proof  as  regards  cessation  rested  on  the  respondent  [39].   The
    respondent needs to show that  the  circumstances  in  connection  with
    which the appellant had been recognised as  a  refugee  had  ceased  to
    exist.  The Tribunal was well aware that the appellant appeared to have
    lied  during  the  Refugee  Resettlement  Programme  and  subsequently,
    notwithstanding her deceitful conduct, the Tribunal observes [42]  that
    "the  picture  described  of  the  appellant  is  consistent  with  the
    background material and the conditions in the east in particular of the
    DRC in 1999."  The Tribunal found that, notwithstanding the end of  the
    civil war in the DRC, women in the position of the appellant  continued
    to face risks.  At [44], the Tribunal found:

         Given the conflict still ongoing in the appellant's home area [DRC]
         and the references in the background material to sexual and gender-
         based violence being used as a weapon of war in the Congo I am  not
         satisfied that so far as the appellant's home  area  was  concerned
         and the circumstances in which the appellant was  recognised  as  a
         refugee had ceased to exist.   There  was  still  conflict  in  the
         appellant's home area.  The appellant  had  been  recognised  as  a
         refugee (as opposed to being entitled to  humanitarian  protection)
         but as a woman given the prevalence of violence against  women  and
         girls with impunity throughout the country...she  would  have  been
         recognised as member of a particular social  group  and  given  the
         notorious use of rape as a weapon of  war  by  both  sides  of  the
         eastern DRC she would have been at risk of persecution on return.

 7. The Tribunal went on to make very  detailed  findings  as  to  why  the
    appellant could not relocate  internally  within  DRC.   The  appellant
    would return on her own to DRC.  She had never worked outside her  home
    or family situation and her education was  minimal.   Her  reading  and
    writing of Swahili was "basic" whilst her English was limited.  Swahili
    is not used in the capital of  DRC  (Kinshasa)  where  the  predominant
    languages are Lingala and French.  The appellant has a disability  [47]
    involving mobility problems in her left leg to which she was  receiving
    treatment before she  went  to  prison  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    possibility of amputation is a real one.  The  Tribunal  accepted  [49]
    that, coming from a village in the east of  DRC,  it  is  possible  the
    appellant had never been to Kinshasa or other large city in DRC and she
    might be safe from  the  risks  facing  her  in  her  home  area.   The
    possibility of the appellant being supported from the United Kingdom by
    her former partner (now living in  Australia)  was  considered  by  the
    Tribunal [50] but it  was  not  a  real  prospect.   Support  from  the
    appellant's brother who lives in Norwich in a Norwich DRC community  is
    likely to be sporadic [51].  The  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant
    struggled to be in employment or support herself with  the  limitations
    which she had including her physical  and  mobility  problems  conclude
    they would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  a
    (relatively safer) city environment in DRC.

 8. The second ground of appeal challenges those findings of  the  Tribunal
    but, in my opinion, the  challenge  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the detailed findings of the  Tribunal  which,  as  I
    have noted, was supported by reference to relevant evidence.   Contrary
    to what is stated in the grounds, it was not for the appellant to prove
    that she would be destitute outside her home area of DRC  but  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect to her live outside her home area  (see
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5).

 9. I am satisfied therefore, that the Tribunal has given clear and  cogent
    reasons for finding that the appellant was able to rebut the Section 72
    presumption.  I am satisfied also that  the  Tribunal  has  given  good
    reasons for concluding that the respondent had failed to discharge  the
    burden of proof and the appellant would not be at risk in her home area
    of the DRC whilst it was also entitled to conclude (for the  reasons  I
    have given above) it would be unduly harsh to expect the  appellant  to
    relocate within DRC to a large city, such as Kinshasa.  In the light of
    those  findings,  the  Tribunal  was  correct  to  conclude  that   the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom to  DRC  would  breach  her
    rights under the 1951 Refugee Convention.

10. The grounds of appeal also challenge the judge's finding that there was
    a  genuine  subsisting  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
    children.  Judge Gill, granting permission,  appears  to  have  assumed
    that the Tribunal had allowed the appeal in addition  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  However, that is not the case.  Despite finding  that  the  best
    interests of the children would be met by the  appellant  remaining  in
    the  United  Kingdom  [82]  the  Tribunal  considered  the  appellant's
    deportation would be proportionate under Article 8 that there  were  no
    very compelling circumstances that outweigh the public interest in  her
    deportation.  The question of whether the Tribunal was right  or  wrong
    in finding  that  there  was  a  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the children is, therefore, not relevant.  In any  event,
    the challenge contained  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  ground  3  is
    immaterial given that I have found that the appellant succeeds  in  her
    appeal on refugee grounds.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 4 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
