
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00008/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 September 2017                        |On 23 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Mr gip van le
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(22/05/17)
     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (04/10/17)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was recognised as  a  refugee
    and granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United  Kingdom  in  1989
    and who has lived here since.  He appeals with permission  against  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Telford  promulgated  on  21
    February 2017 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State to:

      i) revoke his protection status;

     ii)  refuse a human rights claim;

    iii) that his case was excluded from refugee protection by Section 72 of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

     iv) that he was excluded from humanitarian protection;

      v) that having had regard to paragraphs  398,  399  and  399A  of  the
         Immigration Rules his removal would not be in breach of the  United
         Kingdom's obligations pursuant to the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The appellant submits that:-

      i) he does not constitute a danger to  the  community  in  the  United
         Kingdom and therefore Section 72 of the 2002 Act should not apply;

     ii) that the respondent had not established that the cessation  of  the
         provision of the Refugee Convention applies to the circumstances of
         this case;

    iii)  that  his  removal  would  on  the   facts   of   this   case   be
         disproportionate in that he meets paragraph 399A of the Immigration
         Rules, alternatively that there are very  compelling  circumstances
         such that removal would be disproportionate.

 3. It is necessary to set out in  some  detail  the  basis  on  which  the
    appellant acquired leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the
    sequence of events which lead to the respondent's decision.

 4. The appellant was born in Vietnam in  1963.  His  parents  were  killed
    during the war and in 1979, he and his three siblings travelled to Hong
    Kong where they lived initially in a refugee camp. It was there that he
    met his wife, also a Vietnamese national, and where their son was  born
    in 1988. In 1989 the family moved  to  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Orderly Departure  Programme.  They  were  recognised  as  refugees  on
    arrival and were granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.

 5. The appellant and his wife were divorced in 1995,  and  she  has  since
    remarried. He has an extended family here, as does his former wife.

 6. The appellant has an extensive criminal record. Between 21 October 1996
    and 6 October 2015, he was convicted on 21 occasions  for  42  offences
    most of which were of a relatively minor nature, resulting in fines  or
    short periods of imprisonment but on 30 June 2011 he was  convicted  of
    burglary and sentenced to 165 months'  imprisonment,  as  a  result  of
    which he was served with a notice of liability to deportation. This was
    later withdrawn and on 24 February 2012 he was issued  with  a  warning
    letter to the effect that if he were to come to  adverse  attention  in
    the future, the issue  of  whether  he  should  be  deported  could  be
    reconsidered.

 7. On 6 October 2015, the appellant was convicted of  possessing  class  A
    drugs with intent to supply and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
    Consequent to that, on 15 June 2016, the respondent  served  notice  on
    the appellant that she intended to revoke his  refugee  status  with  a
    view to deporting him to Vietnam. Notification the intention to revoked
    was also served on UNHCR.

 8. On 10 October  2016,  UNHCR  responded  to  the  respondent's  proposed
    cessation of refugee status, noting that the  decision  to  invoke  the
    cessation clauses appeared to  have  been  triggered  by  his  criminal
    convictions which it considered ran the risk  of  improperly  modifying
    the cessation clauses by adding the provisions of Article 33 (2) of the
    Refugee Convention, it being the view of UNHCR  that  this  risk  flows
    also from article 14 (4) of  the  Qualification  Directive  2004/83/EC.
    UNHCR also noted that they had not been supplied with information as to
    the circumstances under which the appellant had been  recognised  as  a
    refugee, and so it was not possible to give a substantive opinion as to
    whether Article 1 (C) (5) of the Refugee Convention was invoked.

 9. On 13 May 2016, the respondent made a  deportation  order  against  the
    claimant and on 14 May 2016 decided to revoke protection status and  to
    refuse a human rights claim.  In doing so, she noted that many who  had
    fled Vietnam in the same circumstances as the  appellant  had  returned
    without being harmed.

10. It was, in any event, her view that  the  claimant  was  excluded  from
    Refugee protection by section 72 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and from  humanitarian  protection  by  the  effect  of
    paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules.

11. The respondent also considered that the  claimant's  deportation  would
    not be in breach of articles 3 or 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    having had due regard to the relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules relevant to deportation.

12. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 3 February 2017.  The
    appellant was represented by counsel who was instructed only to  submit
    that the matter should be adjourned.  That application was refused  for
    the reasons given by the judge at [9] - [11], [14]and [17]- [19]

13. The judge found that:

      i) the appellant had not rebutted the presumption that he  presents  a
         serious risk to the community [27];




     ii) the appellant  did  not  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules [28]; that his case  was  not  exceptional  [28];
         that article 8 did  not  apply  [28]  there  being  [29]  no  valid
         separate  claim;  that  the  appellant's  evidence   was   entirely
         incredible [28]; that his "private life  rights  are  properly  and
         lawfully breached due to his poor immigration history"  [28];  that
         the appellant had no family life here [29], [30];



    iii) even if article 8 were engaged [31], removal would  nonetheless  be
         proportionate.

14. On that basis, he dismissed the appeal.

15. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in failing :

      i) to give adequate consideration of article 8, given  the  acceptance
         that he had lawfully resided in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
         half his life [2.1.1];




     ii) to have regard [2.1.2]  to  the  relevant  rules  and  legislation,
         including section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002, as well  as  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         [2.1.3], instead focusing  improperly  on  paragraph  276ADEof  the
         Rules [2.1.4];



    iii) to take into account the appellant's long lawful residence  in  the
         UK, the length of his absence from Vietnam and the lack of any ties
         to Vietnam [2.1.5] and [2.1.6]

16. On 23 August 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission on
    all grounds.

17. I heard brief submissions from both representatives at the  hearing  on
    22 May 2017, both representatives being in effect in agreement that the
    decision of Judge Telford contained so many errors that it needs to  be
    set aside and remade in its entirety.

18. It is regrettable that nowhere in Judge Telford's decision is there any
    indication that he was aware that this was a revocation  of  protection
    appeal, or that it was a deportation appeal; nor does it appear that he
    paid any regard to the  relevant  statutory  provisions,  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules, or relevant case law.  Judge Telford in a number  of
    passages [28], [30] and [32] appears  to  have  used  stock  paragraphs
    which had little or no proper application in this appeal.

19. Judge Telford failed to have proper regard to the following matters:

      i) That the  immigration  decisions  in  issue  was  a  revocation  of
         protection as well as a refusal of a human rights claim;




     ii)  Whether,  revocation  of  refugee  status   notwithstanding,   the
         appellant was at risk of serious harm on return to Vietnam;



    iii) That the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are  set  out
         in paragraphs A398, 398 399A




     iv) That paragraph 276ADE was irrelevant given that the appellant could
         not in any event meet the suitability  requirements  owing  to  his
         convictions;



      v) That both sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act were applicable;



20. In addition, Judge Telford erred:

      i)  In  concluding  that  the  appellant's   evidence   was   entirely
         incredible, yet accepting parts  of  it,  without  giving  adequate
         reasons for either;




     ii) In concluding that the appellant had a "poor  immigration  history"
         when he had lived here lawfully since 1989;



    iii) In failing to address the factors required to be  considered  under
         paragraphs 398 and 399A, including the length of  time  spent  here
         with Indefinite Leave to Remain, and the lack of ties to Vietnam

21. Accordingly, I was  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

    Remaking the decision - hearing 4 September 2017

22. I heard evidence from the appellant, the appellant's brother,  and  the
    appellant's son.  The appellant and his brother gave evidence with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.

23. The appellant adopted his witness statement, adding that if allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom he would comply with the law and  that  he
    would not commit the crimes he had committed before.

24. The appellant said he had lived in the United Kingdom  since  1989  and
    had not visited Vietnam since he had left.  He had  a  brother  in  the
    United Kingdom, a sister in Canada and another brother  who  had  died.
    He said that his parents were dead.

25. The appellant said that he is in contact with  his  son  by  telephone,
    talking to him every night and that he would describe his  relationship
    with his son as being very good.

26. Cross-examined the appellant confirmed that he had applied for a travel
    document from the Home Office and had used it travel to Canada to visit
    his sister in, he thought 2001, excepting that the document showed that
    it had been 2002.

27. The appellant said that he would return to Birmingham if  released  and
    that he would stay with his brother.  He said that he  would  look  for
    work as he did not have a job to return to.

28. It was put to him that although he had said he would not commit a crime
    again, that had not stopped him in the past but he said he did not know
    what else to say that he is sorry for what he  had  done  and  that  he
    would be hoping to be given another chance.

29. The appellant said that he had been in contact with his son through his
    brother and that at the previous hearing when he had  said  he  had  no
    connection with his son what he had meant is not in direct contact.

30. Asked if he knew why he had claimed asylum, the appellant said that  he
    had come from Hong Kong with his  wife  and  that  his  wife  had  been
    invited to come here by her brother.  He said that he was young when he
    arrived from Hong Kong and that he thought that he had left Vietnam  in
    1979 and travelling to Hong Kong.  Asked if there was any reason why he
    could not return apart from a lack of family, employment and  ties,  he
    said he did not really know what the problems would be there.  He  said
    that the family had been fishermen and he had left Vietnam at  the  age
    of 16.

31. In response to my questions the appellant said that he had left Vietnam
    because his father had been put in prison also he said he  thought  his
    father had been put in prison for attempting to leave the country.

32. The appellant's son adopted his witness statement adding that he was in
    contact with his father by mobile phone and had  been  since  February.
    He said that they were in contact two to three times a  week  depending
    on circumstances and their relationship was now better  than  had  been
    before.  And it was because they were now in communication.

33. Mr Le said that he thought his father would obey the law.  He said that
    he could not move to Vietnam that he had only ever  been  for  a  short
    holiday two years ago.  He said it would be difficult for  him  if  his
    father were removed to Vietnam.

34. In cross-examination Mr Le said that he was not  in  contact  with  his
    father every day and that he had  been  back  in  direct  communication
    since March 2007.  He said that prior to that direct contact  was  non-
    existent that is when he was 18 but this  had  only  been  at  home  to
    relatives.  He said he would not have any  family  in  Vietnam  on  his
    father's side that he would not be able  to  support  him  if  he  were
    deported to Vietnam and having enough difficulty supporting  his  wife.
    He said he did not know why his father had obtained refugee status  and
    that his mother is still alive but had a very bad relationship with the
    appellant.

35. I then heard evidence from the  appellant's  brother  who  adopted  his
    witness statement confirming that he is in contact with his brother  by
    telephone but that he had not been able  to  visit  him.   He  said  he
    thought that his brother would respect the law  if  allowed  to  remain
    that he felt sure this was the case.

36. He said that they had no-one left in Vietnam to  help  support  him  as
    they had left when they were young and  that he  would  go  to  Vietnam
    with him.  He said he had a  wife  and  five  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

37. In cross-examination the appellant's brother said that he  had  a  half
    sister in Vietnam whom he believed lived in Saigon, the family had when
    they lived in Vietnam lived near Hanoi.  He said that  he  had  been  a
    bricklayer in Vietnam before leaving for Hong Kong.  He said  that  his
    father had been imprisoned because when they had been trying to  use  a
    publicly owned boat to leave Vietnam he felt that he did not  know  why
    his father was trying to leave Vietnam.

38. In re-examination he said he had no contact with  his  father's  second
    wife or her relatives.

The law

39. The grounds of appeal in this case are set out in  section  84  of  the
    2002 Act and are as follows:-
       (1) An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal  of  protection  claim)
      must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a) that removal of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  would
         breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
         Convention;
         (b) that removal of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  would
         breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  in  relation  to  persons
         eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;
         (c) that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would  be
         unlawful under section 6  of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (public
         authority not to act contrary to Human Rights Convention).
       (2) An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights  claim)
      must be brought on the ground that  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
      section 6  of the Human Rights Act 1998.
       (3) An  appeal  under  section  82(1)(c)  (revocation  of  protection
      status) must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a) that the decision to revoke the appellant's  protection  status
         breaches  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
         Convention;
         (b) that the decision to revoke the appellant's  protection  status
         breaches the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation  to  persons
         eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection.

40. Section 72 of the 2002 Act provides (so far as is relevant) as follows:-



      Section 72 Serious criminal

      (1) This section applies for  the  purpose  of  the  construction  and
            application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the   Refugee   Convention
            (exclusion from protection).

      (2) A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
            judgment of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a
            danger to the community of the United Kingdom is he is -

            (a)   convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

            (b)   sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  two
                 years.

      ...

      (9) Subsection (1) applies where -

            (a)   a person appeals under Section 82, 83 [F1, 83A] or 101 of
                 this Act or under section  2  of  the  Special  Immigration
                 Appeals Commission Act 1997 (c. 68) wholly or partly on the
                 ground that to remove him from or to require him  to  leave
                 the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations under the Refugee Convention, and

            (b)    the  Secretary  of  State  issues  a  certificate   that
                 presumptions under subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply to  the
                 person (subject to rebuttal).

      (10)    The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

             (a)  must being substantive  deliberation  on  the  appeal  by
                 considering the certificate, and

             (b)  if in agreement that presumptions under  subsection  (2),
                 (3) or (4) apply (having given the appellant an opportunity
                 for rebuttal) must dismiss the  appeal  in  so  far  as  it
                 relies on the grounds specified in subsection (9)(a).

41. I am satisfied that, as Mr Whitwell submitted, there has in  this  case
    been an escalation in the appellant's offending as can be seen  by  the
    list of offences as set out in the PNC printout.   Between  21  October
    1996 and 6 October 2015 the appellant was convicted of 42  offences  on
    21 occasions which resulted in relatively  minor  penalties.   He  was,
    however, convicted on 30  June  2011  at  Birmingham  Crown  Court  and
    sentenced to sixteen months'  imprisonment  prison  for  burglary  and,
    although being served with a notice of liability to deportation on that
    occasion which was  subsequently  withdrawn,  the  Secretary  of  State
    warned him in writing that if he should come to adverse notice  in  the
    future that further consideration would be given  to  the  question  of
    whether he should be deported.

42. On 6 October 2015 the appellant was convicted  for  the  possession  of
    crack cocaine with intent to supply and also with possession of heroine
    with intent to supply, both of those being class A drugs. In sentencing
    him, His Honour Judge Bond made the following remarks:-



      JUDGE BOND: stand up please, Mr Le.


      I have to sentence you for possessing crack cocaine  and  diamorphine,
      commonly known as heroin, with intent to supply  to  other  people.  I
      sentence you on the basis that you supplied to people who were already
      addicted to Class A drugs, and that they would come to  your  flat  to
      buy these drugs.


      In sentencing you there is no dispute that because of  the  nature  of
      your dealing and role you played, this was your own operation and  you
      were dealing in order to make money. I accept that you were  doing  it
      to fund your own habit but, whichever way you look at  it,  you  still
      made a financial reward.






      You had significant cash at home, �585, which indicates to me some  of
      your profits from dealing in drugs. The value of  the  drugs  in  your
      possession when the police raided your flat on 26 June  of  this  year
      amounted to �3,260 worth. In total there were 331  separate  deals  of
      crack cocaine and heroin, which indicates to me the level  of  dealing
      that you were undertaking.


      Mr Le, you do not need me to tell you of  the  consequences  of  being
      addicted to Class A drugs. Being an  addict  yourself,  you  know  the
      abject misery it causes. In my experienced of being a  judge  at  this
      court, I know because I see it day in day out that Class A Drugs cause
      addicts to commit crime, often it is robbery, dwelling house or, as in
      your case, dealing in Class A drugs - all  serious  criminal  offences
      that carry custodial sentences.


      You are a man who is now aged 51; I understand that you came  to  this
      country in the mid-1990s from Vietnam, You  have  offended  frequently
      through that period of time but you have always been dealt with by the
      courts by non-custodial measures  or  by  relatively  short  custodial
      sentences.


      You have some convictions for possessing cannabis and I  am  told  you
      are - in fact, I only see one conviction  for  such  offence  [pic]you
      also have a conviction for possessing a Class A drug.


      I do not the details of it but  you  were  dealt  with  by  way  of  a
      conditional discharge so it must have been a very small  amount.  This
      is the first time that you are being dealt with for offences involving
      the supply of Class A drugs to others.


      The Sentencing  Council's  guidelines  for  offences  help  judges  in
      sentencing peoples like you. It has been that this  is  a  Category  3
      offence; it is agreed that you have a significant role.  The  category
      range is between three trial, with a starting point of four and a half
      years.


      Taking into account all the matters that I have  mentioned,  including
      the submissions that have been ably made on your behalf by Mr Bryce, I
      have come to the  conclusion  that,  weighing  everything  up  in  the
      balance, the appropriate starting point in your case  is  four  and  a
      half years after a trial.


      Although you- did not indicate a guilty plea in the Magistrates Court,
      I have been told that there were difficulties in  your  representation
      in that court accordingly, I am prepared to give you maximum  discount
      for your guilty pleas today. So I will discount  your  sentence  by  a
      full one-third, so on count one and count two you will  go  to  prison
      for three years concurrent on each count


43.  It is important that the judge accepted that the appellant was dealing
    in drugs in order to make money albeit to fund his own habit  and  also
    that there were 331 separate "deals" found in his possession.  Also, it
    is of note that the appellant was given  a  maximum  discount  for  his
    guilty pleas resulting in a one third  discount  noting  as  a  parting
    point in this case from four and half years to three years.

44. I have considered carefully the  OASys  Report  which  it  appears  was
    completed on 6  April  2016,  albeit  that  the  printout  is  dated  1
    September 2017.  I note from this that the OGRS3 score indicates a  21%
    transfer of general offending in a year of community sentence/discharge
    and 36% transfer of general offending within two years of discharge.  I
    note also [2.6] that it was noted that the appellant did not  recognise
    the impact and consequences of offending on the victim, community/wider
    society now that he appeared to be easily led [2.7].   Equally  I  note
    that at [2.11] that although the appellant admitted to  being  involved
    in the local drugs culture he denies supplying drugs to others  and  at
    [2.12] that

      "Mr Le has an entrenched pattern of behaviour.  This is of acquisitive
      crime relating to thefts - shoplifting to fund his drugs  misuse.   He
      also has convictions from motoring offending, drugs, threatening words
      and behaviour, burglary and common assault.  He was unable  to  recall
      the details of threatening words and behaviour offence but  said  that
      the common assault was thus as a result of a fight  he  had  with  his
      friend who owed him money.  Mr Le's convictions have been  dealt  with
      by way of community orders, conditional  discharge,  imprisonment  and
      financial penalties.  He has no previous for intent to supply.


45. It is noted  also  [2.13]  the  offences  represent  an  escalation  of
    seriousness and of part of an established period of similar offending.

46. It is not in doubt that the  appellant's  offending  behaviour  results
    from his drug addiction which it appears started around 1995;  that  he
    had stopped between 1999 and 2005 when he worked as a chef  in  Swansea
    but that he relapsed into drug use when he returned to  Birmingham  and
    began to be associated with other drug users [8.9].  In this context, I
    note that the appellant's evidence is that  he  intends  to  return  to
    Birmingham.

47. It is noted at [11.10] that  the  fact  the  appellant  has  previously
    violent  related  convictions  indicating  he  may  be  prone  to   act
    aggressively in conflict situations. That aside, the assessment of risk
    of serious harm at pages 22 onwards indicate little risk of this albeit
    that there is an OVP one year score of twelve and a two year  score  of
    21 [at page 24] giving a low overall risk of  violent  offending.   The
    risk of serious harm summary  at  page  28  indicates  that  the  local
    community risk (of 10.1), the risk is likely to be at its  greatest  on
    release or that it is noted that he is due to be deported.   It  is  of
    note that at Section 10.6 the risk of custody is given as low which  in
    all contexts but equally at page 31 there  are  a  number  of  factored
    links to the risk of  re-offending  including  accommodation,  finance,
    lifestyle, drug misuse, behaviour and attitudes.  Whilst the  appellant
    is in the lower category on OGRS and OVP the latter being  in  relation
    to violent offending, it is at 29% and 42% after two  years,  a  medium
    risk under the OGP probability of proven non-violent reoffending.

48. Mr Khubber submitted that the applicant is at less risk now given  that
    he has shown through tests that he has been free from drugs  since  his
    conviction albeit that this was in prison.  It was submitted also  that
    the drug taking had originated in  the  breakdown  of  the  appellant's
    marriage in the 1990s and submitted that he has now come to terms  with
    his past offending and requirements in terms of future conduct.

49. It is significant that it is the view  of  those  compiling  the  OASys
    Report the appellant had not accepted he has supplied drugs to  others.
    It is also worrying that he appears intending returning to  Birmingham.
    Whilst he intends to stay with family, given  the  appellant's  history
    and  the  increasing  seriousness  of  his  offending  behaviour  which
    includes offences of violence albeit that they are not recent I am not,
    despite Mr Khubber's submissions that the  applicant  is  not  violent,
    satisfied that he does no longer constitute a danger to the  community.
    The fact that he is not violent does not mean that,  for  example,  his
    dealing with drugs does not do harm  to  the  community  precisely  the
    matter addressed by the judge in the sentencing remarks.

50. Whilst I accept that there are some positive indicators in  respect  of
    the appellant, I consider that viewing the evidence as a  whole,  given
    the significant risk that he presents to the community as identified in
    the OASys report that the presumption that he constitutes a  danger  to
    the community is not rebutted.

51. Accordingly, despite the strenuous efforts by Mr Khubber about what the
    appellant has said in evidence, I am not satisfied that the presumption
    is rebutted.

Cessation

52. As was noted in RY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 81 it is open  to
    the United Kingdom to revoke refugee status of  one  making  a  Section
    72(2) certification but it is not obliged to do so.

53. The Secretary of State  did,  however,  in  this  case  undertake  both
    exercises. Given that the applicant was recognised as  a  refugee  many
    years  ago,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  Dang  (Refugee  -   query
    revocation - Article 3) [2013] UKUT 00043.

54. The question then is: does the fact that  the  appellant's  status  has
    been ceased make any difference to the decision under challenge?   That
    is, does it make a difference that  he  remains  a  refugee  under  the
    Refugee Convention?

55. In the light of Dang, I am  satisfied  that  the  purported  revocation
    pursuant to paragraph 58A and 59A(v) of the Immigration  Rules  is  not
    effective.  Nevertheless, that does not affect the issue under  Section
    32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 as the appellant  does  not  come  within
    Section 33(2)(b) as the non-refoulement provisions in Article 33  would
    not apply in this case given that the Section 72 certificate  has  been
    upheld.

56. Accordingly, whether or not the appellant is a refugee (or  has  ceased
    to be a refugee), his removal would not be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention.  Thus,  it  is
    unnecessary for me to consider  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is  a
    refugee as even if the respondent has not made good her assertion  that
    the cessation provisions apply, he could not succeed on the ground that
    removal would be in breach of obligations under the Refugee Convention.



57. In the circumstances therefore it is unnecessary  for  me  to  consider
    whether the cessation clause has properly been  invoked.   Further,  in
    any event, it would make no material  difference  to  the  legality  of
    removal not least as it is conceded  by  Mr  Khubber  in  his  skeleton
    argument at Section 4.2.1 that he has not submitted the  removal  would
    constitute  a  breach  of  rights  under  Article  3  or   humanitarian
    protection under the Qualification Directive.  Under the circumstances,
    it is unnecessary for me to consider whether  the  appellant's  removal
    would be a breach of Article 3.

Immigration Rules

58. The Immigration Rules relevant to this  case  provide  are  390,  A398,
    398B, 399A, 390 which, so far as is relevant provide:
    390. An application for revocation  of  a  deportation  order  will  be
    considered  in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
    following:
         (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
         (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
         (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance  of
         an effective immigration control;
         (iv) the interests of the applicant,  including  any  compassionate
    circumstances.
    390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will  consider
    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only
    be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in maintaining
    the deportation order will be outweighed by other factors.
    A398. These rules apply where:
         (a) a foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
    him to be revoked.
    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and
    ...
    (b) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or ...
     399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies  if
    -
         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
    life; and
         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

59. The  issue  is  whether  in  this  instance,  the  appellant  satisfies
    paragraph 399A, it being agreed that he is a person to  whom  paragraph
    398(b) applies.

60. I accept that in this  case  the  respondent  has  concluded  that  the
    applicant has been resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life
    and that he is socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  Or it may be a somewhat generous concession  given  the  long
    history of offending and the fact that the appellant is still not able,
    it appears, to give evidence without the assistance of an interpreter.

61. In assessing what is meant by integration, I bear in mind what was said
    in Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at 14:-

    In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into  the
    country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,  as  set  out  in
    section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A,  is  a  broad  one.  It  is  not
    confined to the mere ability to find a job or  to  sustain  life  while
    living in the other  country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to  treat  the
    statutory language as subject to some gloss  and  it  will  usually  be
    sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms
    that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls  for
    a broad evaluative judgment to be made as  to  whether  the  individual
    will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in  the
    society in  that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
    participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
    society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of  human
    relationships to give substance to the individual's private  or  family
    life.

62. I am satisfied by the evidence I have heard from the Appellant and  his
    witnesses that there are in effect no ties of a  family  or  friendship
    nature that the appellant has now to Vietnam.  I  accept  that  he  has
    never been back there and he left the country in  1979  and  has  never
    been back.

63. Mr Khubber submits that there are a number of factors to be taken  into
    account in assessing the significant obstacles.   These  are  as  noted
    above the absence for 38 years,  the  lack  of  family,  the  fact  the
    appellant left when he was a child and that he had resided lawfully  in
    the United Kingdom for most of his life.  Mr Khubber  also  relised  on
    the ties with the older brother which are described as  close  and  the
    relationship with the adult son.  Other matters prayed in aid  are  the
    fact that the appellant is free from drugs and his conviction, that his
    offending was related to drug taking and that his ties to Vietnam apart
    from nationality were extremely thin.

64. What is not, however, addressed in any substantial way is the nature of
    obstacles other than those which are, it appears, to be  inferred  from
    the ties to the United Kingdom.

65. There is little in the way of evidence that the  appellant  would  have
    difficulty  getting  employment  or  accommodation.   It  is  not,  for
    example, said that as was the case with Mr Kamara  that  the  appellant
    would have no familiarity with the  norms  of  how  Vietnamese  society
    conducts itself or that he would be unable to  adapt  to  the  cultural
    context.

66. That said, even a cursory glance at the Home Office's country materials
    on Vietnam cited in the refusal  letter  shows  that  the  country  has
    changed markedly since the appellant left.  It would  appear  that  the
    human rights situation although poor is better than it was.  There also
    appears to have been a significant improvement in the economy.

67. This is not a case in which the appellant suffers from  ill-health.   I
    am satisfied by the evidence I have had that there  is  in  reality  no
    possibility of financial support for a family in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His son is recovering from a serious illness and has his own family  to
    support and is unable to contribute.  Similarly, although I accept  the
    appellant's brother may wish to help, I consider that in reality is  he
    is unable to do so given that he has a wife and five children  and  has
    limited resources of his own.   Whilst  I  note  that  the  appellant's
    brother said that he would travel with him to Vietnam, I consider  this
    to be at best an aspiration and an offer made out of the  best  motives
    but it seems unlikely that he will do so at  least  for  anything  more
    than a temporary basis.

68. Mr Khubber submitted  that  the  appellant  would  be  subjected  to  a
    significant culture shock on return to  Vietnam,  a  country  which  it
    would appear has changed significantly since  the  appellant  was  last
    there some 38 years ago.  That again is an inference and is  not  based
    on what the appellant himself said.  The appellant  himself  said  very
    little and did not give much evidence about the difficulties he himself
    would face on return.  While I can accept that he has  no  ties  there,
    there is no further elaboration of the difficulties  that  would  occur
    and I bear in mind that the burden  is  on  him  to  satisfy  the  high
    threshold that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration again into Vietnam.

69. Turning to what is noted in Kamara about integration, I have considered
    what would prevent the appellant from establishing again a private life
    in Vietnam. He would, I accept, be starting from scratch. He does speak
    the language, and has some skills as a cook. He would, however, have no
    familiarity with how that society now works, but it is not evident that
    he could not learn that, or that he would suffer unduly while doing so.
    I  consider  that  there  is  insufficient  evidence   to   show   that
    reintegration into life in Vietnam  would  not  be  possible  for  this
    appellant, or that obstacles in doing so could not readily be overcome.



70. Taking all the factors into account I consider that there may  well  be
    difficulties  that  the  appellant  will  have  in  reintegrating  into
    Vietnam, he does not satisfy the burden to show  that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles.  I am  therefore  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Article 8

71. In assessing Article 8 I bear in mind that I must apply  Sections  117B
    and 117C of the 2002 Act.  I turn first to Section 117B.  The appellant
    has not shown that he is capable  of  speaking  English  to  any  great
    degree and, it appears, despite living here for 28 years still requires
    an interpreter.  There is insufficient evidence  to  show  that  he  is
    financially independent.  There is no evidence  that  he  will  acquire
    employment on release from prison.

72. That said, he has a substantial private life in the United Kingdom  and
    that was established whilst he was here lawfully and it cannot be  said
    that his status  here  was  precarious  certainly  not  before  he  was
    notified of an intention to deport him, which was many years  after  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

73. I accept that the appellant's  relationship  with  his  son  is  to  be
    treated as part of his private life.  There is nothing in the  evidence
    before me which suggests a protected family life exists between them or
    between the appellant and his brother.  All three are  adults  and  the
    contact between the appellant and his son in particular has  been  very
    limited until recently.

74. Turning to Section 117C, I bear in mind that the deportation of foreign
    criminals is in the public interest and that the more  serious  offence
    the greater the public interest in the deportation  of  the  appellant.
    In this case he was sentenced to three and  a  half  years  in  prison.
    That is by any stretch a serious crime and the offence of which he  was
    convicted, in dealing in class A drugs, is serious given not least  the
    damage that drug addiction causes through society as  set  out  in  the
    judge's sentencing remarks.

75. For the reasons set out above I am not satisfied that the exception  in
    Section 117C(4) applies nor is it suggested that the exception in  sub-
    section (5) applies.

76. There are, however, additional  factors  which  in  addition  to  those
    considered  above  in  assessing  whether  the  appellant   meets   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules is taken into account.  These are
    the age at which the appellant left Vietnam, the lack of ties he has to
    that country, the length of time he spent in the  United  Kingdom  and,
    essentially, the difficulties that he would have adjusting again  to  a
    country with which he has no familiarity  at  the  age  of  54.   I  am
    prepared to accept also that there would be a degree of culture  shock,
    the indications from material provided being that Vietnam  has  changed
    almost out of recognition  in  the  very  nearly  40  years  since  the
    appellant left.  Those  are  factors  which  weigh  in  favour  of  the
    appellant.

77. On the other hand, there are significant factors  which  weigh  against
    him which are, in addition to those set out above, the  fact  that  his
    offending was carried out over a significant  period,  with  increasing
    seriousness and that he persisted in his criminal  behaviour  after  he
    was given a warning by the Secretary of State.  Indeed, the convictions
    for possession with intent to  supply  class  A  drugs  post-date  that
    warning.

78. Whilst it is said that he is unlikely to re-offend, I am not  satisfied
    that is so.  He may well have ceased to take drugs whilst in prison but
    given his past history of going back to his  associates  in  Birmingham
    and continuing to take drugs in the past, I am not  satisfied  that  he
    would not do so again in the future.  That is even  supportive  of  his
    son who lives in Manchester, and his brother.  There is also I consider
    a significant risk of re-offending given what  is  said  in  the  OASys
    Report and there is also the risk of harm to the community which  would
    flow from further drug dealing.

79. I have no doubt that the appellant will have  significant  difficulties
    in adjusting again to  life  in  Vietnam  but  he  was  warned  of  the
    consequences of continued criminal behaviour yet he chose  to  continue
    in that path.

80. Taking all of these factors into account and whilst I accept  that  the
    appellant would have significant difficulties on return to Vietnam that
    it may well be  difficult  for  him  to  maintain  the  same  level  of
    telephone contact with his son and brother  as  previously,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the very significant weight to be attached to the public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals is  in  this  case  outweighed.
    For these reasons I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law. I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul










