
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00121/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 6 January 2017                      |On : 11 January 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           YUSUF ADAN SHARIF AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
cease his refugee status and to  refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights
claim further to a decision to deport him pursuant to section 32(5)  of  the
UK Borders Act 2007.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 15 December 1987. He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 30 June 2004 with his mother and four  siblings  to
join his father, a recognised refugee, and was granted  refugee  status  and
indefinite leave to remain in line with his father.


On 21 February 2012  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  robbery  and  false
imprisonment and sentenced, on  17  April  2012,  to  seven  years  and  six
months' imprisonment. In September 2012 he was notified of his liability  to
automatic deportation in accordance with section 32(5) of the 2007  Act  and
on 26 January 2015 he was served with  a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
order under section 32(5). The respondent also, in  a  letter  of  the  same
date, invited the appellant to seek to rebut the presumption  under  section
72 of the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002 that he had been convicted of  a
particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to the community. On  27
April 2015 the appellant was  notified  of  the  respondent's  intention  to
cease his refugee status under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention  and
paragraph 339A of the immigration rules on the basis that the  circumstances
in connection with which he had been recognised as a refugee had  ceased  to
exist. On 14 May 2015 the respondent notified the  UNHCR  of  the  same  and
invited a response.

On 4 December 2015 the appellant was served with a  decision  to  cease  his
refugee status and to refuse his  protection  and  human  rights  claim  and
maintain the decision to deport him, together with a deportation order  made
pursuant to section 32(5) of the 2007 Act.

The respondent, in making that decision, considered first of all  the  issue
of cessation and concluded that  the  situation  regarding  minority  clans,
which was the basis upon which his family had been granted  refugee  status,
had since changed. The respondent relied on the country guidance  in  MOJ  &
Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (Rev 1) (CG) [2014] UKUT  442  in  regard  to  the
current improved situation in Mogadishu and considered  that  the  appellant
no longer required international protection on the basis of his Ashraf  clan
membership. The respondent considered that the appellant would  be  able  to
reintegrate into Somalia and relocate  to  Mogadishu  and  that  he  was  no
longer at risk of persecution or ill-treatment  amounting  to  a  breach  of
Article 3 of the ECHR.  The  respondent  therefore  decided  to  revoke  the
appellant's refugee status. The  respondent,  further,  concluded  that  the
appellant had failed to rebut the presumption under  section  72(2)  of  the
2002 Act and accordingly certified that  the  presumption  applied  to  him,
with the effect that he was  excluded  from  protection  under  the  Refugee
Convention.  He  was  also  excluded  from  humanitarian   protection.   The
respondent went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR and concluded that  the
appellant could not meet the requirements in paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  or
399A and that there were no very compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
public interest in his deportation. The respondent found that the  appellant
could not meet any of the exceptions to automatic deportation in section  33
of the 2007 Act.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 14 April 2016 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juss.  Judge  Juss
found that the appellant could not succeed under the Refugee  Convention  or
on human rights grounds and dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge  had  failed  to  undertake  any  assessment  of  his
circumstances in line with  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ.  Permission  to
appeal was granted on 13 July 2016.

The appeal came before me on 6 January 2017.  I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law and advised the parties that in my  view  the  judge  had  made
material errors of law such that the decision had to be set aside.

There was no dispute by the parties  that  the  judge's  decision  contained
various errors of law: he had  failed  to  give  any  consideration  to  the
certification under section 72 of the 2002 Act; he had  failed  to  consider
the question of cessation; and there was no detailed assessment of the  risk
factors in MOJ. It was Mr Mills' submission, however,  that  none  of  those
errors were material since the outcome of the appeal was  inevitable,  given
the findings in MOJ and considering that a detailed assessment of  the  risk
factors could have elicited no other response.


Whilst it may well be that a full and proper consideration  of  the  various
factors at (ix) to (xi) of the headnote to  MOJ  would  not  result  in  any
positive outcome for the appellant, it seems to me that,  in  the  interests
of justice and fairness, the appellant  should  nevertheless  be  given  the
benefit of a full and proper consideration of his case.  Judge  Juss  failed
to give anything more than a cursory consideration to the  guidance  in  MOJ
and his very limited findings at [16] did not include any  consideration  of
the appellant's particular circumstances in the context of  the  factors  at
(ix) of the head-note and  were  unsupported  by  any  proper  analysis  and
reasoning.


For those reasons I consider that Judge Juss's decision has to be set  aside
and the decision in the appeal re-made, so that a full and  proper  analysis
of the appellant's circumstance can be considered with proper findings  made
in line with the guidance in MOJ. In view of the many errors in the  judge's
approach to the appellant's case as a whole, I do not consider that  any  of
his findings can properly be preserved. Accordingly the  appropriate  course
would be for the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
afresh.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is allowed.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2,  to
be dealt with afresh, before any judge aside from Judge Juss.




                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
