
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00112/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th November 2018                          |On 20th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    a e-a


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbahani, Solicitor of Behbahani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran said to have been born on [~]  1985.
     He came to the United Kingdom in November 1997 when aged 12 years  and
    has lived in the United Kingdom since.  He has  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom and a form of disability due to a progressive spinal issue  and
    polio.  His father was granted asylum in 1996 and  he,  the  appellant,
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in line with his father in 2000.



2.   On 21st September 2007 he was convicted at the Harrow  Crown  Court  of
    false imprisonment and  causing  grievous  bodily  harm  and  sentenced
    overall to some ten years' imprisonment.   Seemingly  he  was  released
    from custody in 2012.

3.   On 13th May 2011 the Home Office issued a notice of decision as to  the
    intention to deport and a deportation order was in fact  made  on  25th
    August 2017.  A decision was also made to refuse a protection and human
    rights claim and cease refugee status.

4.   On 6th July 2017 in the North London Magistrates' Court  the  appellant
    was convicted of stalking,  causing  thereby  alarm  and  distress  and
    sentenced to sixteen weeks' imprisonment and given a restraining order.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  the  decisions,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer on 23rd August 2018.

6.   The  Judge  properly  considered  Section  72(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and upheld  that  certification.   Thus
    the  appellant  was  unable  to  seek  protection  under  the   Refugee
    Convention but was entitled to raise matters which placed his  life  in
    danger were he to return to Iran, within the terms of Article 3 ECHR.

7.   Those matters are said to have been his involvement  with  the  MEK  in
    the United Kingdom which  would  create  a  profile  with  the  Iranian
    authorities, such that he would be at risk  were  he  to  return.   The
    Judge robustly considered that aspect of the claim and found  that  the
    appellant was in effect  using  his  perceived  support  for  the  MEK,
    potentially to create for himself a profile  to  prevent  return.   The
    Judge concluded having regard to BA Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36  (IAC)  that
    the appellant would face no  risk  upon  return,  thus  the  claim  was
    dismissed in all respects.

8.   Challenge has been made to the fairness of that decision and  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on a number of grounds.

9.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.

10.  The grounds are lengthy but can  perhaps  be  fairly  summarised  as  a
    perceived bias by the Judge against the appellant such as to raise  the
    issue as to whether there had been a fair hearing.  Also that the Judge
    had failed to apply country guidance to the issues and  had  failed  to
    consider the evidence of a witness on a crucial issue.

11.  In terms of the certificate under Section 72, it is fairly conceded  by
    Mr Behbahani on behalf of the appellant, that he  is  placed  in  great
    difficulty  in  practical  terms  in  resisting   that   certification,
    particularly having regard to the serious nature of his  offending  and
    the repetition of offending.  In one sense therefore that was a  matter
    that could have been disposed of fairly quickly by the Judge.  However,
    the Judge at paragraphs 101 to 109 makes much of the stalking  offence,
    speaking as  to  the  appellant  being  prone  to  impulsive  behaviour
    bordering on the obsessive and poor  impulse  control.   Such  comments
    seemingly are made without any reference to psychological or  probation
    reports. The Judge speaks of the victim of his attention  as  being  an
    Iranian woman, probably in exile, and what it must feel  like  to  have
    such approaches made to her.  It is said that the woman was not Iranian
    and that the remarks went far  outside  that  which  was  necessary  to
    dispose of the issue of Section 72.  It was suggested that the  remarks
    made are somewhat emotive and seem to reflect more of the  thinking  of
    the Judge than perhaps was necessary  to  dispose  of  that  particular
    issue.  Paragraphs 129  and  154  are  relied  upon  as  again  perhaps
    suggesting that the appellant has chosen the MEK  simply  in  order  to
    make his asylum claim.

12.  Although the passages themselves do not necessarily denote bias of  the
    Judge in a negative or improper sense, it is clear  that  from  a  very
    early stage the Judge has indicated that little weight is to  given  to
    what the applicant has to say, and indeed almost all of what is said is
    rejected.  It is understandable how a perception  might  arise  in  the
    mind of the appellant that the Judge is predetermined  to  give  little
    weight to what he has to say.

13.  Notwithstanding that point, Mr Duffy  submits  that  in  terms  of  the
    central feature of the appeal, namely whether the appellant is either a
    low-level activist with no profile in Iran, or alternatively is seeking
    by his attendance at the various meetings to create for himself a bogus
    profile, that the Judge has  properly  applied  the  considerations  to
    those issues and on that basis the decision should be upheld.

14.  Although generally I recognise the merit in that submission,  there  is
    one matter which seems to me to be one of  distinct  concern  and  that
    relates to the findings or  comments  of  the  Judge,  particularly  at
    paragraph 118 in these terms:-

              "There is no proof  that  the  Appellant  was  supporting  MEK
         before his 2007 conviction.  Indeed he  was  involved  in  a  gang,
         which is time he cannot have spent in the MEK.  He went  to  prison
         until 2012.  He cannot have attended any protests between 2007  and
         2012.  There is no proof of attending protests in 2013, 2014, 2015.
          The witness took the activity back only to about three years  ago.
         I utterly  reject  the  argument  he  has  been  a  consistent  MEK
         supporter.  He was unable to recall the  name  of  a  distinguished
         supporter of it; the name meant nothing when put to  him.   He  has
         many other interests and it is only a recent one.  If the  Iranians
         know about him, they will also know this and are  well  aware  that
         some claims are bogus.  This  may  very  well  be  bogus  political
         activity, if one looks through the lens of accurate chronology."

15.  The reference to  activity  dating  back  three  years  came  from  the
    statement of a Mr Saeed Nasseri who was referred to in  detail  in  the
    decision.  He speaks about having seen  the  appellant  over  the  last
    three years in a statement dated 15th September 2018.

16.  There was however a statement  of  a  Miss  Fatemeh  Shams  dated  15th
    August 2018.  She features at paragraph 62 of  the  decision  as  being
    identified by Saeed Nasseri wearing a  red  headscarf  in  one  of  the
    photographs that was presented in support of the  appellant's  presence
    at various activities.  The significance of her statement is  that  she
    seems to speak of the earlier encounters with the appellant  who  spent
    many hours in demonstrations prior to his imprisonment.  She speaks  of
    the fact that thereafter all were happy to see him  participating  once
    again on a regular basis in those demonstrations.

17.  The defect in the statement is that it lacks a precise chronology,  but
    on the face of the document it seems to indicate that the appellant has
    been a longstanding supporter of MEK in the United Kingdom and  a  very
    committed one.  Although paragraph 62 of the determination spoke of her
    as being another witness in the appeal, the decision does  not  in  any
    sense deal with her evidence or put it into any context.   It  was  not
    clear whether she actually had attended the hearing or not.

18.  The potential significance of her evidence is of  course  to  undermine
    the conclusion which the Judge has come to in the paragraph to which  I
    have referred.  If  indeed  it  be  right  that  the  appellant  was  a
    longstanding supporter of MEK, particularly in  the  years  before  his
    conviction and/or a significant period after,  then  that  is  relevant
    both to the degree of his  involvement  and  to  whether  or  not  that
    involvement was genuine or not.  That in turn may have  some  relevance
    to whether or not he has created any significant profile in the eyes of
    the regime.

19.  That issue may or may not tie in with what is  said  to  be  a  further
    potential error of law, namely the  approach  taken  by  the  Judge  in
    paragraphs 127 to 128 in relation to HJ Iran and  HT  Cameroon  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31 to the lack of reference to RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors  v  SSHD
    [2012] UKSC 38.  The fact that the appellant may be physically able  to
    take part in demonstrations in Iran may not necessarily dispose of  the
    issue of being forced to forego genuine political desires.

19.  The Judge indicates that the regime would readily know if  someone  was
    not a genuine supporter, but equally if the appellant were  in  fact  a
    genuine supporter such would eventually create difficulties for him  on
    a proper reading of the two cases.

20.  How far the  statement  of  Ms  Shams  will  take  matters  is  largely
    unanswered, given that there had been no consideration  of  it.   In  a
    sense the lack of chronology may give it little  weight,  alternatively
    the fact that  she  clearly  is  someone  who  was  involved  with  the
    organisation, might be given  considerable  weight  which  affects  the
    issue of whether the appellant's membership is a bogus one or a genuine
    one and what consequences would flow from that finding.

21.  As with so many of these  matters,  particularly  those  affecting  the
    regime in Iran there is often the requirement for a nuanced and careful
    consideration as to the risk on return.

22.  It seems to me therefore on that fairly  narrow  point,  being  mindful
    that the fairness of procedures as in this case, require the  appellant
    to have confidence that  his  case  had  been  fairly  and  impartially
    considered, I find there to be a material error of law in the  decision
    such as the matter should be set aside and to be remade.

23.  As I indicated to the parties it may well be that the issue on  Section
    72 can be more concisely considered than before and  that  the  parties
    could concentrate upon  the  central  issue.   However,  it  is  to  be
    recognised that that may in  its  turn  require  an  assessment  as  to
    credibility overall.

24.  In those circumstances,  in  accordance  with  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction, I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo hearing on all matters.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        [pic]                          Date 14 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD





