
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
RP/00025/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 April 2017                          |      On 9 May 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     and

                             AWIL MOHAMAUD AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant, Awil Mohamaud Ahmed was born on  3  May  1994
    and is a male citizen of Somalia.  He  appealed  against  the  decision
    dated 8 February 2016 to cease his protection status,  to  certify  his
    asylum claim under Section  72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and to refuse his asylum, human rights and humanitarian
    protection claims.  A decision was also made to  deport  the  appellant
    under the provisions of Section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The
    appellant had been convicted of attempted robbery and sentenced  to  32
    months' imprisonment in consequence.  The  appellant  appealed  against
    the decisions to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shanahan) which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22 November 2016, allowed  the  appeal  against
    the imposition of the Section  72  certificate  and  the  cessation  of
    protection and in respect of humanitarian protection.  The Secretary of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is only one ground of appeal.  An  OASys  report  concerning  the
    appellant and prepared after his  conviction  had  concluded  that  the
    appellant was at low risk of reoffending but that, if he  did  reoffend
    in a violent manner, the risk of others in  society  suffering  serious
    harm was high.   The  Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  the  judge's
    conclusion at [35] ("Therefore, taking all of the  evidence  before  me
    into account I am not satisfied the appellant  does  not  constitute  a
    danger to the community of the United Kingdom") took into account  only
    the low risk of reoffending and failed to take into  account  the  high
    risk of harm should reoffending occur.

 3. I am not satisfied that the judge has  erred  in  law  for  the  reason
    asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.  There  is  no  suggestion
    whatever that the judge has focused only on the risk of reoffending and
    has ignored the possibility of harm to others should reoffending occur.
     Indeed, at [33], the judge wrote, "[The author of  the  OASys  Report]
    concluded that [the appellant's] risk of reoffending was low but if  he
    did the consequences involved a high risk of harm  to  others."   [35].
    The  judge  recorded  in  detail  the  circumstances  surrounding   the
    formation of the OASys assessment including the fact that  the  offence
    was the appellant's first offence and that he had family members in the
    United Kingdom, including close family, who would  provide  support  to
    him.  The judge was also aware that the appellant had taken courses  in
    prison to address his offending behaviour and had "acquired skills  and
    qualifications to enable him to find employment."  The  judge  made  it
    entirely clear that he has taken into  account  "all  of  the  evidence
    before me" before making a final assessment.  Given that the judge  has
    actually referred to the serious risk of harm should reoffending occur,
    I have no doubt at all that "all of the evidence" includes  that  risk;
    there is nothing in the grounds to justify  the  Upper  Tribunal  going
    behind the judge's statement.  Furthermore, the judge's  conclusion  is
    not arguably perverse on the basis of all the evidence which was before
    the Tribunal but nor has the judge focused solely upon  one  factor  in
    reaching his assessment; his assessment may properly  be  described  as
    even-handed and holistic.  The judge has reached a conclusion which  he
    has  supported  by  proper  reference  to  relevant  evidence.  In  the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 2 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
