
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
rp/00077/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 November 2017                        |On 17 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed on a Direct
Access Basis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant) against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        Henderson (the judge), promulgated on  28  July  2017.  The  appeal
        before the judge was against two separate decisions, a Cessation of
        Refugee Status (CRS) decision made on 9 May 2016, and a decision to
        refuse the human rights claim of KN (the Respondent) dated  7  June
        2016, although served on 10 June 2016 (in  the  same  decision  the
        Appellant also decided to deport the  Respondent  pursuant  to  the
        automatic deport provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007, the trigger
        offence being a conviction of Conspiracy  to  Rob,  the  Respondent
        having received a custodial sentence of 4.5 years).


     2. The judge dismissed the Respondent's human rights claim (which  was
        based on his private life, the Respondent having resided in the  UK
        since the age of 9, and his family life, the  Respondent  having  a
        genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  British  national
        partner and their two British national children born  in  2002  and
        2011). There has been no cross-appeal against the dismissal of  the
        human rights appeal. The judge found that the Respondent rebutted a
        certificate issued under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002 and that he  did  not  pose  a  danger  to  the
        community. The Appellant has not sought to appeal  this  aspect  of
        the judge's decision.


     3. The judge allowed the appeal against the CRS  decision,  concluding
        that it breached  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  1951  Refugee
        Convention. The Appellant contends that, in  allowing  the  appeal,
        the judge fell into legal error.

Relevant background

     4. The Respondent is a national of the  DRC  (Democratic  Republic  of
        Congo), born in 1981. According to a letter from the United Nations
        High Commissioner for Refugees "UNHCR" dated 12 February 2015,  and
        the CRS decision, the Appellant arrived in the UK in February  1991
        with his siblings to join their parents. The Appellant's father had
        been a member  of  former  President  Mobuto's  ruling  party,  but
        resigned and joined an opposition political party  (the  UDPS).  He
        was arrested and tortured but managed to flee the country and  made
        his way to the UK. An application for entry clearance was  made  by
        the Appellant and his siblings and this  was  granted  in  December
        1990. The Appellant's father was granted indefinite leave to remain
        (ILR) on the 29 November 1994, and the Appellant was  also  granted
        ILR and recognised as a refugee. The UNHCR letter states  that  the
        Appellant was granted the same status in line with  his  father  on
        the  same  date.  Although  the  CRS  decision  states   that   the
        Appellant's claim for asylum was based  on  his  imputed  political
        opinion there  is  no  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  this
        assertion. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal specifically
        state that the Respondent was not granted refugee status in his own
        right, but as a dependent of his father. There was no submission by
        the Presenting Officer  at  the  error  of  law  hearing  that  the
        assertion in the grounds was in any way inaccurate.


     5. The CRS decision noted that, although a member  of  the  UDPS,  the
        Respondent's father's activities were geared  towards  ex-President
        Mobutu's political party (the MPR). President Mobutu's  party  lost
        power in May 1997. Although the UDPS continued to be an  opposition
        party there was no evidence to suggest that the Respondent would be
        persecuted due to his father's involvement with the UDPS  prior  to
        him leaving the DRC. The Appellant considered a Country Information
        and Guidance (CIG) document and concluded that the Respondent would
        not face any risk of harm as a person returning to the DRC after  a
        period of absence, or on the basis of his criminal convictions. The
        Appellant concluded that there had been significant changes in  the
        DRC since the Respondent was granted refugee status such that he no
        longer held a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  The  Appellant
        therefore  concluded  that  Article  1C(5)  of  the  1951   Refugee
        Convention and paragraph 339A(v) of the immigration  rules  applied
        and decided to revoke the Respondent's refugee status.

 The First-tier Tribunal decision

     6. The judge does not appear to have been impressed by the  Presenting
        Officer appearing  before  him.  The  Presenting  Officer  made  no
        reference to any of the specific paragraphs of the CRS decision and
        made no substantive submissions in respect  of  the  Home  Office's
        policy on revocation of refugee status. At [78] the judge  referred
        to paragraph 3.7 of the Home Office's policy, which indicates  that
        caseworkers must take the UNHCR's comments into account as part  of
        their decision on revocation. The judge said there was no  evidence
        in the CRS that this had been done. The  judge  proceeded  to  note
        that the Respondent was issued refugee status as the  dependent  of
        his father, that he had never been interviewed to assess  his  risk
        on return, and that he had no idea of what risk  there  may  be  to
        him. The judge considered the UNHCR  letter  which  indicated  that
        opposition politicians may still face violence and  harassment  and
        that there remained a  serious  problem  of  politically  motivated
        human rights abuses in the west of the DRC. The judge  noted  again
        that the CRS decision made no reference to  the  UNHCR  letter  and
        concluded that  the  Respondent  had  not  considered  the  UNHCR's
        comments, which was contrary to her own policy.  Having  regard  to
        the UNHCR  cessation  guidelines,  which  recommended  that  states
        should carefully assess the fundamental character of changes in the
        country of nationality, the  judge  concluded  that  there  was  no
        evidence  that  the  Appellant  had   assessed   the   Respondent's
        particular circumstances  and  the  risk  to  him  upon  return  in
        reaching her  decision.  The  judge  consequently  found  that  the
        Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof incumbent  on  her
        to revoke the Respondent's refugee status.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of  permission,  and  the  'error  of  law'
hearing

     7. The grounds contended that the judge made a  material  misdirection
        in law by finding that  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  refugee
        status without identifying  why  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution on return. The  grounds  specifically  noted  that  the
        Respondent was not granted refugee status in his own right, but  as
        a dependent of his father. Given that the Respondent did not  claim
        to hold any political opinion in opposition to the current  regime,
        and was unaware of why he would  be  at  risk  on  return,  it  was
        submitted that the judge was  not  entitled  to  allow  the  appeal
        because  the  Respondent  did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution in the DRC. The failure by the judge  to  identify  why
        the Respondent  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  was  a
        material error of law. The  renewed  grounds  additionally  contend
        that the CRS decision confirmed that an approach was  made  to  the
        UNHCR and  that  paragraph  4  of  the  decision  referred  to  all
        representations having been carefully considered.


     8. Prior to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  I  enquired  whether
        representatives were aware of the Court of Appeal decision in  SSHD
        v Mosira [2017] EWCA Civ 407 (Mosira). Mr Melvin was aware  of  the
        decision and had brought a copy with him. As Ms Jegarajah  was  not
        aware of the decision I gave her copy and put the  appeal  back  in
        the list to enable her to consider it.


     9. At the start of the hearing I gave  Mr  Melvin  an  opportunity  to
        again read Mosira. Neither party requested any further time  or  an
        adjournment of the hearing. There  followed  a  discussion  of  the
        Court of Appeal decision. Mr  Melvin  did  not  make  any  specific
        submissions in light of the Court of Appeal authority. I  indicated
        my preliminary view that the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  by
        allowing the appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
        revoke his protection status because she had not  fully  considered
        the position of the UNHCR, which was contrary to her own policy. Ms
        Jegarajah made further submissions noting that there  had  been  no
        challenge to the judge's section 72 decision and that, while  there
        had been a change in government in the DRC, the UDPS was  still  in
        opposition and its members still targeted. She submitted  that  the
        judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  had   not
        discharged the burden of proof.

Discussion

    10. The CRS decision was made on the basis of Article 1C(5) of the 1951
        Refugee Convention and paragraph 339A(v) of the immigration rules.


    11. Article 1C provides, in relevant part:
         This Convention shall cease to apply to any  person  falling  under
         the terms of section A if:
         ...
         (5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in  connexion  with
         which he has been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of his nationality ...
    12. Paragraph 339A(v) of the immigration rules reflects Article  1C  of
        the Refugee Convention and makes provision for the revocation of  a
        grant of asylum. It applies when a person granted asylum:
          (v) ... can no longer, because  the  circumstances  in  connection
         with which they have been recognised as a refugee  have  ceased  to
         exist, continue to refuse to avail themselves of the protection  of
         the country of nationality;
         ...
         In considering (v) ..., the Secretary of State shall have regard to
         whether the change of circumstances is of such  a  significant  and
         non-temporary nature that the refugee's fear of persecution can  no
         longer be regarded as well-founded.
    13. The Respondent's right of appeal  arose  under  s.82(1)(c)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
        Immigration Act 2014) because the Appellant decided to  revoke  his
        protection status. The Respondent appealed  on  the  ground,  inter
        alia, that the decision to revoke his  protection  status  breaches
        the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention
        (s.84(3)(a)).


    14. The  judge  could  therefore  only  allow  an  appeal  against  the
        revocation of the Respondent's protection status on the basis  that
        the decision breached the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
        Refugee Convention. The judge's decision however, at [78] to  [80],
        appears to be based on the Appellant's failure to take into account
        the UNHCR's comments contained in their letter  dated  12  February
        2015, which was contrary to the Home Office's policy on  revocation
        of refugee status  (paragraph  3.7),  and  that  the  'Home  Office
        Guidance' did not carry out the  recommendation  contained  in  the
        UNHCR's Cessation Guidelines.


    15. It is clear to me that the judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he
        believed  relevant  guidance  and  policy  had  not  been  properly
        applied. Whether or not the judge's observations were justified, he
        did  not  identify  how  the  CRS  decision  breached  the   U.K.'s
        obligations under the  Refugee  Convention.  Article  1C  makes  no
        provision for the manner in  which  any  assessment  under  Article
        1C(5) is carried out. It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the
        possibility that the  Appellant  may  not  have  followed  her  own
        policy, or the UNHCR Guidelines, would lead  to  a  breach  of  the
        U.K.'s obligations under the Refugee Convention. In order to  reach
        this conclusion, the judge would  need  to  identify  the  specific
        Articles of the Refugee Convention that are said  to  be  breached,
        and to explain why there has been a breach. The failure  to  relate
        any failure to follow applicable policy or guidance to the Articles
        of the Refugee Convention renders his decision unsustainable.


    16. Having identified a material error of law,  and  in  light  of  the
        submissions made by the parties, I proceed to consider whether  the
        CRS decision does breach the U.K.'s obligations under  the  Refugee
        Convention.


    17. The burden of proving that Article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention
        applies rests on the Secretary of State (RD (Cessation - burden  of
        proof  -  procedure)  Algeria  [2007]  UKAIT   00066).   She   must
        demonstrate  that  the  Respondent  can  no  longer,  because   the
        circumstances in connection with which he has been recognised as  a
        refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to  avail  himself
        of  the  protection  of  the  DRC.  The  Appellant  must  therefore
        demonstrate  the  circumstances  'in  connection  with  which'  the
        Respondent was 'recognised as a refugee'.  There  was  no  evidence
        produced to the judge that  the  Respondent  was  recognised  as  a
        refugee on the basis that he would be the  subject  of  an  imputed
        political opinion. Given that the Respondent was only 9  years  old
        when he left the DRC (entirely lawfully, on an application of entry
        clearance), it is highly unlikely that the  DRC  authorities  would
        have imputed any political opinion to  him,  or  that  the  British
        authorities would have reasonably considered  that  the  Respondent
        was at real risk of being  the  subject  of  an  imputed  political
        opinion. It is much more likely that  the  Respondent  was  granted
        refugee status because his parents had been granted refugee status,
        which would have been consistent  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
        policy at the time. This appears to have been the view of the judge
        who stated, at [79] that the Appellant's refugee status "was as the
        dependent of his father." The grounds  of  appeal  settled  by  the
        Appellant state that the Respondent was not granted refugee  status
        in his own right, and Mr Melvin did not  seek  to  go  behind  this
        assertion. The Appellant has consequently not discharged the burden
        of proving that the Respondent was recognised as a refugee  on  the
        basis that he would be the subject of an imputed political opinion.
        I find he was not recognised as a refugee in his own right but  was
        granted refugee status  because  his  parents  were  recognised  as
        refugees.


    18. In Mosira the Court of Appeal considered the case of  a  Zimbabwean
        national who entered the UK aged 17 in  2004  pursuant  to  a  2003
        family  reunion  policy  in  order  to  join  his  mother  who  had
        previously been granted refugee status purely because of  the  lack
        of medical facilities available in Zimbabwe to  treat  her  medical
        condition. Under the terms of the 2003 policy Mr Mosira was himself
        granted refugee status by the Secretary of State. Mr Mosira went on
        to commit serious criminal offences and received  concurrent  terms
        of imprisonment for 3  years.  He  was  therefore  subject  to  the
        automatic deportation  provisions.  The  Secretary  of  State  gave
        notice of cessation of his refugee status pursuant to Article 1C(5)
        and paragraph 339A(v) of the immigration rules. She contended  that
        the circumstances which led to the grant of  asylum  status  to  Mr
        Mosira  had  fundamentally  and  durably  changed  because  of  the
        improvements in the political situation in Zimbabwe.


    19. Mr Mosira had a right of  appeal  against  the  decision  that  the
        automatic deport provisions applied to him. An appeal to the First-
        tier Tribunal resulted in the  matter  being  reconsidered  by  the
        Upper Tribunal. In its August 2015  decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal
        held that the Secretary of State was not entitled to proceed by way
        of cessation of Mr Mosira's refugee status because the  changes  in
        circumstances in Zimbabwe had nothing to do with the original basis
        on which he was granted refugee status, which was as a child family
        member of a person who had been granted refugee status.  The  Upper
        Tribunal found that Mr Mosira had rebutted the presumption in  s.72
        of the 2002 Act and, as he was a person with refugee status for the
        purposes of the Refugee Convention, his removal to  Zimbabwe  could
        not be justified according to the test  and  laid  out  in  Article
        33(2) of the Convention (the prohibition on refoulment).


    20. The Court of Appeal noted that Mr Mosira did  not  appear  to  have
        been granted refugee status under paragraph 334 of the  immigration
        rules, expressed concern as to whether paragraph  339A  applied  to
        him at all, and noted that the Secretary of State had  consistently
        advanced her case on the basis that she was entitled to  decide  to
        cease to recognise  Mr  Mosira  as  a  refugee  by  virtue  of  the
        application of  article  1C(5)  of  the  Convention  and  paragraph
        339A(v) of the immigration rules.


    21. Although the Secretary of State, at the hearing of  her  appeal  in
        the Court of Appeal, sought to argue that the Upper Tribunal  erred
        in assuming Mr Mosira was to be treated as a refugee in the absence
        of a lawful cessation of his refugee status even  in  circumstances
        where there was no current risk of persecution, this  argument  was
        advanced very late in the day and it was considered unfair to allow
        the Secretary  of  State  to  rely  on  it.  Although  I  gave  the
        Presenting Officer a further opportunity to consider  the  judgment
        in Mosira there was no application for an adjournment  to  consider
        whether to advance her case on any other basis.


    22. At paragraph 49 of his judgment Lord Justice Sales stated,


         Mr Mosira was not granted refugee status by reason of the threat of
         ill-treatment by the authorities in Zimbabwe. Nor was his mother.
         Therefore the change in the threat posed by the authorities in
         Zimbabwe has no bearing upon "the circumstances in connection with
         which [Mr Mosira] has been recognised as a refugee". He was granted
         refugee status under the 2003 family reunion policy, to join
         someone in the United Kingdom who had (and continues to have)
         refugee status here: those were the "circumstances in connection
         with which he [was] recognised as a refugee". It cannot be said
         that the change in the threat posed by the authorities in Zimbabwe
         means that those "circumstances" have ceased to exist.


    23.   As in the case of Mosira, the Respondent was not granted  refugee
        status by reason of the threat of ill-treatment by the  authorities
        in the DRC. Although his father was granted refugee status on  this
        basis,  any  change  in  the  DRC  still  has  no  bearing  on  the
        circumstances  in  connection  with  which   the   Respondent   was
        recognised as a refugee.

    24. While there are differences between the position of Mr  Mosira  and
        the Respondent, I do not consider that the reasoning of  the  Court
        of Appeal, when applied to the facts, can lead to a conclusion that
        the circumstances in which he came to be recognised  as  a  refugee
        have ceased to exist. Although Mr Mosira was granted leave to enter
        the UK pursuant to a 2003 family reunion policy,  and  was  granted
        refugee status under the terms of that policy, there is nothing  in
        the evidence  before  me  to  indicate  that  the  grant  of  entry
        clearance to the Respondent in 1992  to  enable  him  to  join  his
        parents in the UK was, in principle,  any  different.  Although  Mr
        Mosira's right of appeal did not stem from the cessation  decision,
        the grounds of appeal under the earlier version of s.84(1)  of  the
        2002 Act are not materially different (the earlier  grounds  stated
        that the 'removal of the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
        consequence of the immigration decision  would  breach  the  United
        Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention...').


    25. Given that the political changes in the DRC have  not  altered  the
        basis upon which the Respondent was granted refugee  status,  I  am
        not persuaded that the circumstances in connection  with  which  he
        was recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist I  therefore  find
        that the CRS decision  did  breach  the  U.K.'s  obligations  under
        Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  contain  a  material  error  of
law.
The matter was remade,  and  the  appeal  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
Secretary of State's decision to revoke KN's  refugee  status  breached  the
UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               16 November 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


