
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00151/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34 of the Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Procedure                                   |                               |
|(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008                 |On 22 May 2020                 |
|On 21 May 2020                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     SJ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse   the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims and revoke  his  refugee
    status.

 2. The appellant's appeal was heard at Harmondsworth in November  2019  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan.   The  judge   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in January 2020.  The First-tier Tribunal considered that
    the judge had arguably erred by  making  significant  errors  of  fact;
    making a misdirection of law; failing to understand the parties' cases;
    making erroneous findings; and purporting to dismiss the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appeal was due to be heard in the Upper Tribunal on 24  March  2020
    but the hearing had to  be  cancelled  as  a  result  of  the  Covid-19
    pandemic.  On 23 April  2020,  the  Upper  Tribunal  sent  a  Note  and
    Directions,  in  which  I  expressed   the   provisional   view   that,
    notwithstanding the Secretary of State's skeleton  argument,  filed  by
    the respondent in connection with the aborted hearing of 24 March,  the
    grounds of challenge made it plain that Judge M A Khan's  decision  was
    vitiated by legal error and could not stand.

 5. In response to my directions, Ms Sanders has filed written  submissions
    dated 5 May 2020.  The respondent  has  not  chosen  to  file  anything
    further.

 6. Insofar as errors of fact are concerned, it is, in  my  view,  manifest
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to have  regard  to  relevant
    evidence.  He described having a bundle of 187 pages, whereas  in  fact
    there was an 800 page bundle.  He described the appellant as committing
    "serious violent offences", which was not the case.  He found that  the
    appellant had committed "aggravated burglary", when the  appellant  had
    in fact been convicted of "simple burglary".

 7. With respect to the respondent, these are far  from  being  typographic
    errors.

 8. In addition, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made,  at  best,  unclear
    findings regarding the death of the appellant's father.  Insofar as the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared to think that the Red Cross had  not
    corroborated the appellant's alleged efforts to find his family through
    them, the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to note the determination of
    an earlier judge, who accepted that the appellant had  tried  his  best
    and that a referral to the  British  Red  Cross  International  Tracing
    Service had been made (albeit with no successful outcome).

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge wrongly held that the appellant  had  put
    forward "no serious case" under Article 8.  On the  contrary,  detailed
    submissions had been made on this issue, contrasting the life that  the
    appellant had in the United Kingdom with the one which he was  said  to
    face, if returned to Afghanistan.



Decision

I am entirely satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
cannot stand.  I set his decision aside.  Since the entirety  of  the  fact-
finding  exercise  will  have  to  be  re-conducted,  I  consider  that  the
appropriate is for the matter to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
for fresh findings on all issues.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                      Signed
                      Mr Justice Lane


                                             Dated: 21 May 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber


