
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00110/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Head at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 05 September 2017                         |On 31 October 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     A K


                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R O' Ryan Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis and Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 2. The Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of  their
    family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Respondent  and  to  the
    Appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 3. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is brought by the Secretary  of  State
    who was the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal. However, for ease of
    reference, we refer to the parties as they were known in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in  January  1997.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 March 2011. He applied  for  asylum
    on the same day. The application was refused and he was granted limited
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 1 June 2014, as a minor. He
    appealed the refusal of asylum. On 14 December  2011,  the  appeal  was
    successful. The appellant was granted  leave  as  a  refugee  until  13
    December 2016.

 5. On 9 June 2014 at North Cambridgeshire Juvenile Court the appellant was
    convicted of battery and was given a referral order of 4 months. On  19
    November 2015 at Peterborough Crown Court the appellant  was  convicted
    of wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm and on 9 December  2015  he
    was sentenced to 12 months' detention in a Young Offenders Institute.

 6. On 17 August 2016, a decision was made to deport  the  appellant  under
    section 32 (5) of the UK Border Act  2007.  In  the  same  letter,  the
    respondent ceased the appellant's refugee status on the basis that  the
    circumstances in which the refugee was recognised had ceased  to  exist
    and that he could no longer continue to refuse the  protection  of  the
    country of his nationality or because such protection  has  now  become
    available where it was once not.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. On 7 June  27  judge
    Andrew allowed the appellant's appeal on the basis that the  respondent
    had failed make good the cessation issue, and accordingly the appellant
    remained refugee and so excluded from deportation.

 8. On 22 June 2017, the respondent was granted permission to appeal by the
    First-Tier  Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  finding  that
    cessation of refugee status cannot be founded  upon  an  alteration  of
    circumstances such that an appellant would, at the  time  of  purported
    cessation, have available in the country of  return  a  safe  haven  of
    reasonable internal flight, which had not been available at the time of
    grant of refugee status, was a point of law as yet  undecided  and  the
    alternative view would be fairly arguable. The judge's finding  in  the
    alternative that  internal  relocation  would  not  be  reasonable  was
    arguably not fully reasoned.

 9. Mr Kotas submitted that in  concluding  that  cessation  could  not  be
    founded on internal relocation the judge relied on UNHCR  guidance.  Mr
    Melvin asked whether or not the UNHCR guidance is relevant. It was  not
    the definitive answer. The  judge  should  have  exercised  caution  in
    placing reliance on the UNHCR assessment. The case of SB (cessation and
    exclusion) Haiti  [2005]  UKAIT  00036  at  25  to  27  emphasises  the
    appropriate reservations about the UNHCR guidelines.  Their  assessment
    that internal relocation is not relevant to the question  of  cessation
    considerably overstates  the  convention  requirement.  Ultimately  the
    question for the judge was whether or not someone  is  a  refugee,  and
    internal relocation is a part of that.

10. Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant had been granted  asylum  on  the
    basis that his minority  put  him  at  risk  in  Kabul,  following  the
    authority of the case of LQ, to the point that at that time  he  was  a
    member of a particular social group, namely an orphan who was a  minor.
    He was no longer a minor. The appellant's claim was of a localised fear
    from the Taliban and it was not  a  fear  of  the  State.  The  country
    guidance case was to the point that internal relocation  would  operate
    because Kabul is determined safe. The contrary  opinion  of  UNHCR  can
    carry little weight given that it is an assessment which  goes  outside
    of the UNHCR remit. The UT says as an adult internal relocation is  not
    unduly harsh. At paragraph 28 of the judge's decision he states that he
    is looking at the question of whether or not it would be  unduly  harsh
    to expect the appellant to relocate, in the alternative. The difficulty
    with taking the case as its highest is that if he is erred before it is
    difficult to be sure that he has  given  proper  consideration  to  the
    question in the alternative. For example, he has  not  dealt  with  the
    availability of the integration package mentioned at 31 of the  reasons
    for refusal in the context of providing assistance on return to  Kabul.
    Similarly, the reasons for  refusal  deal  with  the  position  of  the
    appellant's mental health and the availability of treatment  in  Kabul.
    When looking at the issue of mental health the judge must take  account
    of J 2006 EWCA in assessing whether or not the illness can be  managed,
    and in particular whether it relates to worry about immigration status.
    The judge gives a cursory  consideration  and  has  failed  to  provide
    properly articulated reasons directed at the disputed issues.

11. Mr O'Ryan said that his overarching submission is that  the  respondent
    has approached the question of cessation from the wrong starting point.
    In the decision of  17  August  2016,  the  respondent  considered  the
    question as if a fresh application. She decided the position on risk on
    return as at that date. In doing  so  the  respondent  failed  to  give
    recognition of the burden  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish
    fundamental change. The respondent continues to reflect that  erroneous
    approach  when  in  the  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  judges
    criticised for failing to deal with paragraph 28  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter where  reference  is  made  to  paragraph  339O  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the paragraph referencing internal relocation  which
    is relevant in the context of a fresh claim.

12. Mr O'Ryan defended the judge's decision on the basis that at  paragraph
    23 the judge correctly self directs referring to the  case  of  Abdulla
    and Others Bundesrepublic Deutschland Case The 175/08  and  Others  the
    Grand Chamber dealing with article 11  (I)  (e)  of  the  qualification
    directive framing the question in the context of whether there had been
    a change of circumstances of a significant and non-temporary nature  in
    the 3rd country.

13. It was perfectly proper for the judge to look  at  the  UNHCR  guidance
    relating  to  the  meaning  of  the  legal  provisions  in  respect  of
    cessation.  That  is  an  entirely  different  exercise  to  the  UNHCR
    providing views about country conditions and practicalities of  return.
    There is nothing in  the  UNHCR  guidance  about  matters  relevant  to
    cessation which is specific to the practicalities of return.  In  those
    circumstances it was wrong to take  criticism  of  the  reliability  of
    UNHCR country position and apply it as a reason to be critical of their
    interpretation or view on the law. So far the case of SB  is  concerned
    paragraphs referred to by Mr  Melvin  do  not  include  any  definitive
    analysis of the law and cessation and they make  no  reference  to  the
    question of the guidelines, and in particular to paragraph  17  of  the
    UNHCR guidelines to which the judge in this case refers.

14. Mr O'Ryan sought to rely on an unreported decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson promulgated on 17th of May 2016. That is  not  appropriate
    not least because it  was  not  intended  to  have  effect  beyond  the
    specific  dispute  it  presented,  but  also  because,  as  Mr   O'Ryan
    recognised, some of the wording  is  difficult.  Further  although  the
    UNHCR guidelines are referred to, there is no resolution of  a  dispute
    as to the weight to be attached to the guidance.  The  case  was  quite
    different and did not  involve  a  situation  where  the  guidance  was
    arguably at odds with  Article  1  C  of  the  refugee  convention.  In
    addition, it was a case to which the Qualification  Directive  was  not
    applicable because of its date.

15. Mr O'Ryan argued that any misdirection in adopting the UNHCR guidelines
    would not me material because the judge considers at paragraph 28  that
    internal relocation would be unduly harsh. I should remember that  none
    of  the  appellant's  evidence  was  contested.  There  was  no  cross-
    examination of the appellant or his supporting witnesses. If it were  a
    proposition that there were other relatives in Kabul or elsewhere  that
    it was not put. The appellant's evidence that he was an orphan  without
    family to turn to was accepted by judge Iqbal who allowed his appeal in
    2011. Similarly, the evidence  of  the  appellant  psychological  state
    within the bundle the First-tier  including  evidence  of  his  suicide
    attempts. The judge tells me what she makes of that  evidence,  and  in
    the context of the way in which the case was put, i.e. the  absence  of
    dispute  of  the  evidence,  that  was  sufficient.  Mr  Melvin's  bare
    assertion about the integration package is  an  inadequate  basis  upon
    which to undermine the judge's conclusion. There was no evidence of the
    integration package, it was impossible for the judge to  know  what  it
    was because there was no material to engage with. It is trite that  the
    unduly harsh test is not amount to only and Article 3 risk.

16. Mr Kotas asked me to place no weight on the decision of Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson because it was trite law that judges can come to different
    conclusions. No error of law was found in the decision and it  did  not
    contain a definitive position in respect of this discreet area of  law.
    In this case the position is governed by  the  immigration  rules.  The
    circumstances upon which the appellant was  granted  asylum  ceased  to
    exist  he  had  been  a  minor,  now  he  was  an  adult.  Plainly  the
    circumstances upon which he was granted asylum had ceased to exist.

Discussion

17. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of  asylum  was  allowed  in
    2011. Judge Iqbal found that the appellant was  at  risk  in  his  home
    area. The judge accepted the appellant's account that his father was  a
    Mullah, who joined the Taliban, and was killed in the fighting  between
    the Taliban and the authorities. The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    came from Kunar, that the Taliban actively sought to recruit  him,  and
    had kidnapped him to that  end.  The  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    account of having escaped from the Taliban, and that his refusal to  be
    recruited resulted in the Taliban targeting him, and killing his mother
    and his brother. The judge found Kunar is a stronghold of the  Taliban,
    that he remained at risk from the Taliban, and that he  would  have  no
    protection from the authorities in that area.

18. Having found that the appellant was at risk in his home area the  judge
    considered the question of internal  relocation  to  Kabul.  The  judge
    begins by noting  the  age  of  the  appellant,  and  noting  that  the
    appellant had complied with the tracing requirements, found him  to  be
    an orphan. Applying the case of LQ the judge concluded he would  be  at
    risk on return to Kabul as a member of a particular social group.

19. In considering those findings Judge Andrew noted  that  the  respondent
    brought forward no evidence to show that Kunar province  has  undergone
    any significant positive change since the grant of asylum in 2011. What
    evidence there was tended to go the other way. Judge  Andrew  concluded
    that the respondent had not established that the  cessation  provisions
    applied in respect of the circumstances in connection with  which  he's
    been recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist in his home area.

20. Turning to the issue of internal relocation Judge Andrew concluded that
    the issue had no application in light of the UNHCR  guidance.  In  this
    regard I find that the judge erred. The revocation  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules are set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter,  and
    are in the Rules at 338 A and 339 A. In the event  they  replicate  the
    provisions of the Qualification Directive Article 11,  and  Article  1C
    (5) of the Refugee Convention. In short: the person

      a)  "can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with which
         he or she has been recognised as a refugee have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to avail himself or herself of the protection of
         the country of nationality".

21. On the face of the wording the consideration is  of  the  circumstances
    which gave rise  to  the  entitlement.  The  case  of  capital  Abdulla
    involved a dispute about the assessment of country conditions and their
    durability. It is not  authority  that  the  language  of  the  refugee
    convention does not bear its ordinary meaning. With regard to the UNHCR
    guidance whilst it purports to address the  issue  it  so  exceeds  the
    ambit  of  the  provision,  and  stands  alone,  it  cannot  have   the
    determinative weight afforded it by the Judge. There is no  basis  upon
    which to limit the consideration of the "circumstances" to those of the
    home area. Internal relocation is always part of the consideration of a
    person's  qualification  for  refugee  status.  To   exclude   internal
    relocation from the cessation consideration would be inconsistent  with
    the wording of the Article and inconsistent with the  core  purpose  of
    surrogate protection.

22. The final issue for me to decide is if the Judge's decision on internal
    relocation was affected by error. I can see no basis to  conclude  that
    it was.   Previously Judge Iqbal had decided that Kabul was not a  safe
    location because the appellant would face a real  risk  of  persecution
    there.  Judge  Andrew  plainly  started  from  the   premise   of   the
    reasonableness of relocation, identifying only matters that went to the
    issue of harshness, so recognising the  validity  of  the  respondent's
    point that the Kabul was  safe.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    earlier error has not vitiated the basis upon which this  part  of  the
    claim was assessed.

23. Mr Kotas relied on a failure to specifically deal with the offer of  an
    integration package mentioned  at  paragraph  31  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter as being mentioned in paragraph  25  of  the  notice  of
    intention to cease refugee status. I find no merit in the point. It was
    not specifically in the grounds but in any event as Mr O  'Ryan  points
    out the evidence to support the assertion was not brought  forward  and
    was not before the judge. it is not said  that  the  HOPO  on  the  day
    relied on it  in  submissions  to  answer  the  otherwise  unchallenged
    evidence of the appellant. Although the grounds rely on  the  appellant
    having said that in 2011 he had a brother in Afghanistan and an  uncle.
    I note that the judge found the uncle had refused to help  him  and  so
    was not available to him in any event. Mr  Kotas  did  not  pursue  the
    point before me. He was right to leave it because the appellant's  case
    to the judge was that there was no one to turn to in Afghanistan and he
    was not challenged on that evidence.

24. Although the consideration is markedly brief, it is  not  cursory.  The
    appellant  had  put  in  considerable  evidence  which  had  not   been
    contested. The judge expresses the significance of the  fact  that  the
    witness evidence was not challenged. The grounds do not argue that  the
    conclusion was not open to the Judge on that  evidence.  There  was  no
    misdirection in respect internal relocation.  In  the  context  of  the
    dispute as it unfolded before the judge on the day I am satisfied  that
    this is a sufficiently reasoned conclusion,  fully  explaining  to  the
    respondent why the judge concluded in the appellant's favour.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal reveals  no
    material error of law and stands.





Signed                          Date 27 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
