

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00103/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15th November 2017                      |On 18th December 2017          |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     GC
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Holmes, instructed by GMIAU


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, CG, is a national of Zimbabwe born on the [ ] 1983.  On
    the 13th  April  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  OR  Williams)
    allowed, on human rights grounds, her  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    deport her. The Secretary of State  now  has  permission[1]  to  appeal
    against that decision.




    Anonymity Order

 2. There would be no reason to anonymise the  Appellant's  identity.  This
    case does however turn on the presence in the United  Kingdom  of  four
    children; I am concerned that identification  of  the  Appellant  could
    lead to identification of those children. Having had regard to Rule  14
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and   the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The background facts are these.   GC arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    the 3rd February 2003 and claimed asylum. She was granted  asylum,  and
    indefinite leave to remain, on the 26th March 2003, it  being  accepted
    that she had a well- founded  fear  in  Zimbabwe  for  reasons  of  her
    political opinion.  Her husband and  daughter  were  both  subsequently
    granted indefinite leave in line with her.

 4. On the 13th February 2015 GC was convicted at  Bolton  Crown  Court  of
    fraud charges: "making false representations to make gain  for  herself
    or another or to cause loss to another or expose another to risk".  She
    was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment on the 6th March  2015.    This
    was the index offence which led the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department to take action to deport her. GC was served with a notice of
    intention to deport; the UNHCR was informed that her refugee status was
    to be revoked; the deportation order was signed on the 2nd August 2016.



 5. The legal framework for the Secretary of State's decision  was  section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, which requires her to 'automatically'
    deport foreign criminals:

         32  Automatic deportationE+W+S+N.I.


         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
         (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a) who is not a British citizen,

           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

         (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months.

         (3) Condition 2 is that-

           (a) the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of State
           under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal), and

           (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

         (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
         (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
         public good.

         (5) The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in respect
         of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).



 6. GC  could  successfully  resist  deportation,  however,  if  she  could
    demonstrate that she fell within one of the  'exceptions'  set  out  in
    section 33 of the same Act:




         33 ExceptionsE+W+S+N.I.


         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
         (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-

           (a) do not apply where an exception in this section applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and

           (b ) are subject to sections 7 and 8 of the Immigration Act 1971
           (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other
           exemptions).

         (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

           (a) a person's Convention rights, or

           (b) the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
         Convention.

           ....


 7. It was with s33(2)(b) in mind that the Secretary of State  took  action
    to revoke GC's refugee status before the deportation order was  signed.
    The  refusal  letter  dated  2nd  August   2016   explains   that   the
    circumstances pertaining to the grant of asylum no longer  subsist:  GC
    had been granted asylum on the basis of her association with  the  MDC,
    and since that  party  was  now  legally  recognised  as  the  official
    opposition to Mugabe there was no current risk of  harm.   GC  did  not
    contest these findings before the First-tier Tribunal.


 8. On appeal GC instead relied on  the  second  exception  in  s33(2),  at
    subsection (a). She contended that her removal to Zimbabwe would be  an
    unlawful interference with her human rights, in  particular  Article  8
    ECHR. In this regard she relied on  the  presence  in  the  UK  of  her
    children.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that GC is a foreign  criminal  and  that
    her deportation would be conducive to the  public  good.   It  directed
    itself to the principle  that  the  more  serious  the  offending,  the
    greater the public interest in deportation.    It  had  regard  to  the
    remarks of the sentencing judge, which revealed that this had not  been
    GC's first conviction for fraud, a history which the judge  treated  as
    an aggravating feature of the case. The Tribunal  then  considered  the
    evidence regarding the likelihood of reoffending, and  having  done  so
    concluded that she posed a low risk. The Tribunal gave five reasons for
    that conclusion. First, that GC had split from  her  partner  whom  the
    Tribunal described as a 'destabilising influence'. Second, the  lengthy
    sentence imposed had given her a chance to reflect and  understand  the
    triggers to her own offending. Third, GC expressed full  responsibility
    for her offending, and had sought  to  address  her  own  behaviour  by
    undertaking courses in prison. Fourth, since she got out of prison  she
    had  secured  employment  and  was  leading   an   "honest   productive
    lifestyle". Fifth, upon her release on licence she had  fully  complied
    with all probation requirements and demonstrated a willingness to  work
    with  the  authorities.   The  Tribunal  went  on   to   give   express
    consideration to the role that deportation of foreign  criminals  plays
    in deterring future crime by others.


10. Against that background the Tribunal proceeds to assess the position of
    the Appellant's children. Three of her four children were minors at the
    date of the appeal, and  they  are  all  British  children.  Her  adult
    daughter is aged 18 and has indefinite leave to remain.   The  children
    see their father approximately once every three weeks. As to whether it
    would be unduly harsh on the children to remain in the UK without their
    mother, the Tribunal reminded itself of the  "onerous"  burden  on  the
    Appellant to demonstrate that this test is met. It  gave  four  reasons
    for finding that she had discharged that burden.

11. First, the child K had significant  health  problems  stemming  from  a
    history of encephalitis and kidney complaints from which  she  had  not
    made a full recovery. Medical evidence before the Tribunal stated  that
    the child experienced  considerable  stress  when  separated  from  her
    mother and that this had resulted  inter  alia  in  epileptic  seizure.
    Since her mother had been  released  from  prison  there  had  been  no
    seizures and this was to be attributed to her stabilising presence.

12. Second, the children could not depend, in the absence of their  mother,
    on their father to act responsibly. The Tribunal had regard to evidence
    produced by Child Welfare Services relating to the  father's  "erratic"
    behaviour, including alcohol abuse and violence.

13. Third, it is likely that the Appellant's removal would  result  in  the
    children becoming dependent on S, the 18 year old girl. The Tribunal so
    found because that  is  what  happened  previously  when  their  father
    abandoned his responsibilities. S had already shown signs of  suffering
    from stress and inability to cope although her situation  had  improved
    upon her mother's release from prison.

14. Fourth, there are no other  family  members  in  the  UK  to  whom  the
    children (or their father) could turn for support.

15. In respect of their possible return to Zimbabwe the Tribunal said this:

         "I have carefully considered whether it would be unduly harsh  [for
         the children] to  leave  the  UK  with  the  appellant  and  go  to
         Zimbabwe. The appellant will  be  returning  to  Zimbabwe  after  a
         considerable number of years away and with no  support  network  (I
         had no reason to doubt her evidence that her surviving family,  her
         2 siblings, now live in South Africa). Taking into account the  age
         of the children, cultural background in the UK only, the fact  that
         they  are  settled  in  school,  health  needs   (K   has   regular
         neurological/kidney function assessments and has been referred  for
         assessment by a Speech Therapist due to her Learning  Disability  -
         this care, expected for a  British citizen, would not be  available
         to her in Zimbabwe, moreover she  is  unable  to  fly  due  to  her
         history of neurological ill-health), S is 18 years old  and  whilst
         not a child has the need for  emotional  support  from  her  mother
         following her traumatic assaults both from her father  and  others.
         The fact that the appellant would be without work and accommodation
         would make the whole family vulnerable and such  a  move  would  be
         unduly harsh for the children".





    The Secretary of State's Appeal

16. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    its approach in the following manner:


              i) Failure to give reasons for the finding that there is a low
                 risk of reoffending, in particular for the finding that the
                 children's father was a 'destabilising factor';


             ii) Failure to take material matters into account  in  findings
                 that there is a low risk of reoffending, in particular  for
                 failing to note that she has  been  on  licence  since  her
                 release;

            iii) In giving little/no weight to the important principles that
                  deportation serves as a deterrent  and  an  expression  of
                 public revulsion;

             iv) Failing to take into account material evidence that  Bolton
                 Children's Services had no  involvement  with  this  family
                 until after the Appellant's release from prison;

              v) The adult child should have been dealt with separately

             vi) The Tribunal should have taken into account the  statements
                 made in the refusal letter about the availability of health
                 care and education in Zimbabwe.


17. Permission was granted on all grounds by Designated Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Woodcraft, who added for good measure that  the  Tribunal
    should have considered whether the children could be left in  the  care
    of social services. For the  sake  of  completeness  I  note  that  the
    Secretary of State has formally distanced herself from  that  idea,  it
    being wholly contrary to her published policy on  deportation  and  the
    best interests of British children.  That  additional  ground  was  not
    therefore pursued before me.




    Discussion and Findings


18. There is no merit in the ground that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    give reasons for its finding that there was a low risk of the Appellant
    reoffending. As I have summarised above, in  fact  it  identifies  five
    reasons, all of which are set out in the determination  with  admirable
    clarity. The Secretary of State may not agree with those  reasons,  but
    that of course is a matter not capable of  demonstrating  an  error  of
    law.  The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  father  was  a
    destabilising influence, given the independent evidence before it (from
    Social  Services)  of  his  drinking,  physical  abuse  and   "erratic"
    behaviour.


19. In its assessment of likelihood  of  reoffending  the  Tribunal  looked
    holistically at the Appellant's overall circumstances. It accepted,  as
    it was entitled to do, her credible evidence that  her  lengthy  prison
    sentence had changed her behaviour.  It was uncontested fact  that  she
    was now responsible for her children on her own, and the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to place weight on that matter when considering how likely  it
    was that GC was re-offend.  The fact that she was on  licence  was,  in
    these circumstances, of minimal importance in the  overall  assessment.
    The Tribunal plainly had regard, in addition, to the sentencing remarks
    of the Trial Judge.

20.  In  respect  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  the  Tribunal
    recognises the significant weight that that must attract  at  paragraph
    8, directing itself to the principle that "it would  be  rare  for  the
    best interests of the child to outweigh the strong public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals". Contrary to the assertion in the grounds,
    the Tribunal expressly recognises the importance of deterrence  and  in
    the expression of public revulsion at paragraph 26.

21. The grounds allege that the Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    account material evidence, namely that Bolton Children's  Services  had
    no involvement with this family until  after  the  Appellant's  release
    from prison: as Mr Harrison conceded before me, that ground is based on
    a misapprehension of the facts. The material from Bolton indicates that
    Children's Services became involved in these children's lives when they
    were living with their father and their mother was in prison.

22. As to the final ground Mr  Harrison  was  unable  to  take  me  to  any
    objective material - either before the First-tier Tribunal or myself  -
    to demonstrate that K would have been able  to  access  the  specialist
    care that he requires in Zimbabwe, a country whose healthcare system is
    said to be "in total collapse".

23. Properly analysed, these grounds amount to no more than a  disagreement
    with the findings, carefully made and clearly reasoned, by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. They disclose no arguable error of law.



    Decision and Directions


24. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error of law and it  is
    upheld.

25. There is an order for anonymity.
                                             [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          14th December 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Woodcraft on the 13th June 2017

