
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00097/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 29 March 2021                    |On: 07 April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [M W]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Thomas of Compass Immigration Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
revoke her refugee status and to refuse her human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 19 February 1974. She  claims
to have left Zimbabwe on 13 March 2001 and to have arrived in the UK  on  14
March 2001. On 21 February  2008  she  claimed  asylum,  together  with  her
daughter Maryrose, born on 2 October 2005.

The appellant's claim, as initially stated, was that  she  was  at  risk  in
Zimbabwe as a result of her involvement with the  MDC  as  well  as  on  the
basis of a family  feud  which  arose  from  her  sister's  former  husband,
Innocent Makanga, a police inspector in the  Zimbabwe  police,  holding  her
responsible for the break-up of his marriage. The appellant claimed also  to
have been arrested with her manager when she was working in  a  hotel  owing
to a clash during the presidential  elections  between  MDC  supporters  and
Zanu-PF militia. She claimed to have been detained overnight and  raped  and
that the hotel manager  was  ill-treated  and  died.  She  was  subsequently
arrested at a march and taken to the police station, but then  released  and
she was advised that her name was on a list  of  those  in  opposition.  She
left the country shortly thereafter.

The appellant's claim was refused on 6 August  2008,  but  she  successfully
appealed against that decision and was granted asylum on  27  October  2008,
with limited leave valid until 27  October  2013.  On  26  August  2010  the
appellant  married  Carl  Worsley.  On  26  September  2013  she   made   an
application for settlement protection.

On 14 July 2016 the appellant was convicted of five  counts  of  dishonestly
making false representations  and  fraud  and  on  23  March  2017  she  was
sentenced to 68 months' imprisonment.

On 13 February 2018 the appellant was  issued  with  a  decision  to  deport
pursuant to the Immigration Act 1971 and the UK Borders Act 2007,  in  which
the respondent invited her to seek to rebut the presumption  in  section  72
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  On  12  and  27  March
2018 the appellant's solicitors  made  representations  in  response.  In  a
letter dated 22 May 2018  the  respondent  notified  the  appellant  of  the
intention to revoke her refugee status pursuant to paragraph 339A(v) of  the
immigration rules on the basis that the country situation  had  changed  and
she  was  no  longer  at  risk  of  politically  motivated   violence.   The
appellant's solicitors made representations in response on 19  and  25  June
2018, as did the UNHCR, but the respondent revoked the  appellant's  refugee
status on 3 December 2018. A Deportation Order was issued  on  16  September
2019 and on the same day the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  revoke  the
appellant's protection status and to refuse her human rights claim.

In that decision, the respondent considered the appellant's  conviction  for
fraud, which involved her  persuading  individuals  to  invest  their  money
through her in what was a scam and which  led  to  them  losing  their  life
savings. The respondent considered that to  be  a  very  serious  crime  and
considered the appellant to be a potential danger to  the  community.  As  a
result the appellant was  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection  and  the
respondent certified that the presumption in section 72(2) if the NIAA  2002
applied to her so that she was excluded from protection  under  the  Refugee
Convention. The respondent also  considered  that  the  appellant  could  no
longer, because the circumstances in connection to which she was  recognised
as a refugee had ceased to exist, continue to refuse  to  avail  herself  of
the protection of her country of nationality and therefore decided to  cease
his refugee status in view of the fact that Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
Convention and paragraph 339A(v) of the immigration rules  applied.  It  was
not accepted that the appellant was at any risk on return to Zimbabwe.

With regard to Article 8, the respondent accepted that the appellant  had  a
genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  her  partner  and  daughter  but
considered that it would not be unduly harsh for her  partner  and  daughter
to live in Zimbabwe or to remain in the UK without her, particularly as  her
daughter was currently living with her aunt  (the  appellant's  sister)  and
had had to cope  without  the  appellant  whilst  she  was  in  prison.  The
respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  therefore  did  not  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 399 of  the  immigration  rules.  With  regard  to
paragraph 399A, the appellant had not been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
most of her life  and  it  was  not  accepted  that  she  was  socially  and
culturally integrated in the UK or that  there  would  be  very  significant
obstacles to her integration into Zimbabwe. The respondent considered  there
to be no very compelling circumstances outweighing the  public  interest  in
the appellant's deportation and concluded that  her  deportation  would  not
breach Article 8.

The appellant appealed against that decision  and  her  appeal  came  before
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis  on  20  March  2020.  The  appellant  gave
evidence before the judge of having experienced rape and abuse from the  age
of 16 years from a family friend who  worked  for  the  government  and  who
frequently came to the family home. She had become pregnant  from  the  rape
but the baby was taken from her. She feared the person who  had  abused  her
if she had to return to Zimbabwe. She was also concerned  about  what  would
happen to her daughter if she was deported as she was  her  daughter's  sole
carer. Her daughter had lived with church members and  then  with  her  aunt
whilst she, the appellant, was  in  prison,  but  they  were  currently  all
living together. The judge had before him  an  independent  social  worker's
report.

The judge, having considered the nature and seriousness of  the  appellant's
crime and the sentencing remarks, upheld  the  section  72  certificate  and
accordingly  concluded  that  Article  1C(5)  of  the  1951  Convention  and
paragraph 339D had no application. The judge found that  the  appellant  was
not at risk of serious harm if returned to Zimbabwe and  he  concluded  that
returning her to that country would not breach Article 3. In  light  of  the
fact that the appellant's daughter had a very close family relative to  look
after her, and who had previously  carried  out  that  responsibility,   and
given the seriousness of the appellant's offence, the judge  concluded  that
there were no very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  appellant's
deportation. He accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that the judge had misdirected  himself  by  omitting  to
consider whether the appellant had rebutted the presumption that she  was  a
danger to the community for the purposes of section 72 of the 2002  Act  and
had only considered the first limb of section  72(9);  that  the  judge  had
erred by failing to make findings on whether the appellant remained at  risk
from her brother-in-law and had failed to undertake a full  risk  assessment
under  Article  3;  and  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  Article  8  was
completely inadequate  as  there  was  a  failure  to  consider  the  social
worker's report and a failure to consider  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
daughter would be without any parents if she was deported.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, but was subsequently granted, on a  renewed  application,  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 19 July 2020. The matter then came before me.

Hearing and submissions.

At the hearing both parties made submissions before  me.  As  a  preliminary
matter, Ms Cunha conceded that the judge had erred by failing  to  undertake
a proper assessment of risk on return and by failing to give reasons why  he
was departing from the previous decision of the Tribunal in  regard  to  the
risk from the appellant's brother-in-law.  Ms  Cunha  said  that  the  other
grounds were, however, resisted.

Ms Thomas submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  make  any
findings on the second limb of the section 72  certification  in  regard  to
the appellant constituting  a  danger  to  the  public  and  had  failed  to
consider any of the evidence submitted in that regard. The judge's  findings
on the section 72 certification could not, therefore, stand. In addition  to
the concession in relation to Article 3, the judge had  also  erred  in  his
Article 8 assessment as he had failed to address the best interests  of  the
appellant's daughter. Ms Thomas submitted that the judge's decision  had  to
be set aside and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
hearing.

Ms Cunha submitted that it was implicit in  the  judge's  findings  at  [61]
that he considered the appellant to be a  risk  to  the  community  and  the
findings on the section 72 certificate were  therefore  sufficient.  As  for
Article 8, the judge had considered the independent social worker's  report,
which in itself considered the best interests of the child.

Discussion and conclusions

I agree with the concession made by Ms Cunha  in  relation  to  the  judge's
findings on risk on return, as it is clear that the judge, whilst  referring
to the determination of Judge Fountain in the appellant's  previous  appeal,
did not engage with all parts of that decision in the context of  Devaseelan
and failed to consider whether there remained a risk  to  the  appellant  on
the basis on which that appeal was allowed, namely from her former  brother-
in-law.
However, I cannot agree with Ms Cunha, in  resisting  the  first  ground  of
appeal, that it is implicit  in  the  judge's  findings  at  [61]  that  the
appellant remained a danger to the community and neither can I  accept  that
the brief and passing reference to risk at [79] was sufficient to show  that
the certification issue had been properly addressed by the judge. There  was
evidence before the judge in the form of letters from the Probation  Service
and evidence in relation to the appellant's rehabilitation which  the  judge
simply failed to consider. I cannot see how  the  judge's  decision  on  the
section 72  certificate  can  properly  be  upheld  and,  given  Ms  Cunha's
concession on the judge's  inadequate  findings  on  risk  on  return,  that
cannot be considered to be immaterial.

With regard to the judge's findings on Article 8, I again find merit in  the
grounds and  do  not  accept  Ms  Cunha's  submission  that  the  judge  had
effectively considered all relevant matters. The judge made no  findings  on
the best interests of the appellant's daughter and I do not  agree  with  Ms
Cunha that  it  was  sufficient  that  the  judge  had  had  regard  to  the
independent social worker's report.  The  judge  made  no  findings  on  the
impact on the appellant's daughter of her deportation and whether  it  would
be unduly harsh for her daughter to go to Zimbabwe with her or  to  stay  in
the UK without her. Further, the question of rehabilitation and whether  the
appellant posed a risk to the community was also a relevant matter  for  the
consideration of very compelling circumstances and  the  judge's  assessment
was also materially flawed by the absence of a proper assessment of risk  on
return.

For all of these reasons the  judge's  decision  is  materially  flawed.  It
seems to me that the errors and omissions are too numerous  and  significant
for  there  to  be  preserved  findings  and  the  appropriate   course   is
accordingly for the decision to be set aside in its  entirety  and  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided afresh.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Alis.


 Signed: S Kebede
 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                          Dated: 29 March 2021
