
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00018/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2021                  |On 2 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  AA's  appeal  against  the
respondent's  decision  to  deport  him  from  the  UK  and  to  refuse  his
protection and human rights claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and AA as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant, whose date of birth is given as 1 January 1975, is a  citizen
of Somalia from Mogadishu and is a member of the Ashraf  minority  clan.  He
arrived in the UK on 23  May  1995  using  a  Kenyan  passport  and  claimed
asylum. His claim was refused but he was given exceptional leave  to  remain
until 15 November 1996 and was subsequently recognised as a  refugee  on  10
July 1998 and granted leave until 15 November 1999. On 18 July 2000  he  was
granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.

Between 7 March 2001 and 15 February 2016 the appellant was convicted of  44
offences in the UK. On 6  March  2013  he  was  convicted  of  making  false
representations and was sentenced to six weeks imprisonment; on  16  October
2014 he was convicted of driving  offences,  fraud,  theft  and  failing  to
surrender to custody and was sentenced to 23 weeks imprisonment; and  on  15
February 2016 he was convicted of similar offences and was sentenced  to  26
weeks imprisonment.

On 7 March 2016 the appellant was sent a notice of liability to  deportation
under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, to which he responded  on
18 March 2016, giving reasons why he should not be  deported,  relying  upon
his parental responsibilities to his four children, and claiming to be  gay.
On 11 May 2016 the respondent notified the appellant  of  the  intention  to
cease his  refugee  status  and  again  invited  him  to  make  comments  or
representations.  The  appellant  made  representations  on  18  May   2016,
referring again to his sexuality. On 25 May 2016 the UNHCR was  notified  of
the intention to cease the appellant's refugee status and they responded  on
15 June 2016.

On 13 December 2016 the respondent made a decision to deport  the  appellant
and to refuse his protection and human rights claim.  The  respondent  noted
the appellant's claim that he had realised that he was bisexual in  2002  or
2003 and could not come to terms with it. His  girlfriend  was  pregnant  at
the time. He had one affair with a man in 2003, 2004, or 2005 and  then  had
a relationship with another man, MO, in 2007, which  lasted  a  year,  at  a
time when he was raising his children and had a girlfriend.  MO  was  killed
by Al-Shabaab when he returned to Somalia to  visit  his  mother  and  since
then he had had no other homosexual relationships. He smoked  heroin  as  it
prevented him from feeling sexual. The respondent did not  accept  that  the
appellant would be at risk from Al-Shabaab and did not accept  that  he  was
gay or bisexual. The respondent, relying  on  the  findings  in  MOJ  &  Ors
(Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  00442,  considered  that  the
security landscape of  Somalia  had  much  improved  since  he  was  granted
refugee  status  and  that  he  could  return  to  Mogadishu  without  being
persecuted due to his minority clan membership.  The  respondent  considered
that the appellant could no longer, because the circumstances in  connection
to which he was recognised as a refugee had ceased  to  exist,  continue  to
refuse to avail himself of the protection of his nationality  and  therefore
decided to cease his refugee status in view of the fact that  Article  1C(5)
of the Refugee Convention and paragraph 339A(v)  of  the  immigration  rules
applied. It was not accepted that he was at any risk on return to Somalia.

With regard to Article 8, the respondent noted that the  appellant  had  not
produced any evidence of his four children,  but  that  there  was  evidence
that they had been taken into care by social services. It was  not  accepted
that he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
children and it was not accepted that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
children if he was deported from the  UK.  The  respondent  noted  that  the
appellant was no longer in a relationship with  his  partner.  He  therefore
did not meet the requirements of paragraph 399  of  the  immigration  rules.
With regard to paragraph 399A, he had been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
most of his life,  but  it  was  not  accepted  that  he  was  socially  and
culturally integrated in the UK and it was not accepted that there would  be
very significant obstacles to his integration into Somalia.  The  respondent
considered there to be no  very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
public interest in his deportation and concluded that his deportation  would
not breach his Article 8 rights.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal  was  initially
heard by Judge  Chana  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  where  he  gave  oral
evidence, and was dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  18  April  2017.
However that decision was set aside by consent in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
the case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso  on  8  January
2020. The appellant did not appear at the hearing and neither was there  any
appearance by a legal representative on  his  behalf.  There  had  been  two
previous case management review hearings which the appellant had  failed  to
attend and it was noted that there was no known  current  address  for  him.
The notice of hearing had therefore been sent to his last-known address  and
Judge Veloso therefore proceeded to hear the appeal  in  his  absence,  with
submissions from the respondent.

The judge did not accept that the appellant was bisexual and did not  accept
that he had a fear of persecution in Somalia on the basis of his  sexuality.
The judge, however, noted that the appellant's initial  asylum  claim  which
had led to the grant of refugee status had not been solely  based  upon  his
minority clan status but was  also  based  upon  his  involvement  with  the
Somali Banadire Movement Front (SBMF) which the  respondent  had  failed  to
consider. She accordingly found that the respondent had failed to  discharge
the burden of proving that the circumstances in connection to which  he  had
been recognised as a refugee had ceased  to  exist.  The  judge  noted  that
since the appellant's case had been remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  he
had been convicted on 21 July 2018 of possession of  heroin  and  she  noted
that according to the OASys report, he  had  been  addicted  to  heroin  and
cocaine for over ten years and had been homeless  for  six  years.  On  that
basis, and given that the appellant would be returning to Mogadishu  without
any connections or  support  from  family  members,  without  any  financial
assistance and that the evidence suggested that he was unable to  take  care
of himself, the judge concluded  that  he  would  face  living  difficulties
amounting to serious harm in breach of  Article  3.  The  judge  accordingly
allowed the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge's reasons for  rejecting  the  Secretary  of  State's
case for cessation were wholly inadequate and failed to follow the  approach
in The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  MA  (Somalia)  [2018]
EWCA Civ 994 and the guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG
[2014] UKUT 00442; that the judge's Article 3  findings  were  unsustainable
in the light of MA Somalia and Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442; and that the judge's  reliance  upon  an  outdated
OASys report to speculate upon matters was arguably perverse.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, but was subsequently granted, on a  renewed  application,  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 10 March 2020. The matter then came before me.

Again there was no appearance by the appellant. I discussed at  length  with
Ms Cunha the record of his address and whether there was any  unfairness  in
the appeal proceeding in his absence, particularly as it  appeared  that  he
had been without a legal representative since 20  December  2017.  The  most
recent record Ms Cunha had was an address provided by the appellant  to  the
police and communicated to the Home Office Criminal Casework  Department  on
22 November 2020, following a period of detention  from  5  to  13  November
2020. I noted that that was the same address held by the Tribunal  and  that
the Notice of Hearing for today's hearing had been sent to that  address.  I
also noted that  that  was  the  address  to  which  the  previous  notices,
decisions and directions had been sent, including and following the  hearing
before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Veloso,  and  that  the  appellant  would
accordingly be aware that his appeal had been allowed and that the  decision
allowing  the  appeal  had  been  challenged  by  the  respondent.  In   the
circumstances, it seemed to me that the Notice of Hearing had been  properly
served on the appellant and that there was no unfairness  in  proceeding  to
hear the appeal in his absence.

Ms Cunha then made submissions  before  me,  relying  upon  the  grounds  of
appeal prepared by Mr D Clarke. She submitted that the judge  had  given  no
proper reasons for concluding that the respondent had failed  to  show  that
the circumstances in connection to which the appellant had  been  recognised
as a refugee had ceased to exist, in particular since there was no  evidence
that the appellant had had any involvement with the SBMF for over 25  years.
The judge failed to consider the appellant's current circumstances  and  any
risk on return  on  that  basis,  in  accordance  with  the  'mirror  image'
approach in The Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  MA  (Somalia)
[2018] EWCA Civ 994. Ms Cunha also relied upon  the  case  of  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department v KN  (DRC)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1665  in  that
respect, in so far as it endorsed the findings in  The  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department v MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797.

Ms Cunha submitted further  that  the  judge,  in  making  her  findings  on
Article 3, failed to  have  regard  to  the  approach  to  the  question  of
destitution in Said, as endorsed in MA (Somalia), and to the high  threshold
to be met in such cases. Finally, the  judge's  findings  were  perverse  in
that she relied upon a four year old OASys report and speculated  from  that
report on the appellant's current  circumstances  without  there  being  any
evidence from him, and made  assumptions  which  were  not  based  upon  the
evidence.

Discussion

I find myself in agreement with the respondent's grounds of  appeal  and  Ms
Cunha's submissions. I agree that the judge's findings  and  conclusions  on
the issue  of  cessation  of  refugee  status  were  inconsistent  with  the
approach set out in MM, MA  and  KN,  as  relied  upon  by  Ms  Cunha.  When
concluding that the respondent had failed to show that the circumstances  in
connection to which the appellant had  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  had
ceased to exist the judge relied, at [28], upon the appellant's  involvement
with the SBMF over 25 years ago as being  an  additional  and  determinative
factor beyond his membership of a minority clan. However the judge  did  not
assess the appellant's current situation in  that  regard  and  provided  no
basis for concluding that that would remain a risk factor under the  country
guidance in MOJ. The judge therefore failed  to  consider  material  matters
and misdirected herself in law, and her conclusion in relation to the  issue
of cessation is accordingly unsustainable.

I am also in agreement  with  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  on
Article 3, which  made  assumptions  and  speculated  upon  the  appellant's
current circumstances on the basis of an outdated OASys report  and  in  the
absence of any evidence from the appellant. As Ms Cunha properly  submitted,
the judge gave no weight  to  the  respondent's  submissions  in  regard  to
financial assistance  available  to  the  appellant  on  return  to  Somalia
through the facilitated return scheme, at [43], failing to consider that  he
had not sought to  make  any  such  application.  Furthermore,  the  judge's
conclusions on Article 3 in relation to destitution took no account  of  the
cases of Said and MA (Somalia),  as  elaborated  upon  in  the  respondent's
second ground, and the high threshold to be met in such cases.

For all these reasons I agree with Ms Cunha that the judge's  decision  must
set aside in all respects. Ms Cunha submitted that the judge's  errors  were
such that they infected all of her findings and that no findings,  including
those on the appellant's sexuality, could be preserved. She  requested  that
the case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided afresh  and  I
consider that that is the appropriate course.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Veloso.

    Anonymity

    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 11 February 2021
