
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00131/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 30 June 2017                     |On : 11 July 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                AMADU FOFANAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Gasparro, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  19
September 2016 refusing his protection and human rights claim further  to  a
decision to deport him pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007
and a decision to cease his refugee status.

The appellant, born on 1 January 1984, is a  citizen  of  Sierra  Leone.  He
arrived in the UK on 19 July 2002 and claimed asylum. On 26 May 2004 he  was
granted refugee status and indefinite leave to enter.

On 12 November 2015 the appellant was convicted of  possession  with  intent
to supply a controlled Class A drug, heroin, and on 15 January 2016  he  was
sentenced to two years' imprisonment. On 17 March 2016 he was served with  a
decision to make a deportation order under  section  32(5).  The  respondent
also, in a letter of the same date, invited the appellant to seek  to  rebut
the presumption under section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  Act  2002
that he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and  constituted
a danger to the community. On 18 March 2016 the  appellant  stated  that  he
wished to return to Sierra Leone and signed a disclaimer.

On 8 June 2016 the appellant was served with a notice of intention to  cease
his refugee status  under  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
paragraph 339A of the immigration rules on the basis that the  circumstances
in connection with which he had been recognised as a refugee had  ceased  to
exist. On 23 June 2016 the respondent notified the UNHCR  of  the  same  and
invited a response, which was received in a letter dated 1  September  2016.
In  a  decision  dated  19  September  2016  the  respondent   revoked   the
appellant's protection refugee status and refused  his  human  rights  claim
and maintained the decision to deport him. A deportation  order  was  issued
the same day pursuant to section 32(5) of the 2007 Act.

In her notification of intention to cease (revoke) the  appellant's  refugee
status dated 7 June 2016, the respondent noted  that  he  had  been  granted
refugee status on the basis that, as a young child  having  been  previously
captured and held hostage by the Revolutionary  United  Front  (RUF)  rebels
and government forces and forced to become a child slave, to return  him  to
Sierra Leone would result in his suffering mental  anguish  and  torment  as
his parents had been killed and there would be no one  there  who  would  be
able to care for him. The respondent noted that the political  situation  in
Sierra Leone had significantly changed since he was granted  refugee  status
and there was now  a  new  government  in  place  and  an  improved  country
situation. The respondent considered  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  his
father's friend on account of the fact that he had  stolen  a  diamond  from
him and noted that he last saw him when he was 15 years of  age  whereas  he
was now an adult  of  32  years  and  that  he  was  based  in  Guinea.  The
respondent considered it unlikely, due to the  passage  of  time,  that  the
appellant would be targeted by his father's friend and did not  accept  that
he would be at risk of persecution in Sierra Leone.

The respondent, in making her decision of 19 September 2016  to  refuse  the
appellant's protection and human rights claim  and  to  revoke  his  refugee
status, noted that the appellant had amassed 24 convictions in the  UK  from
6 December 2005 for 32  offences  including  offences  against  the  person,
offences against property, theft and kindred offences, offences relating  to
police/court/prisons,   drugs   offences   and   firearms/shotguns/offensive
weapons. The respondent considered the issue of cessation, noting  that  the
appellant had been granted refugee status as an unaccompanied minor  on  the
basis of the poor humanitarian situation  in  Sierra  Leone  but  concluding
that the situation had significantly improved and that he would be  able  to
re-integrate into the country. It was not accepted that he  would  face  the
prospect of living in circumstances falling below that which was  acceptable
in humanitarian protection terms and it was therefore not accepted that  his
return to Sierra Leone would lead to treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the
ECHR. The respondent was satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  no  longer,
because the circumstances in connection with which he was  recognised  as  a
refugee had ceased to exist, continue to refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
protection of his country of nationality. His refugee status  was  therefore
revoked. The respondent went on to consider Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  noting
that the appellant had failed to respond to the  notification  of  liability
to deportation and had provided no details of a partner or children  in  the
UK. The respondent therefore concluded that the  appellant  could  not  meet
the requirements in paragraph 399(a) and (b) or 399A and that there were  no
very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  his
deportation. The respondent found that the appellant could not meet  any  of
the exceptions to automatic deportation in section 33 of the 2007 Act.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  Judge
Hodgkinson in the First-tier Tribunal on 9  March  2017  and  he  gave  oral
evidence before the judge. The judge recorded that it  was  the  appellant's
contention that he continued to be at risk on  return  to  Sierra  Leone  on
account of his fear of the person from whom he stole a diamond and his  fear
of former members of the RUF and his neighbours in his home area due to  him
having previously been a recruited RUF child soldier. It was  also  asserted
that the appellant's removal to Sierra Leone would breach his Article 3  and
8 human rights, in relation  to  his  ability  to  reintegrate  into  Sierra
Leone, his significant mental health problems and alleged suicide  risk  and
his family and private life.

It was noted that the decision  of  19  September  2016  did  not  refer  to
section 72 and that it did not contain a section 72  certification.  However
it was accepted that section 72 applied and that the  appellant's  case  had
been certified under section 72. In considering the  appellant's  propensity
to re-offend, the judge considered the appellant's mental  health  problems,
as addressed in a psychological report from a Dr Brock  Chisholm,  dated  12
December 2016, noting the conclusion therein that he  suffered  from  severe
mental health repercussions arising from his experiences as a child  soldier
in Sierra Leone and within the context of a family history of psychosis  and
that he suffered from PTSD accompanied by psychotic symptoms such  as  those
seen in a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The  judge  also  had  regard  to  the
Consideration Minute from the Home Office  caseworker  who  was  responsible
for the appellant's grant of refugee status. The judge considered  that  the
appellant would probably commit further offences and that he had  failed  to
rebut the presumption in section  72(2)  that  he  posed  a  danger  to  the
community and concluded that he should be excluded from  Refugee  Convention
protection.

The judge then went on to consider  risk  on  return  to  Sierra  Leone.  He
considered that the appellant had fabricated  his  claim  of  a  recent  and
specific adverse interest in him in Sierra Leone, he did not accept that  he
would be at risk on the basis of the stolen diamond and he  did  not  accept
that he would be at risk on account of having been forcibly recruited  as  a
child soldier. He then went on to consider  the  appellant's  mental  health
and the relevance of that to an Article 3 and 8  claim.  It  was  argued  on
behalf of the appellant, and with reference to the European Court  judgement
of the Grand Chamber in Paposhvili v. Belgium - 41738/10, that  his  removal
would breach Article 3 as a result of his mental  health  problems.  However
the judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  mental  health  problems
reached the relevant threshold to engage Article 3.  With regard to  Article
8 the judge considered a statement from the appellant's former  partner  and
the mother of his two daughters, Alice, and accepted that the children  were
the appellant's. He accepted that the appellant enjoyed a family  life  with
his children but not with Alice, but he did not  accept  that  it  would  be
unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the appellant.  He
found that the appellant could not,  therefore,  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 399(a) or (b) of the immigration rules. The  judge  accepted  that
the  appellant  had  achieved  a  limited  level  of  social  and   cultural
integration in the UK and that there would be very significant obstacles  to
his integration in Sierra Leone, but concluded that he could  not  meet  the
requirements in paragraph 399A as he had not been resident  in  the  UK  for
most of his life. The judge concluded further that the  public  interest  in
the appellant's deportation was not outweighed by  compelling  circumstances
and that his removal would not be disproportionate or in breach  of  Article
8. Accordingly he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  regard
to the judge's decision on  Article  3  and  8.  Permission  to  appeal  was
initially refused but was subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal  on  11
May 2017.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 30 June  2017.   I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.


Ms Gasparro submitted that in light of the conclusions of the  doctor  which
the judge had accepted,  his  findings  at  [64],  that  the  appellant  was
"currently reasonably well" and  "there  is  no  evidence  before  me  which
establishes  that  his  removal  to  Sierra  Leone  would   result   in   an
irreversible decline in his health" were perverse. She  submitted  that  the
judge's Article 3 assessment was therefore wrong.  Further,  the  judge  had
failed in his  proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8,  to  consider
relevant matters including what would happen to the appellant on  return  to
Sierra Leone and the fact that his criminality was a direct  result  of  the
actions of non-state actors in Sierra  Leone  and  that  his  mental  health
problems did not arise out of a  naturally  occurring  disease  but  were  a
result of the same reasons leading  to  the  grant  of  refugee  status.  Ms
Gasparro also submitted that  the  judge  had  misinterpreted  the  doctor's
conclusions in regard to the risk of suicide  and  that  his  assessment  of
suicide risk was erroneous.


Mr Tufan submitted that it was not irrational  for  the  judge  to  conclude
that the appellant was currently reasonably well, as there was  no  evidence
that he had been sectioned and  his  condition  was  stable  and  was  being
managed by medication. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge was  bound  by  the
judgment in N v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL  31,
not Paposhvili, and that he had given proper consideration to  the  risk  of
suicide in accordance with the decision in J v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629.  He  relied  upon  the  case  of  KH
(Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ
1354. And submitted that  there  were  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
decision.


Ms Gasparro,  in  response,  reiterated  the  submissions  previously  made,
submitting that  the  appellant's  case  could  be  distinguished  from  the
reliance in N on D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 425 cases.


Consideration and findings


The challenge to the judge's findings on Article  3  is  a  narrow  one  and
boils down to the question of whether the judge, in light  of  the  accepted
conclusions in Dr Chisholm's report as recorded  at  [47]  to  [50]  of  his
decision, was entitled to conclude that the appellant did not meet the  high
threshold so as to engage Article 3. The grounds  in  particular  challenge,
in light of the medical report, the judge's  findings  at  [64],  that  "the
appellant is currently reasonably well" and "there is no evidence before  me
which establishes that his removal  to  Sierra  Leone  would  result  in  an
irreversible  decline  in  his  health  or...a   reduction   in   his   life
expectancy".

It cannot be disputed that  the  judge  conducted  a  thorough  and  careful
assessment of the medical evidence. It is relevant to consider the  findings
that he made.


At [61] the judge considered the evidence of medical care available  to  the
appellant in Sierra Leone, making the following finding:


    "The material satisfies  me  that,  whilst  there  is  some,  extremely
    limited, psychiatric care in Sierra Leone, such care is so  limited  in
    scope and availability that, in real terms, I entirely accept that  the
    appellant, bearing in mind his mental health problems and  the  content
    of Dr Chisholm's report, would neither seek to access, nor would he  in
    reality be able to access  any  effective  treatment.  Consequently,  I
    accept that his health would deteriorate in Sierra Leone, as  described
    by Dr Chisholm, whose report, I reiterate, is not the  subject  of  any
    challenge."


When considering paragraph 399A(c), at [82], the judge  made  the  following
finding:

    "I accept that he would be destitute if removed to Sierra  Leone,  with
    no ability to work, no work prospects and nobody realistically to  whom
    he might turn. I also accept that such would involve at least a gradual
    deterioration  in  the  appellant's  well-being,  as  indicated  by  Dr
    Chisholm."


The judge also accepted in its entirety the conclusions and  opinion  of  Dr
Chisholm, which included the following:

    At [47]: "Reference is made to a well-documented history of persecutory
    delusions and other psychotic and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
    symptoms, with documented hallucinations. Reference  is  also  made  to
    there being a history of suicidal thoughts but no history  of  suicidal
    intent or behaviour...Dr Chisholm indicates that  there  is  consistent
    opinion that he is not capable of taking care of his own mental  health
    and that he requires medication and monitoring, with a history of  poor
    diet and poor self-care skills..."

    At [48}: "the appellant suffers from severe mental health repercussions
    arising from his experiences as a child soldier in  Sierra  Leone...the
    appellant suffers from PTSD, accompanied by psychotic symptoms such  as
    those seen in the diagnosis of schizophrenia."

    At [49]: "the appellant's medical records "clearly indicate that  there
    is  little  doubt  that  he  will  relapse   without   medication   and
    monitoring." Dr Chisholm proceeds, in 48-49 of his report, as follows:


         "48. If he relapses he will present  a  clear  danger  to  himself,
         others and is likely to become severely mentally ill.  He  will  be
         completely unable to care for  himself,  including  neglecting  his
         physical needs such as epilepsy medication,  which  could  well  be
         life-threatening."

     At [50]: "In 50-58 of his report, Dr Chisholm concludes as follows:...


         "52. Even if there were  good  mental  health  services  in  Sierra
         Leone, which there are not, it is likely  that  he  would  relapse.
         Without medication, and people to help him to  regularly  take  his
         medication and monitor and change  it  according  to  need,  it  is
         extremely likely that he will have a relapse  of  severe  paranoia,
         delusions and hallucinations.


         53.  If he relapses in Sierra Leone, it seems almost  inconceivable
         that he will be able to care for himself. In my opinion this man is
         at very great risk of harm to himself through epilepsy,  drug  use,
         poor diet and an inability to find work or even accommodation...


         54.  ... the chances of his relapse in Sierra Leone  are  enormous.
         In this case they will be prolonged dangerous and severe ...


         58.  Because of his poor self care,  he  is  likely  to  have  some
         relapse in the UK, but this can be easily managed. He will  have  a
         severe psychotic relapse if he was sent to Sierra Leone,  where  he
         has no social  support  and  there  are  very  poor  mental  health
         services. He will  present  a  very  severe  risk  to  himself  and
         others."

The judge also referred, at [52], to the Consideration Minute from the  Home
Office caseworker responsible for the grant of refugee status, who  accepted
at that time, in May 2004, that if the appellant returned  to  Sierra  Leone
"his fragile mental state would be stretched to the limit"  and  that  "this
young man would suffer mental anguish and torment if he  was  to  return  to
Sierra Leone".

There can no criticism of the judge's consideration of the  evidence,  which
was particularly thorough and detailed. In such circumstances, I have  given
considerable thought as to whether or not the appellant's challenge  to  the
judge's conclusion at [64] is little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  his
decision. I am also conscious that I must not simply be substituting my  own
decision for that of another judge. I note that the respondent, in her  rule
24 response acknowledged at [2] that this was a  finely  balanced  case  but
considered that the judge had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings.
However, after careful deliberation I  find  myself  in  agreement  with  Ms
Gasparro that, in applying the above findings on  the  medical  evidence  to
the test in Paposhvili, which is what the judge  did  at  [64],  he  reached
conclusions that were simply unsustainable. Whilst the  judge's  conclusion,
that  the  appellant  was  "currently  reasonably  well",  was   plainly   a
reflection of the fact that his condition was currently stable, it is  clear
from the medical evidence that that would not be the case  if  he  were  not
being monitored in taking his medication  and  if  he  was  not  taking  his
medication. Furthermore, there clearly was evidence before  the  judge  that
established that the appellant's removal to Sierra Leone would result  in  a
rapid  and  irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of  health.  The  judge's
conclusion at [64] was not, therefore, in  my  view,  open  to  him  on  the
evidence before him and it seems to me that the evidence  before  the  judge
established that the appellant was able to meet the test in  Paposhvili  for
establishing an Article 3 claim.

Of course that would be immaterial in the long-run,  if  the  appellant  was
nevertheless unable to meet the more stringent  test  in  N.  As  the  judge
properly found at [64], N was the authoritative judgment and Paposhvili  was
not binding on him.  I  therefore  turn  to  the  question  of  whether  the
appellant was able to meet the very high test in N.


In N, Baroness Hale, in agreeing that the  appropriate  test  in  Article  3
health cases had to be the same stringent test in D v United Kingdom  (1997)
24 EHRR 425, said the following:
   "69.   In my view, therefore, the test, in this sort of case, is  whether
       the applicant's illness has reached such a critical stage (ie he  is
       dying) that it would be inhuman treatment to deprive him of the care
       which he is currently receiving and send him home to an early  death
       unless there is care available there to enable him to meet that fate
       with dignity. This is to the same effect as the text prepared by  my
       noble and learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead.  It  sums  up  the
       facts in D. It is not met on the facts of this case.
    1. There may, of course, be other exceptional cases, with other extreme
       facts, where the humanitarian considerations are equally compelling.
       The law must be sufficiently flexible to accommodate them."
At [70], Baroness Hale therefore contemplated there being other  exceptional
cases with other extreme facts where the  humanitarian  considerations  were
equally compelling. It seems to me that the appellant's case is one  of  the
very rare cases which could be said to fall  within  this  category.  Whilst
reliance was placed on the case of Bensaid v United Kingdom (2001)  33  EHRR
205 which involved an appellant with severe mental health problems  but  who
nevertheless was not considered to qualify for Article  3  protection,  this
appellant's case is, in my view, clearly distinguishable on the  basis  that
his mental health problems have arisen as a direct consequence of  the  very
issues which led the respondent to recognise him as a refugee in  the  first
place. In addition, the criminal offending leading to the revocation of  the
appellant's refugee status was plainly linked to his mental health  problems
and drug addiction which, in turn, and as stated, arose as a result  of  his
experiences in Sierra Leone. The Consideration Minute from the  Home  Office
caseworker made it clear  that  it  was  accepted  at  that  time  that  the
appellant was traumatised by  his  experiences  and  that  he  would  suffer
mental anguish and torment if he was to return  to  Sierra  Leone.  Although
the appellant is now a man of 33  years  of  age,  and  several  years  have
passed, the  medical  evidence  is  clear  in  that  the  appellant  remains
traumatised by his experiences in Sierra Leone. There is therefore also  the
additional consideration of the effect on the appellant of having to  return
to the country where he experienced the source of his trauma  and  which  he
left as a child after escaping captivity.


With regard to the test set out in N, I have also had regard to  the  recent
judgement of the Court of Appeal in The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department v MM (Zimbabwe) [2017] EWCA Civ 797,  where  Lord  Justice  Sales
commented at [16]:


   "I think it would be desirable for the Upper Tribunal to  look  again  at
   whether MM has a good basis for resisting deportation under Article 3  of
   the ECHR on the grounds of the likely radical deterioration in his mental
   health if he is returned to  Zimbabwe.  Although  we  did  not  have  the
   benefit of argument  on  this  point,  I  have  some  doubt  whether  the
   principle to be applied under Article 3 in this case  is  necessarily  as
   restrictive as the FTT thought it was. It seems to me to be arguable that
   to return someone to a country where they are likely to suffer a profound
   mental collapse, possibly amounting in effect to a destruction  of  their
   personality, might infringe the  right  under  Article  3  to  protection
   against torture and inhuman treatment and might qualify as one  of  those
   very exceptional cases in which lack of  medical  services  in  the  home
   country might constitute a bar to deportation (see  D  v  United  Kingdom
   (1997) 24 EHRR 423 and N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 885, GC). It may
   be that MM will face an uphill struggle to make out such a claim,  but  I
   consider that this issue should be open for fresh  consideration  by  the
   Upper Tribunal when the case is remitted to it. Thus, although I consider
   that the FTT erred in treating this factor as decisive under Article 8 in
   circumstances in which there  was  no  violation  of  Article  3,  it  is
   possible on a fresh assessment under Article  3  that  MM  could  succeed
   under that article."

On the medical  evidence  before  the  judge,  namely  the  report  from  Dr
Chisholm, it seems to me that it could be said of the appellant that  he  is
"likely to suffer a profound mental collapse, possibly amounting  in  effect
to a destruction of their personality",  in  the  terms  suggested  by  Lord
Justice Sale.

Accordingly,  for  all  of  these  reasons,  I  consider  that  the  judge's
conclusion on Article 3 risk on return is not sustainable and  must  be  set
aside and substituted by a finding that the appellant's  removal  to  Sierra
Leone would be in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. The  appellant's  Article
8 claim stands and falls with the decision on Article 3 and could  not  have
succeeded independently of a successful outcome under Article  3,  but  must
succeed on the basis of "very compelling  circumstances"  in  light  of  the
decision in Article 3.


DECISION


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and is  re-made  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 3 and 8 human rights grounds.

Signed   [pic]
 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                          Dated: 7 July 2017
