
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00115/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 6 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION mADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a failure to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on  1  November
    1994.

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 February 2010  when  aged
    15.  He entered with his father and sister in order to join his  mother
    in the UK who had come to the UK in  2002.   She  was  granted  refugee
    status in 2006.  It would appear that, on the basis of family  reunion,
    the appellant was also granted refugee status.   He,  and  his  family,
    were granted indefinite leave to remain on 11 July 2011.

 4. Between 2013 and 2017, the appellant  was  convicted  of  a  number  of
    offences.  In 2013, he was convicted  of  possession  of  an  offensive
    weapon, namely a baseball bat; in 2014 he was convicted of theft and in
    2016 he was convicted of battery.  In relation to  these  offences,  he
    was sentenced, inter alia, to an absolute  discharge  and  a  community
    order which was subsequently varied to one day's detention in  a  youth
    detention centre.

 5. On 1 December 2017, he was convicted at  the  Bristol  Crown  Court  of
    wounding contrary to s.20 of the Offences against the Person Act  1861.
    He was sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of  nineteen  months.   In
    addition, he was convicted of the offence of theft and sentenced  to  a
    consecutive term of imprisonment of one month.  The total period of his
    imprisonment was, therefore, twenty months.

 6. On 21 December 2017, a decision to make a deportation  order  was  made
    based upon the appellant's conviction on 1 December 2017. A deportation
    order was made on 22 December 2017.

 7. Submissions were made on the appellant's behalf on 26 January 2018  and
    9 February 2018.

 8. On 13 March 2018, the respondent issued a notice of intention to revoke
    the appellant's refugee status.

 9. On 31 May 2018, a decision was taken to revoke the appellant's  refugee
    status.  Further, on 3 July 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's international protection and human rights claims.

The Appeal

10. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decisions
    to revoke his refugee status and to refuse his human rights claims,  in
    particular under Art 8 of the ECHR.

11. The appeal was heard by  Judge  Trevaskis  on  13  March  2019.   In  a
    determination  sent  on  22  March  2019,  the  judge   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal.

12. The appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (DJ Macdonald) on 24 April 2019.

13. On 14 May 2019, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 response seeking
    to uphold Judge Trevaskis' decision.

The Judge's Decision

14. As we have indicated, Judge Trevaskis dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to revoke his refugee status.  That  decision  was
    not challenged in the grounds of appeal and was not  challenged  before
    us by Mr Hodgetts, who represented the appellant, and we  need  say  no
    more about it.

15. In relation to Art 8 of the ECHR, the judge dealt with the appeal  both
    under the Immigration Rules (paras 399(a) and  399A)  and  outside  the
    Rules.

16.  The  judge  made  the  following  findings.   First,  as  regards  the
    appellant's relationship with his claimed partner, the  judge  accepted
    that this was a genuine and subsisting relationship.  He  accepted  the
    evidence of the appellant's partner that if he were deported she  would
    accompany him to Sierra  Leone.   The  appellant's  partner  is  an  EU
    citizen who has a permanent right of residence in the UK and the  judge
    treated her as "settled" in the UK.  However,  applying  the  terms  of
    para 399(b), the judge found that it would not be unduly harsh for  his
    partner to accompany him to Sierra Leone and it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for her to remain in the UK without  the  appellant  if  he  were
    deported.  We interpose  that  those  findings  are,  in  effect,  that
    Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") was not satisfied.

17. Secondly,  applying  para  399A,  the  judge  found:  first,  that  the
    appellant had not spent most of his life lawfully resident in  the  UK;
    second, that he was not socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
    and third, that  they  were  not  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Sierra Leone. We interpose  that  this  finding  is,  in
    effect, that the appellant did not meet the requirements of Exception 1
    in s.117C(4) of the NIA Act 2002.

18. Finally, the judge  concluded,  outside  the  Rules,  that  the  public
    interest represented  by  the  "very  serious  offence"  of  which  the
    appellant had been convicted outweighed his private and family life  in
    the UK such that his deportation was not disproportionate.

The Issues

19.  Both  in  his  written  grounds  and  oral  submissions,  Mr  Hodgetts
    identified eight grounds.  We have renumbered his  grounds  to  reflect
    the typographical mistake of "Ground 3" being duplicated.

20. Grounds 1, 2 and 3 relate to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  public
    interest and the severity of the appellant's offending:

          i) The judge failed to take into account the  sentencing  remarks
             of  the  Crown  Court  judge,  in  particular  the  mitigating
             circumstances surrounding the offence, which were properly the
             "starting  point"  following  Masih  (deportation   -   public
             interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 0046 (IAC).

         ii) In taking into account the appellant's offending history prior
             to the index offence, the judge failed to  take  into  account
             the sentences imposed which included an absolute discharge and
             a community order varied to  one  day  detention  at  a  youth
             detention centre.  Further, in relation to the  index  offence
             he failed to take into account that the starting point for the
             sentence was three years' imprisonment but the appellant  was,
             in fact, sentenced to nineteen months' imprisonment.

        iii) The judge was wrong to equate the index offence  of  wounding,
             even using a knife, with the seriousness of a  class  A  drugs
             offence in stating that it was a "very serious offence"  which
             attracts the revulsion of society.

21. Ground 4 (renumbered) relates to  the  judge's  conclusion  under  para
    399(b) (or s.117C(5)) that the effect of  the  appellant's  deportation
    would not be unduly harsh on the appellant's partner.

         (iv) The judge failed to take into  account  that  the  appellant's
             partner had an EU right to remain in the UK.

22.  Ground  5  (renumbered)  concerns  the  judge's  assessment   of   the
    appellant's relationship with his mother in the UK.

         (v)  The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  medical  evidence
             concerning the health of the appellant's mother and to make  a
             clear finding as to  whether  or  not  "family  life"  existed
             between the appellant and his mother.

23. Ground 6 (renumbered) relates to the judge's finding in respect of para
    339A (or s.117C(4)).

         (vi) The judge  failed  to  take  into  account  all  the  evidence
             concerning  the  appellant  in  concluding  that  he  was  not
             socially and culturally integrated in the UK.

24. Ground 7 (renumbered) relates to the judge's  assessment  of  the  risk
    that the appellant would reoffend.

         (vii)    The judge failed to take into account,  in  assessing  the
             appellant's risk of reoffending,  a  report  from  a  forensic
             psychologist which concluded  that  the  appellant's  risk  of
             reoffending was "low".

25. Ground 8 (renumbered) relates  to  the  judge's  decision  outside  the
    Rules.

         (viii)   In applying s.117C(6) of  the  NIA  Act  2002,  the  judge
             failed to enquire, even if Exceptions 1 and 2  were  not  met,
             whether there were "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and
             above those  Exceptions  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
             interest.

26. Ms  Rushforth,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,  made  the
    following submissions which we set out in summary.

27. First, it was clear from para 75 of his determination  that  the  judge
    had, in fact, had regard to the Crown Court judge's sentencing  remarks
    as he specifically referred to  the  judge  having  found,  within  the
    relevant sentencing guidelines, that the appellant's offending amounted
    to "greater harm".  Further, the case of Masih only required  that  the
    sentencing remarks be the "starting  point".   The  judge  plainly  had
    regard to the seriousness of the appellant's offending by reference  to
    the length of sentence and the OASys Report.

28. Second, the judge referred to the appellant's earlier offending history
    at para 88 but did not take those offences into account (including  the
    largely non-custodial sentences) in assessing the public interest.

29. Third, Ms Rushforth submitted that the judge was entitled to take  into
    account that the s.20 offence of wounding using a  knife  was  a  "very
    serious offence" which did attract the "revulsion of society".

30. Fourth,  in  assessing  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's partner to travel to Sierra Leone, Ms  Rushforth  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to take into account her evidence that  she
    was willing to do so.  Further, at para 93  the  judge  had  also  been
    entitled to find, that if she chose not  to  accompany  the  appellant,
    there was no evidence to demonstrate that it would  be  "unduly  harsh"
    for her to remain in the UK without him, having  regard  to  the  "very
    short duration" of their relationship.

31. Fifth, Ms Rushforth accepted that the judge had  not  referred  to  the
    supporting medical evidence concerning  the  appellant's  mother.   She
    submitted that, perhaps, his reference at para 103 to their being "[n]o
    medical evidence"  referred  to  the  evidence  at  the  hearing.   She
    accepted there was medical evidence  at  page  81  of  the  appellant's
    bundle but that it made no  reference  to  the  care  provided  by  the
    appellant to his mother.

32. Sixth, Ms Rushforth accepted that the judge had  not  been  correct  to
    find, on the basis of all the evidence,  that  the  appellant  was  not
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK having  lived  here  since
    2010 when he was 15 years old.  However, the judge had found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the other  two  requirements  of  para  399A  or
    Exception 1 and so his error was not material.

33. Seventh, Ms Rushforth accepted that the judge had not made reference to
    the expert psychologist's report  assessing  the  appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending as "low".  However, she submitted that this was not an  EEA
    case and so propensity was less significant.  The  seriousness  of  the
    offence itself justified the deportation.

34. Eighth, Ms Rushforth submitted that the judge had carried out a  proper
    assessment outside the Rules  having  regard  to  paras  76-89  of  his
    determination where he had set out the relevant factors in carrying out
    the balancing exercise.

Discussion

35. The judge's determination is detailed.  He considered  the  appellant's
    case under the relevant Rules dealing with deportation at para 90 (para
    339(a)), paras 91-93 (para 399(b)) and paras  94-98  (para  339A).   In
    addition, albeit disconnected from one another, the  judge  dealt  with
    the appellant's Art 8 claim outside the Rules at  paras  76-89  and  at
    paras 99-104.

36. Although we do not accept Mr Hodgetts' submissions in  respect  of  all
    his grounds, we are satisfied that a number of them (Grounds  5-8)  are
    well made and lead us to conclude that the judge's decision to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 is legally flawed and cannot stand.

    Grounds 5-8

37. First, in assessing the appellant's case outside the Rule  as  required
    by s.117C(6) (see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662), the  judge
    was required to consider whether there  were  circumstances  "over  and
    above" those described in Exceptions 1 and 2  that  amounted  to  "very
    compelling circumstances".  In order to make a finding in that  regard,
    the judge had properly to consider whether Exceptions 1 or 2 were  met.
    Although we accept Ms Rushforth's submission that the judge's error  in
    assessing whether the appellant met the requirement in Exception 1  (at
    s.117C(4)(b)) that he be socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK
    could not be material to his finding that Exception 1 was not met, that
    factual error necessarily was carried over to his consideration outside
    the Rules.  It was, at least, a relevant factor  in  assessing  whether
    there were "very compelling circumstances".  Although this  matter  was
    not raised before us at  the  hearing,  in  assessing  the  appellant's
    private life claim outside the Rule, this error  may  be  reflected  in
    what the judge  states  in  para  99  of  his  determination  that  the
    "appellant's presence has been lawful but precarious until July  2018".
    That may well reflect the judge's earlier finding  that  the  appellant
    was not socially and culturally integrated despite having lived in  the
    UK since the age of 15 and undertaken his education in the UK including
    in university.  The judge's latter comment is, also, inconsistent  with
    the fact that the appellant was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    July 2011.

38. Secondly, in assessing the appellant's  claim  outside  the  Rules,  we
    accept Mr Hodgetts' submission that the judge, in assessing the  public
    interest, took into account that, according to  the  OASys  Report  the
    appellant was a "medium risk of serious harm to members of the  public"
    (see para 49).  However, the judge made  no  reference  to  the  expert
    psychologist's report at paras 12.3 and 12.4 (at page 91 of the bundle)
    that indicated that the appellant's further risk of  violent  offending
    was "low".  The judge  was  required  to  consider  this  evidence  and
    grapple with it in assessing what, if any, risk the appellant posed  of
    reoffending.  While the risk of reoffending may be less significant  in
    a non-EEA case, we do not accept Ms Rushforth's submission that it  is,
    in effect, immaterial because of the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offending.  We accept that the  judge  was  entitled,  contrary  to  Mr
    Hodgetts' submissions, to characterise  the  appellant's  offending  as
    "very serious" and that offences of wounding involving knives attracted
    the "revulsion of society".  However, it is also clear to  us  that  in
    assessing the public interest the judge had regard to  the  appellant's
    risk of reoffending and in that respect he failed properly  to  grapple
    with the psychologist's report.

39. Thirdly, in assessing the appellant's claim outside the Rules the judge
    considered the appellant's relationship with his  mother.   It  is  not
    clear to us whether in para 103 the judge found that there was  "family
    life" between the appellant and his mother.   The  judge  was,  in  any
    event, wrong to say that there was "[n]o medical  evidence"  concerning
    her.  There was medical evidence at page 81 of the  appellant's  bundle
    from her GP.  That highlighted a number of significant  medical  issues
    which she faced.  In addition, there was evidence from a support worker
    (at page 80 of the appellant's bundle) relevant to his mother's  mental
    health and physical problems  connecting  them  to  her  experience  in
    Sierra Leone prior to her coming to the UK and being  recognised  as  a
    refugee.  There was also  a  supporting  letter  from  the  appellant's
    mother (at pages 78-79 of  the  appellant's  bundle)  speaking  to  the
    support that the appellant provided his mother.  As we have said, it is
    unclear whether the judge made a finding  that  "family  life"  existed
    between  the  appellant  and  his  mother.   Paragraph   103   of   his
    determination is in the following terms;

         "103.    I have considered whether the  appellant  and  his  mother
             have a relationship of mutual dependency which  amounts  to  a
             relationship which is capable  of  engaging  article  8  ECHR,
             despite the fact that the appellant is no longer a child.   It
             is unfortunate that his  mother  was  unable  to  attend  this
             hearing.  I have however considered the content of her  letter
             of support.  No medical evidence has been provided in  respect
             of her, and the appellant has given very little detail of  the
             care that he provides to his mother.  She also has a daughter,
             apparently now living in Birmingham, and  there  has  been  no
             evidence to show why she would be unable to provide  care  for
             her mother in the absence of the appellant."

40. The absence of a clear finding is, in itself, an error of law  and,  in
    any event, the judge failed to have regard to the relevant evidence  we
    have set out which would be material  to  determining  whether  "family
    life" existed between the appellant (as an adult child) and his  mother
    (see Butt v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 184 and the case law set out at [17] -
    [18]).

41. It follows, in our judgment that we  are  persuaded  on  the  basis  of
    Grounds 5-8 (renumbered) that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

    Grounds 1-4

42. It is unnecessary for us to express any view on Grounds 1-4 as  we  are
    satisfied on the basis of  Grounds  5-8  (renumbered)  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in dismissing the Art 8 claim and his  decision
    cannot stand.  As the re-making will require the judge to make findings
    of fact based upon the up-to-date position of  the  appellant  and  his
    family and whether at the date of hearing his deportation  will  breach
    Art 8, the hearing should be de novo and none of the  judge's  findings
    are preserved.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the judge materially erred in law in  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   That  decision  is,
    accordingly, set aside.

44. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to remake the decision in respect of  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR. None of the findings in respect of Art 8 are preserved.

45.  On  remittal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal against the revocation of his  asylum  status  shall
    stand.

46. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge (other than Judge Trevaskis) to remake the decision in respect of
    Art 8.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                30 July 2019
