
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00166/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2020                           |On 2 March 2020               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     K g
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jacquiss, instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of  2
    October 2018 making a deportation order and refusing protection  status
    and refusing a human rights claim.

2.   The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 1998.   He  made  an
    asylum claim which was refused in April 2000 but  a  subsequent  appeal
    was successful, and he was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    refugee on 22 January 2003.  On 19 June 2008 he was  convicted  at  the
    Central Criminal Court of attempted murder  and  violent  disorder  and
    sentenced to life imprisonment on the  first  count  and  three  years'
    imprisonment to be served concurrently on the second count.   Following
    communications from the Secretary of State and representations made  on
    his behalf his refugee status was revoked on 2 August 2018 and  he  was
    subsequently served with a deportation order and decision letters.

3.   As regards the asylum claim in 1998,  the  appellant  claimed  to  have
    been in fear  of  persecution  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  a
    suspected member of the LTTE, because the leader of the LTTE  was  from
    the same area as he was.  In 1996 he had been  detained  and  held  for
    four months, during which time he was ill-treated  and  released  on  a
    condition to report monthly.  He did so until March 1998 and then  fled
    to the United Kingdom.

4.   The conviction in 2008 came about as a consequence of  the  appellant's
    involvement in a gang called the East Side Boys who attacked  a  member
    of a rival  gang  and,  in  the  appellant's  case,  inflicted  serious
    injuries on this person with a Samurai sword.  And he  was  ordered  to
    serve twelve years of the life sentence imposed  for  attempted  murder
    and the concurrent term of three years for violent disorder.

5.   With regard to the cessation issue, the judge noted that there  was  no
    real dispute with regard to the assertion that the appellant  had  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime.  It was  also  concluded  by
    the judge that the appellant currently  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community.  The appellant had pleaded not guilty  to  the  offence  for
    which the judge noted that he continued  to  deny  responsibility.   As
    late as February 2019 when he appeared before the Parole Board  he  had
    still denied guilt and in cross-examination was initially equivocal but
    also sought to mitigate responsibility.  He claimed to have been  young
    and na�ve with little experience of life although he was aged 30 or  31
    at the time of the attack.  He now claimed to have remorse.

6.   The appellant claimed to be  a  changed  person  and  referred  to  his
    achievements  in  prison,  including  certificates  for  completing   a
    victim's awareness course and thinking skills and many others of  entry
    level academic nature.

7.   The judge noted the conclusions of the Parole Board panel hearing of  4
    February 2019.   The  panel  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  offender
    supervisor, offender  manager  and  the  appellant.   The  panel  noted
    several factors increasing his risk of  reoffending  and  causing  harm
    identified  in  the  evidence   provided,   including   lifestyle   and
    associates,  misuse  of  alcohol,  deficits  in  thinking  skills   and
    behaviour and weapons.  He maintained that his associations  were  from
    local cricket and footballs teams.  It was noted that the index offence
    represented a significant rise in the risk he posed of serious harm and
    remained largely unexplained.  The panel found his evidence relating to
    his offending history and risk factors to be vague with a  tendency  to
    minimise his responsibility for virtually all matters raised.  Although
    he had completed victim awareness work and thinking  skills  programmes
    he was found not to have enough understanding of his risk  factors  and
    there was no direction for either release or progression.

8.   He had in fact been moved to  a  more  secure  regime  because  of  the
    notice of intention to deport at the end of his minimum term  and  what
    was perceived to be a risk of absconding.  It was noted that he was  an
    enhanced prisoner, employed full-time in a fabric cutting workshop  and
    there was nothing but positive comments for his work,  engagement  with
    staff and prisoners.  He was careful with whom he associated and  there
    were no concerns over drug or  alcohol  misuse.   He  was  assessed  as
    ineligible for either Resolve or the Self-Change Programme  principally
    due to his denial of the index offence.  He  had  accepted  that  anger
    management was an issue in the past and  might  have  featured  in  his
    offending.  He had completed no further offending behaviour work  since
    the last review.   The  offender  supervisor  was  confident  that  the
    appellant would comply with  the  general  regime  if  placed  in  open
    conditions, but he assessed the appellant's risk of absconding as being
    heighted with some residual concerns over the past associates.  He  did
    not recommend the appellant's release.

9.   The OGRS  scores  in  the  most  recent  OASys  assessment  placed  the
    appellant  in  a  group  of  offenders  with  a  low  risk  of  general
    reconviction and low risk of reoffending.  If he did  reoffend  he  was
    assessed as posing a medium risk of causing serious harm to the  public
    and the victim of the offence and the public might be caught up in  any
    violence which might emerge.  However, the offender manager  said  that
    in the context of so little being known about the offence, his risk  of
    violence in the future might be higher than  that  stated  in  the  OVP
    score (risk of violent offending) which had placed him at low  risk  of
    reoffending.  The panel considered these to be realistic assessments of
    current risk.

10.  The judge took  into  account  the  argument  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  that  there  was  a  risk  of  absconding  because  of   the
    deportation action that had heighted  the  appellant's  risk  and  that
    alone was the reason the Board did not direct his release.   The  judge
    considered this to be a simplification of the facts.   She  noted  that
    the report began with a reference to the letter from  the  Ministry  of
    Justice that indicated that if there was a direction for release  of  a
    foreign national prisoner by the Parole Board, Immigration Enforcement,
    there would be a detention under immigration powers until such time  as
    the prisoner was deported from the United Kingdom or granted bail by an
    Immigration Judge.  Though absconding  might  have  been  part  of  the
    Parole Board's consideration, it also  took  into  account  other  risk
    factors including  the  appellant's  ongoing  denial  of  the  offence,
    tendency to minimise the nature of the offence despite its  seriousness
    and his level of responsibility.   This  the  judge  considered  to  be
    relevant  to  the  appellant's  motivation  to  comply  with  any  risk
    management measures were he to be released.

11.  She went on to note that he had a history of offending, which  included
    two offences of obtaining property by deception  and  driving  a  motor
    vehicle with excess alcohol, driving while  disqualified  and  using  a
    vehicle while uninsured.  The judge thought  it  was  unclear  why  the
    offender manager and the Parole Board said they did not have sufficient
    information with regard to the index offence but  commented  that  this
    might be a reference to the lack of explanation for his conduct by  the
    appellant as there was a great  deal  of  information  in  the  various
    presentence and OASys Reports, the news reports and presumably the vast
    amount of evidence produced in support of the trial.

12.  The judge said that she had regard  to  the  concern  of  the  offender
    manager that the risk of violent offending might be higher than the OVP
    scores indicated  and  that  they  had  concerns  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's  true  motivation  to  comply.   She  said  that  currently
    insufficient work had been addressed to address risk.  The Parole Board
    had not been  satisfied  that  it  was  no  longer  necessary  for  the
    protection of the public that the appellant remain detained.

13.  The judge noted the contents  of  the  offender  manager's  presentence
    report and the conclusion that the appellant was dangerous  as  defined
    by the Criminal Justice Act 2003.  The judge found on the evidence that
    the facts had not changed and that the  appellant's  evidence  did  not
    rebut the presumption and he was not protected from removal by  Article
    33(2) of the Refugee Convention because of his conviction for attempted
    murder and violent disorder, and he currently constituted a  danger  to
    the community.

14.  The judge went on to consider the revocation of refugee  status  issue,
    taking full account of the country guidance in  GJ  and  others  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC) and an expert report of Dr Chris Smith.  The judge set
    out the headlines to the guidance  in  GJ  and  considered  Dr  Smith's
    report bearing in mind the context of the appellant's activities  prior
    to leaving Sri Lanka and the  circumstances  of  his  conviction.   The
    appellant confirmed that he had never been a member of the  LTTE  prior
    to his departure from Sri Lanka.  His evidence, the judge said, was  of
    one arrest and detention at  a  time  when  it  was  acknowledged  that
    everyone in the northern province had some involvement in the LTTE, and
    that GJ confirmed that such past history in itself did not put  him  at
    risk.  The judge commented that as  regards  the  appellant's  diaspora
    activity this had been primarily antisocial  behaviour  culminating  in
    his involvement in a gang of Tamil men who were terrorising  their  own
    community, travelling in convoy to the other side of London armed  with
    weapons to settle a score with a rival gang.  He gave  no  evidence  of
    any pro-Tamil activity.

15.  The appellant claimed that his identity  and  membership  of  the  East
    Ham/East Side Boys would be known to the  authorities  because  of  the
    media attention gained.  The  judge  remarked  that  however  the  news
    articles produced were from three local newspapers, and in addition the
    appellant relied on two photographs, which were taken at the same  time
    and neither of which referred to his name.

16.  The judge went on at paragraph 83 to conclude that  there  was  nothing
    in the newspaper articles, nor in the sentencing  remarks,  the  Parole
    Board report or the OASys assessment to suggest that the activities  in
    which the appellant was involved was a front for the LTTE  or  part  of
    their fundraising activity in the diaspora.  The judge considered it to
    be fanciful to suggest that the appellant would be perceived by the Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.  There was no evidence  that
    the activity in which he had been  involved  was  anything  other  than
    violent criminality.

17.  The judge noted that Dr Smith had been asked specifically  to  consider
    the likelihood of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  being  aware  of  the
    appellant's history of involvement in the Tamil gang and why they would
    be aware.  He said that  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  a  serious
    offence and the case was widely reported at the  time  in  the  British
    press.  The  judge  remarked  that  however  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence for this claim and  the  appellant  had  only  provided  local
    newspaper articles.  Dr Smith had referred to past assistance given  to
    the Metropolitan Police to combat Tamil organised  crime  but  did  not
    refer to the appellant as being one of those organised crime gangs.  He
    referred in the report to a policeman stating that a London  Court  was
    told that "Psycho" in Romford was a leading LTTE  extortionist  in  the
    East Side Boys gang but it had never been part of the appellant's  case
    that he had LTTE involvement.

18.  Dr Smith had gone on to give two examples of individuals whom  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities believed to be  part  of  Tamil  organised  criminal
    activities in the UK linked to  the  LTTE.   Neither  example,  in  the
    judge's view, was comparable to the situation  of  the  appellant.   As
    regards Dr Smith's claim that it was extremely like that the Sri  Lanka
    authorities  would  have  committed  the  appellant  to  "institutional
    memory" which might mean that he was on a stop or watch list, the judge
    considered this  to  be  speculative.   She  said  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence why the appellant would be on a stop or watch list.
     He had left Sri Lanka over twenty years ago and having been rounded up
    with others, held for months and released with a  condition  to  report
    monthly and this was prior to the end of hostilities.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant did not have a profile  that  would  cause
    him to be of interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka.

19.  Dr Smith, who accepted that the  appellant  did  not  have  a  role  of
    significance or importance in the LTTE said  this  did  not  mean  ipso
    facto that he would not be of interest on return.  The judge noted that
    this conclusion was based on Dr Smith's assertion  that  the  appellant
    would be known because of the involvement in  a  Tamil  gang  and  data
    collection by the Sri Lankan authorities.  The judge was not  satisfied
    on the evidence that there was anything in the appellant's profile that
    would lead the authorities  to  conclude  that  he  was  involved  with
    diaspora LTTE activity and the  judge  found  he  was  not  in  a  risk
    category identified in GJ and others  and  that  it  was  open  to  the
    Secretary of State as a consequence to revoke his refugee status.

20.  The judge went on to consider humanitarian protection  and  Articles  2
    and 3 of the ECHR and for the  reasons  set  out  with  regard  to  the
    Refugee Convention findings concluded that there was not a real risk of
    ill-treatment on return.

21.  It was accepted by counsel who appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that there was not a strong Article 8 claim.   The  appellant  had  not
    given evidence of having a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
    partner nor with any child settled in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge
    did not accept, bearing in mind that for the great majority of his time
    in the United Kingdom the appellant had been engaged in antisocial  and
    criminal activity and for the last ten years had been in  prison,  that
    he had integrated into United Kingdom society.   There  were  not  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2.  The appeal was dismissed.

22.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had erred with regard to risk  on  return,  quoting  the
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal in RS (Sri  Lanka)  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 1796, making the point that the case was not a GJ  type  case,  but
    rather one where risk existed on the  basis  of  perceived  association
    with gangs with LTTE affiliations, that the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    approach to exclusion and the issue  of  dangerousness.   It  was  also
    argued that the Article 8 claim was not properly addressed but  it  was
    accepted that that was tied in to the success or failure of  the  first
    two grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

23.  In her submissions Ms Jaquiss relied on and developed the  points  made
    in the grounds.  With regard to the first ground, it  was  argued  that
    the judge had failed to make findings as  to  whether  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would be aware that the appellant had absconded  and  there
    would be an arrest warrant, secondly whether the  gang  link  would  be
    discoverable by the Sri Lankan authorities and thirdly whether the gang
    activities would put the appellant at risk of detention on return.

24.  It was also argued that the judge  not  made  findings  concerning  the
    risk arising from jumping bail/escaping from custody.  The guidance  in
    RS (Sri Lanka) was of relevance to this.  There were  important  issues
    about the objective evidence in the respondent's COI,  quoted  in  that
    case,  concerning  what  would  happen  to  a  person  who  had  jumped
    bail/escaped from custody.  GJ made reference to  a  computerised  stop
    list, and if there were an arrest warrant the appellant would be on the
    stop list.   So,  the  judge  was  required  to  consider  whether  the
    background to the appellant's claim would put him at risk.

25.  As to whether the gang involvement  would  be  discovered  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities there was no clear finding as to what  ought  to  be
    known or discoverable.  The judge had said  at  paragraph  86  that  Dr
    Smith's evidence was speculative, but the appellant would  have  to  be
    redocumented and this would lead to discovery and detention.  The judge
    referred to local news reports but a Google search  would  produce  the
    articles.  It was clear from GJ that the Sri Lankan authorities  had  a
    sophisticated intelligence network and if a lay person  could  discover
    relevant information they would be able to  do  so  either  during  the
    redocumentation process or on return.

26.  With regard to risk on account of gang activities, the judge  said  the
    expert evidence was not reliable, being vague and speculative and being
    unsupported by the evidence.  Clear deference was shown to  Dr  Smith's
    evidence at paragraph 8 of the Court of Appeal's decision  in  RS.   He
    cited in evidence the sources for  his  opinion.   The  case  had  been
    widely reported in the British press  and  he  had  interviewed  police
    officers and had little doubt of links between the  LTTE  and  criminal
    gangs in the United Kingdom.  There was the Sri Lankan website to which
    he referred about concerns  respecting  these  links.   There  was  the
    reference to MM as an example, in Dr Smith's report.  He considered the
    appellant was likely to be detained  and  hence  mistreated.   He  also
    considered redocumentation issues.  It  could  not  be  said  that  the
    report was other than well-supported and reasoned.  The  appellant  had
    been second in command in the gang and was  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and there was a link between the gang and the  LTTE.   This
    was not a GJ case but on its specific facts the  judge  had  failed  to
    address that point.

27.  With regard to dangerousness and  exclusion,  the  key  point  was  the
    report at page 111 in the appellant's  bundle.   This  was  the  Parole
    Board decision letter of 14 February 2019.  It was assessed that  there
    was a low risk of  reoffending  and  a  medium  risk  of  harm  if  the
    appellant did reoffend.  The judge's conclusion at  paragraph  77  that
    there  was  no  change  since  2007  was  unsustainable.   He  had  not
    approached the issue of dangerousness on the premise  of  release  into
    the  community  and  strict  licence  conditions  and   had   therefore
    misunderstood this decision.

28.  It was argued on behalf the appellant that the decision  of  the  board
    was taken solely on the basis that he  was  subject  to  a  deportation
    order.  This could be seen at paragraph 7 of the report at page 111  of
    the bundle.  Other factors were considered including the need for  help
    in controlling his temper but what was key was why the risk  management
    plan was insufficient and it  was  until  the  deportation  status  was
    resolved, and an allowed appeal would resolve it.

29.  It was also relevant to consider the third paragraph on page 112  which
    included reference to exemplary compliance with the prison  regime  and
    the fact that in different circumstances the panel might have had  less
    doubt about the appellant's future compliance.  So, the only reason the
    panel found that the appellant could not be managed at the time of  the
    review was the risk of absconding to avoid  deportation.   In  contrast
    before the Parole Board risk factors about immigration status were  not
    relevant to dangerousness.  So, if he were released  he  would  not  be
    liable to deportation and the risk factor would be removed so that  had
    to be factored out by the judge.  It had been  done  properly  and  had
    made a real difference to considerations as to risk.

30.  As had been said in the grounds, reliance was not placed on  Article  8
    per se and it was accepted that that essentially stood or fell with the
    conclusions about the first two grounds.

31.  In his submissions Mr Singh observed that RS had not  been  before  the
    judge.  In the grounds it was said that as the appellant had exited Sri
    Lanka illegally he would be at real risk  of  an  arrest  warrant.   In
    contrast to RS the appellant had never claimed to be part of  the  LTTE
    and the events in question had happened twenty  years  ago  when  there
    were general roundups of Tamil men especially  from  the  Jaffna  area.
    The  case  had  been  successful  on  appeal  because  of  his  general
    characteristics.  If the Tribunal found there was an error of  law  and
    it was material with regard to illegal exit  it  would  be  a  material
    error of law, but there were only small errors.  There was the question
    of whether the appellant would be at risk if a Google search were done.
     The judge had dealt with the media reports in the United Kingdom.  All
    that had been produced were several local newspaper articles.   It  had
    not been evidenced that  the  authorities  would  conduct  an  internet
    search about the appellant's crimes in the United Kingdom.   It  should
    be questioned whether all returnees' profiles were checked and  whether
    there was a digital profile of the crimes if any while  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  If  the  Tribunal  found  there  was  a  possibility  of  the
    authorities carrying out a Google search then it was accepted that  his
    Google profile would become known , including that he was a member of a
    violent  Tamil  gang  in  the  United  Kingdom.   With  regard  to  the
    affiliation of the gang and whether the LTTE links would  mean  greater
    risk, the judge had addressed that at paragraph  84  to  paragraph  86.
    The grounds were a matter of disagreement  only.   The  judge  had  not
    accepted the appellant would be linked with LTTE activities.

32.  With regard to the point that it was not a GJ case,  if  not  it  could
    not be said that the gang issue would put the appellant at risk because
    of tenuous links with the LTTE.  The judge's findings in  this  respect
    were sound.

33.  With regard to the issue of dangerousness, the judge had gone  to  some
    length to show why she believed the appellant was still a risk  to  the
    public  despite  the  OASys  report.   She  noted  the  Parole  Board's
    conclusions and quite clearly accepted the conclusions of  the  report.
    There had been exemplary compliance and deportation  risk  was  a  main
    factor.  She addressed the reasoning including the  ongoing  denial  of
    the  offence  and  minimising  the  offence.   This  was  relevant   to
    compliance motivation.  A number of factors were set out at  paragraphs
    71 to 76.  The judge had  considered  the  positives  as  well  as  the
    negatives, for example the completion of the community order.  She  was
    right to conclude as she did with regard to risk to  the  public.   The
    question then was whether the risk  factors  about  immigration  status
    could be relied on in respect of dangerousness.  It was argued that the
    judge had quite rightly gone into detail about the weight of the  other
    factors as well as the immigration status issue to find  the  appellant
    was still a risk to the public.  The findings on Article 8 were  sound.



34.  By way of reply Ms Jacquiss accepted that of course  RJ  had  not  been
    before  the  judge,  but  he  had  analysed  already  existing  country
    information when there had been absconding from bail  or  illegal  exit
    which could lead to a risk on return.  The grounds set out how the case
    had been put to the judge on the  basis  of  risk  on  the  grounds  of
    leaving Sri Lanka illegally and, if detained, risk of ill-treatment and
    the fact that the links to the gang would be identified.  This was  set
    out in the skeleton before the judge at paragraph 17.  Also  there  was
    clear evidence from the  expert  about  checks  on  returnees  and  the
    appellant would be returned having left illegally and having a criminal
    record.  As regards treatment of the evidence in the report, it was not
    a matter of mere disagreement but the basis  for  the  conclusions  had
    been set out and the links between the  gang  and  the  LTTE  would  be
    perceived.  It was not a GJ case in the sense that  the  appellant  was
    political but it was a question of the perception of  the  links.   The
    submissions on dangerousness were maintained.

35.  I reserved my decision.

36.  The first argument upon which the  appellant  relies  is  the  question
    whether the judge adequately or at all addressed the issue  of  whether
    the Sri Lankan authorities  would  be  aware  that  he  had  previously
    absconded and exited the country illegally following his  release  from
    detention on bail and whether he might be  subject  to  an  outstanding
    arrest warrant.

37.  The judge properly set out the guidance from GJ.  It is of course  part
    of the appellant's claim that this is  not  a  straightforward  GJ-type
    political opinion case but is concerned rather with perception and that
    is a point of particular relevance with regard to the appellant's index
    criminal offence and gang membership, to which I shall come on shortly.
     The judge was clearly right to set out the GJ guidance of relevance to
    the appellant.  Dr Smith  commented  on  the  redocumentation  process,
    concluding that the main area of risk for the appellant was  return  to
    Sri Lanka and  that  it  was  extremely  likely  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities had committed him to institutional memory, which might mean
    that he was on a stop or watch list.

38.  In GJ it was said in the guidance that a person whose name  appears  on
    a computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising a list
    of those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest  warrant
    is in one of the risk categories.  It was said that  individuals  whose
    name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
    over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance  of  such
    order or warrant.

39.  As noted above, the appellant's history is that  he  was  detained  and
    held for four months in 1996 during which time he was ill-treated,  was
    released on a reporting condition which he observed  until  March  1998
    and then fled to the United Kingdom.

40.  Ms Jacquiss referred to RS (Sri Lanka)  which  concerned  an  appellant
    who had been detained in Sri Lanka from shortly  after  the  civil  war
    ended in May 2009 and was detained while in detention on account of his
    association with the LTTE.  In December 2010 after eighteen  months  in
    detention he escaped and went into hiding but eventually  succeeded  in
    travelling to the United Kingdom.  The judge in that case  found  there
    was no risk on return.  The Court of Appeal noted  that  the  appellant
    had been arrested after the end  of  the  war,  although  only  shortly
    after, and remained of sufficient interest to the  authorities,  to  be
    detained for some eighteen months thereafter during which time  he  was
    tortured and he was not released but escaped from custody.   It  seemed
    to  the  court  on  those  facts  to  be  inherently  likely  that  the
    authorities would seek to recapture him and to  do  so  by  issuing  an
    arrest warrant.

41.  This authority was, of course, not  before  the  judge  in  this  case,
    thought as Ms Jacquiss pointed out, the decision was based on materials
    that were in existence at the time of the judge's decision.

42.  The judged noted that the appellant had never been  involved  with  the
    LTTE and that his evidence was of one of arrest and detention at a time
    when it was acknowledged that everyone in  the  northern  province  had
    some involvement in the LTTE.  The judge  considered  that  Dr  Smith's
    evidence that it was extremely likely that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    would have committed the  appellant  to  "institutional  memory"  which
    might mean that he was on the stop or watch list was speculative.   She
    commented that there was no supporting evidence for why he would be  on
    a stop or watch list.  He left Sri Lanka over twenty years  ago  having
    been rounded up with others, held for  a  month  and  released  with  a
    condition to report monthly  and  that  this  was  before  the  end  of
    hostilities.  As a  consequence,  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant did not have a profile that would cause to be of interest  to
    the authorities in Sri Lanka.

43.  In my view there is no error of law in the judge's evaluation  of  risk
    on return in this regard.  It is entirely consistent with the  guidance
    in GJ.  It is not inconsistent with what was said in  RS  either.   The
    facts of the two cases are clearly different, and I note  the  emphasis
    by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 25 of its judgment on the fact that
    RS was arrested after the end of the war  and  was  detained  for  some
    eighteen months and escaped from custody.  By  contrast  the  appellant
    was detained for four months and released on a reporting condition  and
    that was in 1996 as the judge noted at a time when it appears  to  have
    been common ground that everyone in  the  northern  province  had  some
    involvement in the LTTE.  In my view  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    consider that Dr Smith's claim about the institutional  memory  of  the
    authorities being speculative was a conclusion that was  open  to  her.
    The reasoning at paragraph 86 of her decision is sound.

44.  The next issue is that of whether the appellant's previous  involvement
    with the East Side Boys might be known or discoverable  on  account  of
    media reports or simply by putting the appellant's name into  a  search
    engine.

45.  Dr Smith referred to the view of the Metropolitan Police that the  East
    Side Boys were paid by the LTTE and his agreement with that  view.   Dr
    Smith believed that there would have  been  considerable  communication
    between the Sri Lankan Police and those  involved  in  Operation  Enver
    which was a special task force set up to combat Tamil  organised  crime
    in the United Kingdom.  Dr Smith's approach to Scotland Yard to discuss
    this matter was unsuccessful but he had no reason to believe  that  the
    view of Tamil crime links to the LTTE had changed despite  the  success
    of Operation Enver overall.

46.  An example was quoted by Dr Smith  from  the  Sri  Lankan  Ministry  of
    Defence website concerning a person who was arrested in Sri  Lanka  who
    had documentation relating to the LTTE extracting funds from the  Tamil
    diaspora in the United Kingdom.  He gave another example  of  a  former
    member of the East Side Boys  who  reported  to  the  Sri  Lankan  High
    Commission as instructed by the Secretary  of  State  and  was  closely
    questioned as to his links to the LTTE and was shown media coverage  of
    a revenge attack against him and that the official was in possession of
    enough information to prove his links to the LTTE in  East  London  and
    displayed awareness of his criminal conviction for a  firearm  offence.
    He had admitted when asked about attendance at rallies and was told  he
    would answer for his crimes on return to Sri Lanka.   At  a  subsequent
    interview he was asked if he still assisted the  LTTE  and  whether  he
    collected money for them.

47.  Dr Smith considered that the similarity between this case and  that  of
    the appellant indicated a strong likelihood the appellant would  either
    be placed under surveillance on return to  Sri  Lanka  or  more  likely
    detained at the airport and as a consequence ill-treated.

48.  The judge noted that there was nothing in the newspaper articles or  in
    the sentencing remarks, the Parole Board report or the OASys assessment
    to suggest that the activities in which the appellant was involved were
    a front for the LTTE or part  of  their  fundraising  activity  in  the
    diaspora.  She considered  it  to  be  fanciful  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant  would  be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities   as
    indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state  or  the  Sri
    Lankan government and there was no evidence that the activity in  which
    he had been involved was anything other than violent criminality.

49.  She then went on at  paragraph  84  of  her  decision  to  consider  Dr
    Smith's evidence as summarised above.  She noted that the appellant had
    only provided local newspaper articles rather  than  showing  that  the
    case was widely reported at the time in the British press.  She went on
    to refer to the two examples given by Dr Smith, commenting  as  regards
    the first case the facts of a person being arrested in Sri Lanka with a
    large number of pin numbers, bank receipts for local and foreign  banks
    and a large amount of money  that  it  was  hardly  comparable  to  the
    appellant.  The second case involved a person with a conviction  for  a
    firearm offence who had been told he would answer  for  his  crimes  on
    return to Sri Lanka and she commented that it was not  clear  how  this
    incident translated to the appellant being placed  on  surveillance  on
    return to Sri Lanka or more likely detained at the airport, as  claimed
    by Dr Smith.

50.  Although the judge could have said more about  this,  I  consider  that
    again her findings were open to her.  It is  relevant  for  example  to
    note, though it is, I accept, not a point made by the  judge,  that  MM
    admitted attendance at rallies.  The fact that there was awareness of a
    criminal conviction in this case in that one isolated incident was  not
    such as in any sense to require the judge to go on  and  conclude  that
    the case was sufficiently on fours with that of the appellant  or  that
    there would be that level of knowledge about him such as to  place  him
    at risk on return.  It is not made clear what the level or type of  the
    media coverage, of which the Sri Lankan official was aware,  consisted.
    As noted by the judge, the only evidence that has been provided in this
    case is that in local newspapers.  Although the judge appears  to  have
    placed some emphasis, for example at paragraph 87 of her  decision,  on
    actual involvement in diaspora LTTE activity, there  is  sufficient  in
    her judgment, in particular at paragraphs 84 and 85 to  show  that  she
    was aware that the claimed risk was on the basis, at least in part,  of
    perception of LTTE involvement via the gang, and I consider  that  this
    was a matter that was properly addressed by the judge.

51.  The next issue is that of exclusion and the  dangerousness  point.   In
    essence it is argued on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the  essential
    reason why the Parole Board would not direct release was because of the
    fear of absconding due to the impeding decision on deportation.

52.  It can be seen from the Parole Board  hearing  decision  letter  of  14
    February 2019 that  the  offender  manager  did  not  recommend  either
    progression to open conditions or release.  Among other things she said
    that the appellant did not fully understand his risk factors and  would
    require one to one work on controlling his temper.  When questioned  as
    to why the risk management plan was  not  in  her  view  sufficient  to
    manage his risk she assessed him as a  medium  risk  of  breaching  his
    licence conditions and remaining unlawfully at large in the  community,
    to avoid deportation.  She said that any  risk  management  plan  would
    require  full  compliance  on  the  appellant's  part  and  until   his
    deportation status was resolved she was not sufficiently  confident  in
    his intentions.  She added that if unlawfully at large in the community
    there was effectively no risk management plan in place and his risk  of
    serious harm would rise with the potential for reckless behaviour.

53.  The panel considered the current assessments  of  risk  and  gave  full
    credit for the relevant but limited offending behaviour work  completed
    and the evidence  of  positive  behaviour  in  closed  conditions.   It
    considered that his ongoing denial of the  index  offence  was  not  in
    itself a bar to  progression  or  release  but  certainly  hindered  an
    understanding of his risk factors.  His tendency to minimise the nature
    of these incidents and therefore his level of responsibility gave cause
    for concern over his understanding of what changes he needed to make to
    live pro-socially.  On the other hand his compliance  with  the  prison
    regime was exemplary and in different  circumstances  the  panel  might
    have had less doubt about his future compliance.  The panel had to bear
    in mind that he had a conviction for seeking to travel  under  a  false
    passport with the specific intention of avoiding deportation.   He  had
    been notified that the UK authorities intended to deport him now as his
    minimum term had been reached subject to the  appeal  process  and  the
    panel  therefore  agreed  with  the  professionals  that  his  risk  of
    absconding was heightened.  The offender manager  was  clear  that  his
    risk of absconding/being unlawfully at large in open conditions  or  in
    the community was for the time being unmanageable and in that situation
    his risk of serious harm would rise.  The  panel  agreed  and  did  not
    recommend his transfer to open conditions.  It was not  satisfied  that
    it was no longer necessary for the protection of  the  public  that  he
    remain detained and did not think his risk could currently  be  managed
    in the community.  It was necessary for his case that he  was  detained
    and no direction was made for his release.

54.  Clearly a factor of significance to  this  decision  was  the  risk  of
    absconding until  the  appellant's  deportation  status  was  resolved.
    However, I consider it was open to the judge, at paragraph  72  of  her
    decision, not to agree that it was the risk of  absconding  because  of
    the deportation action that alone heightened the  appellant's  risk  as
    the reasons for the decision.  As she noted, absconding might have been
    part of the Parole Board consideration but it also  took  into  account
    other risk factors including the  appellant's  ongoing  denial  of  the
    offence, his tendency to minimise the nature of the offence despite its
    seriousness and his level of responsibility.  In  the  circumstances  I
    consider it was open to her to conclude that the  presumption  had  not
    been rebutted and  that  he  currently  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community and as a consequence consider that her conclusion that it was
    right to uphold the decision  to  revoke  the  refugee  status  of  the
    appellant was lawful.  The submissions to the contrary in  this  regard
    are in my view a matter of disagreement only.

55.  It was common ground that the Article 8 challenge stood  or  fell  with
    the decision in respect of the first two grounds, and in  light  of  my
    findings on those two matters, that in my view falls away.


Notice of Decision

56.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 13 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

