
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00046/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th April 2016                     |On 18th April 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr Jasser Ouda Al- Jasser
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adebayo, Solicitor, A2 Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any anonymity order  pursuant  to  Rule
13 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
Chamber) Rules 2014.  No  anonymity  order  was  sought  on  the  claimant's
behalf and I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity order in  the
Upper Tribunal.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal which allowed the claimant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision to revoke his protection status  pursuant
    to Section 82(1)(c) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 2. The facts so far as material appear to be  as  follows.   The  claimant
    received refugee protection on the basis that he is a stateless Kuwaiti
    Bidoon.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th March 2013 and asylum
    was granted to him after an appeal on 24th June 2013.

 3. However, after the grant of asylum, by use of the  biodata  information
    provided by the claimant, it came to light that before he came  to  the
    United  Kingdom,  the  claimant  had  made  two  United   States   visa
    applications in Iraq using an Iraqi  passport  in  the  name  of  Gaser
    Alhadidi, on 28th May 2012 and 16th January 2013.

First-tier Tribunal decision
 4. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence and expert evidence  as  to
    the existence of false Iraqi passports in general,  although  not  this
    one in particular.  The  claimant's  oral  evidence  was  that  he  put
    himself in the hands of an agent, and that he did  as  the  agent  told
    him, including, on 2 occasions, his giving fingerprints at  the  United
    States Embassy in Baghdad on the basis of the Alhadidi identity,  which
    was false, and a false Iraqi passport, obtained by the  agent,  in  the
    same name.

 5. Other evidence for the claimant, taken into account by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, included the presence in the United Kingdom of a son  of  the
    claimant, and of his uncle (who is the claimant's  father-in-law)  both
    of whom have been accepted as refugees  on  the  basis  that  they  are
    Kuwaiti Bidoons, and a letter from the  Kuwaiti  Community  Association
    supporting the claimant's contention that he is a Kuwaiti Bidoon.

 6. The Secretary of State relied on two copy visa applications produced to
    the First-tier Tribunal under cover of a witness statement  by  Matthew
    Johnson. Mr Johnson is the Designated Team Manager for the exchange  of
    data as part of the High Value Data Sharing Protocol between  the  Five
    Country Conference  countries  (Australia,  Canada,  New  Zealand,  the
    United Kingdom and  the  United  States)  whereby  anonymised  sets  of
    fingerprints are submitted to a receiving country if there is  evidence
    or reasonable belief that the individual concerned may be known to  the
    authorities of that  country.   Mr  Johnson's  evidence  was  that  the
    fingerprints of Mr Alhadidi in the United States Embassy  records  from
    Baghdad are the same as those of Mr Al-Jasser provided by the Secretary
    of State. It goes no further than that.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal found the claimant to be a credible witness and
    that he had  indeed  followed  the  agent's  instructions  when  making
    applications at the United States Embassy in Baghdad on both occasions.
     The Tribunal found the Iraqi passport to have  been  a  forgery.   The
    First-tier Tribunal concluded that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the burden upon her of showing  that  the  claimant  was  an
    Iraqi citizen who  had  deceived  the  United  Kingdom  authorities  in
    applying for and receiving refugee status as  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.   The
    claimant's appeal against revocation of protection was allowed.

Permission to appeal
 8. The Secretary of State appealed. The  basis  on  which  permission  was
    granted was that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law in that:

 a) In  determining  that  the  claimant  had  not  employed  deception  in
    obtaining his  refugee  status,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  an
    incorrect standard of proof, because it gave  insufficient  weight,  or
    failed to take into account, that the claimant's  fingerprints  matched
    two visa applications using an Iraqi  passport  that  at  no  time  was
    deemed to be a forgery by the US Homeland Security Department.  As this
    was the only identity document provided by the claimant  the  Secretary
    of State argued that she was entitled to  assume,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that his true identity and nationality was  Iraqi.   The
    claimant had not provided evidence (apart from his  own  oral  evidence
    and the country evidence of the existence of forged Iraqi passports) to
    indicate that the passport used in the US applications was  a  forgery;
    and/or

 b) In failing to give adequate reasons for finding that the  claimant  was
    under the agent's  control  when  he  went  to  Iraq  on  two  separate
    occasions eight months apart (before coming to the United  Kingdom)  to
    make two separate visa applications with the same Iraqi  passport,  and
    in accepting that the claimant's Iraqi passport must be  a  forgery  if
    obtained by an agent.

 9. A Devaseelan challenge to the judge's reasoning  was  rejected  in  the
    grant of permission and has not been relied upon before me.

Rule 24 Reply
10. The claimant replied to the grant of permission on 11 April  2016.   He
    argued that the onus was on the Secretary of State to prove that he was
    an Iraqi national, and that the burden was not discharged.   He  relied
    on BA and others (Bedoon - statelessness - risk of persecution)  Kuwait
    CG [2004] UKIAT 000256 and NM  (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)
    Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 356 (IAC), to the effect that undocumented Bidoon
    remain at risk of persecution and serious harm in Kuwait.

11. The claimant observed that his grant of refugee status was  the  result
    of an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  evidence  had  been
    tested now, not once but twice, by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  found
    credible.  The Secretary of State should not be permitted to revoke his
    protection status on the basis of inconclusive and weak  evidence  from
    the United States.

12. At paragraph 8 of the Reply, the claimant identified inconsistencies in
    the family details provided in the two  Iraqi  applications,  which  he
    contended were supportive of his account  that  the  applications  were
    completed by an agent, not by him, and that he gave his fingerprints in
    Baghdad on the agent's instructions.  The United  States  DHS  had  not
    taken  any  point  on  the  significant  differences  between   the   2
    applications in his father's date of birth, his mother's name and  date
    of birth, and his spouse's name and date of birth, suggesting that  the
    United States DHS had not given anxious scrutiny to those applications.



13. The claimant's son had reached the  United  Kingdom  in  2009,  several
    years before any of the Iraqi or United Kingdom  applications  said  to
    have been made by this claimant.  On entry, the claimant's son gave  as
    his father's name the name in which the claimant now applies for asylum
    in the United Kingdom.  The claimant's uncle  (his  father-in-law)  had
    always used the same surname as that which the claimant now  used,  and
    again had been in the United Kingdom for a  number of years.   The  use
    by the claimant's son and uncle of the same family name was  indicative
    of it being genuinely his name.

14.  The  claimant  made  submissions  about  the  method  by   which   his
    fingerprints and biodata came to be given at the  American  Embassy  in
    Iraq and about the ease with which Iraqi passports of  the  'A'  series
    were said to be forged.  The use of a forged  Iraqi  passport  did  not
    make the claimant a genuine Iraqi citizen.  The claimant's  failure  to
    mention that he had been to Iraq did not change the fact of his being a
    Kuwaiti Bidoon and it was more likely than not that such was the  case,
    as the First-tier Tribunal had found.

Submissions
15. For the Secretary of State,  Mr Kandola recognised that  the  Secretary
    of State's first two grounds of appeal were in effect the same  ground,
    that the First-tier Tribunal applied an incorrect standard of proof  to
    the evidence when  determining  that  the  claimant  had  not  employed
    deception in obtaining his refugee status on the basis that  "no  basis
    has been offered for the Secretary of State's preferring  one  scenario
    over the other", that is to say that the deception which took place was
    in the United Kingdom and not in Iraq.  The Secretary of  State  argued
    that generic evidence demonstrating passport fraud in Iraq did  not  in
    any way demonstrate that this particular passport was a forgery.

16. The other ground of appeal advanced is a challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasons for believing that the claimant  did  as  the  agent
    told him in relation to the various applications that he made, and  was
    under the agent's control, and for accepting that  the  Iraqi  passport
    was a forgery arranged by an agent.

17.  Mr  Kandola  acknowledged  that  there  were  difficulties  about  the
    verification  which  the  United  States  authorities   undertook,   in
    particular the checking of family members, and that neither the  United
    States Department of Homeland Security  (United  States  DHS)  nor  the
    British authorities had asked the  Iraqi  authorities  whether  such  a
    passport exists and whether it was  issued  in  Iraq  in  circumstances
    which would indicate that it was a  genuine  Iraqi  passport  for  this
    claimant.

18. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal.

19. I did not consider it necessary to call upon Mr  Adebayo,  who  appears
    for the claimant.  Mr Adebayo relied on his Rule 24 Reply.

Discussion
20. It is common ground that the Secretary of State  bears  the  burden  of
    proving, to the ordinary civil standard of  balance  of  probabilities,
    that the claimant has used deception in obtaining refugee status in the
    United Kingdom, entitling her to revoke  his  protection  status.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found that on the facts, that burden was  not
    discharged.

21. The Secretary of State asks the Upper Tribunal to  interfere  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact  and  credibility,  specifically
    that the Iraqi passport was a forgery, that the claimant is  a  Kuwaiti
    Bidoon, and that the Iraqi application was made by him on the advice of
    an agent, whose instructions he followed.

22. If the Upper Tribunal is to interfere with findings of  material  fact,
    the  Secretary  of  State  must  show  that  those  findings  meet  the
    perversity or irrationality standard set out in the  judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Brooke in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 90.2 and 90.3:

             "90. ...2. A finding [of fact] might only  be  set  aside  for
             error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational
             or unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was
             wholly unsupported by the evidence.

             3. A decision should  not  be  set  aside  for  inadequacy  of
             reasons unless the adjudicator failed to identify  and  record
             the matters that were critical to  his  decision  on  material
             issues, in such a way that the IAT was  unable  to  understand
             why he reached that decision."

    I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  are
    perverse, Wednesbury unreasonable, or that they are wholly  unsupported
    by the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  am  satisfied  that
    the contrary is the case and that the evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was evidence upon which those findings could properly be made.



23. Nor do I find that I cannot understand how the decision was reached: on
    the contrary, it  is  fully  and  carefully  reasoned.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal made its decision  having  heard  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    claimant, his son  and  father-in-law,  and  also  had  regard  to  the
    Norwegian LandInfo and other country evidence, the  United  States  DHS
    documents, and a letter from the Kuwaiti Community Association.

24. The Secretary of State was  entitled,  on  the  evidence  of  the  visa
    applications,  to  conclude  that  the  claimant  had  used   deception
    somewhere, either in Iraq by  saying  to  the  United  States  consular
    authorities that he  was  an  Iraqi  citizen  and  producing  an  Iraqi
    passport, or in the United Kingdom by saying to the Secretary of  State
    that he was a Kuwaiti Bidoon and satisfying an Immigration  Judge  that
    he was stateless. However,  her  challenge  to  the  finding  that  the
    deception was in Iraq, not the United  Kingdom,  relies  on  inferences
    drawn from the two United  States  DHS  printouts  which  provide  some
    limited details concerning two United States visa applications made  in
    Iraq by Gaser Alhadidi, who produced an Iraqi passport.

25.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility made after hearing oral evidence  from  the  claimant,  his
    uncle (and father-in-law), and  his  son,  and  considered  the  United
    States DHS evidence and country evidence. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    found the claimant and his witnesses to be witnesses of truth.

26. The United  States  DHS  evidence  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded does not assist, beyond identifying  that  the  two  sets  of
    United States DHS applications were made by  the  same  person  as  the
    present application.  In particular,  there is  no  indication  on  the
    face of the copy visa applications,  or  in  the  accompanying  witness
    statement of Mr Johnson, that the United States DHS performed any check
    of its own on the genuineness of the Iraqi passport, or took  any  view
    on the point, and the family details point  suggests  that  the  United
    States DHS did not even check its own records of the first  application
    on the second occasion, although the same name and passport was used on
    both occasions.

27. On the balance of probabilities, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not
    err in concluding that the United States DHS evidence is  not  evidence
    that the claimant used a genuine Iraqi passport to apply to go  to  the
    United States from Iraq and therefore that he was an Iraqi citizen. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  entitled,  on  the  basis  of  all  the
    evidence before her, to conclude that it was the Iraqi identity and the
    United States visa applications which  were  deceptive,  and  that  the
    claimant had not sought  to  deceive  the  United  Kingdom  immigration
    authorities.

28. It remains open to the Secretary of State to make further enquiries.  I
    record that at the hearing, Mr Adebayo said he had with  him  a  letter
    from the Iraqi Embassy which may be relevant to such enquiries.

29. As far as this decision is concerned,  it  is  a  carefully  and  fully
    reasoned decision by an experienced First-tier Tribunal Judge, and  the
    conclusions which she reached  were  unarguably  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence adduced and relied upon by the Secretary of State,  who  bears
    the burden of proving deception. There is in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision no want of reasoning at the R (Iran) level which would entitle
    the Upper Tribunal to interfere with the finding of fact by the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the claimant is a stateless Kuwaiti Bidoon  who  has
    not deceived the British authorities.

30. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision stands.

Conclusions
The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.
I do not set aside the decision. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed   Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:  14 April 2016
                   Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

