
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00038/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th October 2016                 |On 15th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Huseyin [K]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Kpogho, Solicitor, Able Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision  to  deport  him  to  Turkey  as  a  foreign  criminal.   That
    deportation  order  had  the  effect  of  invalidating  the  claimant's
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  where  he  has  lived
    since coming here on a family reunion visa in 2006 to join his  father,
    who had refugee status as from 12th August 2005.

 2. The claimant remains a Turkish citizen and is in  a  relationship  with
    the woman who is now his wife, who is a citizen of Cyprus.

 3. The Secretary of State certified her decision under Section  72(9)  and
    in the First-tier and before me the  claimant  does  not  dispute  that
    Section 72(9) is applicable nor does he seek to pursue  any  protection
    application  under  the  Refugee  Convention   or   the   Qualification
    Directive.  This appeal turns only on whether it  is  unduly  harsh  to
    remove the claimant to Turkey having regard  to  his  circumstances  in
    relationship with his wife and their child.

 4. I granted permission on this appeal partly because  Section  72(9)  had
    not been properly dealt with at the beginning of the decision but  also
    because this is a decision which follows MAB and not KMO and  that  has
    resulted in an erroneous approach to the circumstances  of  removal  as
    set out in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

 5. At the date of the respondent's decision on 3rd July 2015 the  claimant
    and his wife remained estranged  and  he  was  still  in  prison.   His
    daughter had lived with her father only for  a  few  months  after  her
    birth before his arrest for assaulting her mother on 17th January 2014.
     That was not the claimant's first conviction for assaulting the  woman
    who is now his wife.  There had  been  two  previous  convictions,  the
    first on 19th April 2011 resulting in a restraining order to last until
    18th April 2012, a  fine  and  compensation  and  the  second  on  23rd
    December 2011 resulting  in  a  conviction  and  a  term  of  suspended
    imprisonment.  The third offence in January 2014 was therefore a breach
    of the suspended sentence.

 6. The claimant had threatened his wife with harm  to  both  her  and  the
    baby, which the  judge  in  his  sentencing  remarks  considered  still
    presented a high risk.  He was convicted of common assault  by  beating
    and intimidating a witness, to wit, his wife,  and  sentenced  to  five
    months for the common assault and 29 months for the intimidation to run
    concurrently.

 7. On the expiry of his sentence he was retained in immigration detention.
     The judge made an indefinite restraining order which was discharged in
    February 2016 but the claimant was not  actually  released  until  July
    2016 and he still is not living with his wife, having  been  bailed  to
    live with his father.  The reason for that is  not  before  me  because
    there is no evidence about the basis for the  bail  conditions  in  any
    form before me.

 8. It is said that the claimant and his wife are reconciled but that alone
    is not sufficient to amount to evidence that it is unduly harsh  either
    under 399(a)(i)(b) or 299(b)(iii) or Section 117C(5) of  the  2002  Act
    for his wife and child to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    claimant.  It is not suggested by either party that they can reasonably
    be expected to return to Turkey with him.

 9. It is the claimant's case that the current circumstances are  different
    from those which were taken into account by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There is no real evidence as to what the current position is before  me
    and therefore, while I set aside this determination I do  not  consider
    that it is possible to remake the decision today.  The decision will be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision. The decision will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed: Judith A J C Gleeson            Date:  14 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

