

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: RP/00031/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                    |Decision signed:   23.05.2017        |
|on    23.05.2017                      |sent out: 24.05.2017                 |

Before:
                        The Hon. Mr Justice NICOL and
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN
Between:
                            Ahmed Abashek MUDHIR
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Peter Ievins), sitting at Taylor House  on  2  December
    2015, to  an appeal by a citizen of Somalia, born 1983. The appellant's
    appeal had been against an order for his  automatic  deportation  as  a
    foreign criminal, following sentences of 9 years' imprisonment  in  all
    for firearms offences in 2011. The appellant had come here in 1993 with
    his half-brother, and been  granted  asylum  as  his  dependant.  Judge
    Ievins had allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds;  but
    the respondent had certified the  asylum  claim  under  s.  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. Following the grant of permission, the s. 72 certificate was  the  only
    aspect of this case to have been dealt with by the Upper Tribunal  (May
    J and Upper Tribunal Judge Jeremy  Rintoul),  who  found,  following  a
    hearing on 19 July 2016,  that  the  appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumption set out in s. 72 (2), which brought in article  33  (2)  of
    the Refugee  Convention.  That  meant  that  he  could  not  claim  the
    protection of that Convention; but the question still  remained  as  to
    whether he could be deported to Somalia without a real risk of 'inhuman
    or degrading treatment' contrary to article 3  of  the  European  Human
    Rights Convention.

 3. This issue was listed for hearing on 24 - 25 May before us; but, during
    the few days before the hearing, it turned out that the  appellant  had
    been sentenced to a further period of 22 years' imprisonment on 12  May
    for more firearms offences. We asked the parties whether there was  any
    purpose to be served by the appeal continuing, bearing in mind that the
    appellant could not be removed till he had served the custodial  period
    of that sentence. The result, on the morning of the 22nd, was an e-mail
    from the presenting officer in charge of  the  case  (Mr  Ian  Jarvis),
    saying that the decision under appeal, to  deport  the  appellant,  had
    been withdrawn in the light of the recent sentence.

 4. Mr Jarvis helpfully referred us to r. 17 (1) (a) of the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules, and to SM (withdrawal of  appealed  decision:  effect)
    (Pakistan) [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC). The relevant part of  r.  17  follows:
    since it is now (as in force from 21 August 2015) in  rather  different
    terms from those considered in SM, it will be  enough  for  us  to  set
    these out.

        17.  (1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of  the
             withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-
             (a) by sending or delivering to the Upper  Tribunal  a  written
             notice of withdrawal; or
             (b) orally at a hearing.
             (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless the  Upper
             Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in  relation  to  an
             application for permission to appeal.

 5. We sought the appellant's views and were told that he consented to  the
    withdrawal. In the circumstances already mentioned, both  parties  have
    sensibly recognized that no useful purpose is  served  by  this  appeal
    continuing.  We  accept  Mr  Jarvis's  e-mail  as  written  notice   of
    withdrawal of the decision under appeal,  and  have  no  hesitation  in
    consenting to that. The result will  be  that  this  appellant  remains
    liable to serve the custodial  period  of  his  sentence.  If  a  fresh
    decision is made to deport him  when  that  nears  its  end,  then  its
    merits, including those of any s.  72  certificate,  will  need  to  be
    considered on the basis of the relevant circumstances as they are then.

Decision under appeal withdrawn
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
