
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: RP/00113/2019
                                                         & HU/20059/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 July 2021                     |On 01 October 2021                  |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AFA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Adebayo, Solicitor, A2 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in this matter is referred to as the 'Secretary of State'
    in the body of this decision, the respondent as the 'claimant'.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hanbury  ('the  Judge')  sent  to  the
    parties on 20 November 2020. The Judge allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent to cancel his refugee status.

 3. The respondent appeals with permission of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin
    by means of a decision dated 15 December 2020.

Remote hearing

 4. The hearing before me was a Teams  hearing  held  during  the  Covid-19
    pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field House.  The  hearing
    room and the building were open to the  public.  The  hearing  and  its
    start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was  addressed  by  the
    representatives in the same way as if we were together in  the  hearing
    room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing  in  open  court;
    that the open justice principle has been secured;  that  no  party  has
    been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on
    a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

Anonymity

 5. No anonymity order was issued by the Judge.

 6. I observe that this  appeal  is  concerned  with  the  cancellation  of
    refugee status. In  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    presently in the interests of justice that the claimant is not publicly
    recognised as someone who has secured international protection  and  is
    challenging a subsequent decision to cancel refugee status. In reaching
    such conclusion and being mindful of the right to information protected
    by article 10 ECHR I observe paragraph 13 of Upper Tribunal Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders.

 7. I therefore grant the claimant anonymity and my order  is  detailed  at
    the conclusion of this decision.

Background

 8. The claimant asserts that he is an undocumented Bidoon  who  previously
    resided in Kuwait. He sought international  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 24 July 2012 asserting that he possessed a well-founded fear
    of persecution if he were to return to Kuwait because there was a  real
    risk that he would be arrested, detained and mistreated  consequent  to
    his involvement in a demonstration.

 9. The Secretary of State accepted the claim advanced and  recognised  the
    claimant as a refugee on 22 August 2012.

Incident at Baghdad airport

10. The claimant was encountered at Baghdad airport  on  19  July  2017  in
    possession of an Iraqi passport in the identity of AFKA. AFKA's date of
    birth as detailed in the passport was the same as the  date  previously
    provided by the claimant to the Secretary of State during the course of
    his application for international protection. The claimant was also  in
    possession of a  biometric  residence  permit  ('BRP')  issued  by  the
    Secretary of State in the name he had previously provided, namely AFA.

Cancellation of refugee status

11. The Secretary of State wrote to the claimant on 12  September  2019  to
    inform him as to her  intention  to  cancel  his  refugee  status.  The
    claimant responded by letter  dated  23  September  2019  in  which  he
    confirmed that he is an undocumented Bidoon and that the Iraqi passport
    found in his possession was a forgery provided  by  an  agent.  He  had
    found himself stranded in Iraq having  visited  Karbala  for  religious
    observance and subsequently lost the travel document provided to him by
    the Secretary of State. Efforts to secure a travel document through the
    consular office of  the  British  Embassy  in  Iraq  were  unsuccessful
    because he was not a British citizen. He therefore believed that he had
    no choice but to resort to using an agent to secure his return  to  the
    United Kingdom. He secured an  Iraqi  passport  through  an  agent  and
    sought to exit Baghdad airport on 19 July  2017.  However,  immigration
    control observed that the personal details incorporated  onto  his  BRP
    did not match those in the passport he presented.

12. The claimant further explained that a second agent  provided  him  with
    another Iraqi passport, and he was able to travel to the United Kingdom
    via Lebanon, arriving in this country on 3 August 2017. He provided the
    passport to an immigration officer who took a photocopy of  it  and  in
    turn he was issued with a IS.81 form.

13. The Secretary of State  cancelled  the  claimant's  refugee  status  by
    letter dated 12 November  2019.  The  claimant  appealed  against  this
    decision (RP/00113/2019).

Human rights

14. The claimant lodged an application for indefinite leave to remain under
    the Immigration Rules in August 2017. Following the decision to  cancel
    refugee status the Secretary  of  State  issued  a  decision  dated  21
    November 2019 refusing the claimant's application for leave to  remain.
    The  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances justifying leave to remain on article 8  grounds  outside
    of  the  Rules.   The   claimant   appealed   against   this   decision
    (HU/20059/2019).



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15. At the hearing held at Taylor House on 26 October 2020 the Judge  heard
    oral evidence from the claimant and his three witnesses.  The  claimant
    did not pursue his article 8 appeal: [43] of the decision.

16. The Judge concluded that the Secretary of State had failed to establish
    to the required standard that the claimant has obtained refugee  status
    as a result of a misrepresentation as to his nationality  and  personal
    history.

Grounds of appeal

17. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal can properly  be  identified
    as follows:

         i. The First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to  have  regard  to  a
            relevant decision of this Tribunal: Hussein and Another  (Status
            of passports: foreign law) [2020] UKUT 00250 (IAC), [2020]  Imm.
            A.R. 1442.

        ii. The First-tier Tribunal failed to  adequately  engage  with  the
            respondent's case, namely that the Iraqi passport was  genuinely
            issued to the claimant.

       iii. The First-tier Tribunal failed to give  any,  or  any  adequate,
            reasons as to how the Iraqi passport was altered and  perversely
            found  that  the  passport  was  simultaneously  genuine  whilst
            belonging to someone else.

18. The claimant filed a  rule  24  response,  dated  26  April  2021.  The
    Secretary of State relied upon a  skeleton  argument  authored  by  Mr.
    Lindsay, dated 18 May 2021.

Decision

19. Mr. Adebayo conceded, on instructions, that the  Judge's  decision  was
    unsustainable for material error  of  law.  For  the  reasons  detailed
    below, he was correct to do so.

20. I have sympathy for the Judge who was required to  consider  an  appeal
    with unusual facts giving rise to complex considerations.  However,  it
    is trite that both parties can expect a  fair  consideration  of  their
    case. In this matter, as is now accepted by  the  claimant,  the  Judge
    failed to adequately engage with the Secretary of State's case.

21. At its core, the Secretary of State's  case  is  that:  (i)  the  Iraqi
    passport in the name of AFKA was lawfully issued; (ii) it was  lawfully
    issued to AFKA on 15 March 2017, four months before the claimant states
    he lost his travel document in Iraq circa July 2017; (iii)  on  balance
    it is unlikely that the claimant, asserting that there  was  no-one  to
    help him in Iraq, could secure the services of an agent(s)  to  provide
    him with a false passport(s); (v) AFA and AFKA are the same person; and
    (v) the claimant is a national of Iraq and not an undocumented Bidoon.

22. At page E1 of  the  respondent's  bundle  is  a  photograph  of  AFKA's
    passport exhibiting his personal details page alongside the  claimant's
    BRP card. A secondary image of AFKA is inlaid into the personal details
    page as a security feature. The Secretary of  State  asserts  that  the
    photograph clearly establishes that both documents were issued  to  the
    claimant. It is not  asserted  that  damage  has  been  caused  to  the
    laminated personal details page which would be suggestive of tampering.

23. As previously observed, the claimant asserts that: (i) he  secured  the
    passport through an agent; (ii)  he  has  been  consistent  as  to  his
    assertion; (iii) he has evidence of  efforts  to  contact  the  British
    authorities in Iraq to secure a means of his returning to this country;
    and (iv) his relatives have been accepted  to  be  undocumented  Bidoon
    from Kuwait, and several are now British citizens.

24. In considering the matter the Judge detailed at [51] of his decision:

         '51. I note that here it is  the  [claimant]  who  is  saying  that
            [AFKA's] passport is not genuine rather than the  [Secretary  of
            State] who says it is. The Secretary of State has asserted  that
            it is a genuine document that I have no reason  to  reject  that
            assertion. Nobody has argued or presented evidence that it is  a
            false document. It is the case, given the burden and standard of
            proof identified above, therefore, that the [Secretary of State]
            has shown that the appellant for whatever reason  chose  to  use
            another person's passport at Baghdad airport in 2017.'

25. Unfortunately, having concluded that the Iraqi document  is  a  genuine
    document, the Judge  immediately  proceeded  to  a  finding  that  'for
    whatever  reason'  the  appellant  chose  to  use   'another   person's
    passport'. No reasons were given for this finding of  fact,  and  there
    was no engagement with the respondent's  case  that  the  passport  was
    lawfully issued to AFA in the identity of AFKA. Such failure alone is a
    material error of law. Further, the material error of law  flowed  into
    other elements of the Judge's decision:

         '54. The acceptance that the [claimant] as indeed a member  of  the
            ...  family was decisive in the granted  (sic)  refugee  status.
            Even if documents produced  were  false,  false  or  misleading,
            actually the fact is that the appellant is reasonably likely  to
            be an undocumented Bidoon. It is hard to see, therefore, how the
            use of another person's passport should affect  the  outcome  of
            the appeal.'

26. I note that no consideration was given by the Judge to the existence of
    the security features addressed above, nor as to whether  the  lawfully
    issued passport was  or  was  not  tampered  with.  Rather,  the  Judge
    proceeded to consider the fact that several of  the  claimant's  family
    have been accepted by the Secretary of State to have been  undocumented
    Bidoon from Kuwait as determinative:

         '53. ... Unless it can be shown that the other family members  were
            wrongly identified as part of the [claimant's] family,  or  that
            they had lied about  his  true  identity  and  there  was  other
            evidence to show he was in fact [AFKA], I am bound  to  conclude
            that they  were  all,  the  [claimant]  included,   undocumented
            Bidoons.'

27. The Judge materially erred in concluding that he was bound to make such
    finding of fact on the basis identified as it excluded consideration of
    the Secretary of State's case in respect of the  passport.  It  may  be
    that the claimant and his family are truthful as to their  history  and
    origins. It may also be that are not, with the Secretary of State  only
    recently being made aware as to the true state of affairs consequent to
    the claimant's actions  in  Iraq.  In  simple  terms,  as  observed  in
    discussion with the representatives at the hearing,  the  Judge  placed
    the cart before the horse when failing to consider the evidence in  the
    round.

28. Having concluded that the decision must be set aside for material error
    of  law,  I  make  one  further  observation.  Section  82(1)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')  provides
    for a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  in  three  identified
    circumstances, including revocation  of  refugee  status,  but  not  in
    respect of cancellation  of  refugee  status.  An  appeal  against  the
    decision to cancel refugee status is brought on protection claim and/or
    human rights grounds. The Judge erred in allowing the appeal solely  on
    the ground that "the respondent has failed to satisfy the Tribunal that
    the [the claimant] had  obtained  refugee  status  as  a  result  of  a
    misrepresentation of facts." No such ground of appeal exists under  the
    statutory regime: section 84 of the 2002 Act.

Remittal

29. Mr. Adebayo requested that the matter be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Mr. Lindsay submitted that the matter should remain  in  this
    Tribunal and be dismissed because the appeal could not succeed in light
    of Hussein and Another (Status of passports: foreign law)  [2020]  UKUT
    00250 (IAC), [2020] Imm. A.R. 1442, and in particular [12]-[13].

30. I confirmed at the hearing that the matter should properly be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal. Having found that the claimant succeeded on
    his appeal on what I  believe  the  Judge  intended  to  be  protection
    grounds, no consideration was given by  the  Judge  to  the  claimant's
    human rights appeal. Consequently, the effect of the error has been  to
    deprive the claimant of the opportunity for the entirety of his case to
    be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

31. As for the Secretary of State's reliance upon Hussein, there is at  yet
    no finding of fact as to whether the Iraqi passport was issued  to  AFA
    in the identity of AFKA, or to someone else, and such finding  of  fact
    is properly to be  made  before  consideration  can  be  given  to  the
    application, or otherwise, of the decision in Hussein.

32. I take this opportunity  to  observe  that  this  matter  may  well  be
    suitable for a panel hearing, but such observation is not binding  upon
    the First-tier Tribunal which  can  properly  undertake  its  own  case
    management consideration.



Notice of Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    20 November 2020 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of  the  Tribunal  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007, save for confirmation that the claimant  does
    not pursue his human rights appeal on article 8 grounds.

34. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hanbury.

35. No findings of fact are preserved.

36. An anonymity order is made.



Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

37. I order:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly
         or indirectly identify the claimant (AFA). This  direction  applies
         to, amongst others, the claimant and the Secretary  of  State.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Dated: 4 August 2021
