
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     EW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                             Anonymity Direction

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    D. Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                   (Delivered Orally on 20 November 2018)


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea,  born  in  January  1995.   His
    father was granted refugee status in the  United  Kingdom  in  November
    2004 and the appellant was granted entry clearance on  16  August  2006
    pursuant to the refugee family reunion provisions.  In April 2007,  the
    appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain.  It  is  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State that the appellant was at that  time  recognised
    as a refugee in line with his father.

 2. On 16 December 2013, the appellant was convicted at Leeds  Crown  Court
    of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to
    90 months' imprisonment.  On 5 October  2017,  the  SSHD  notified  the
    appellant, and the UNHCR, of the intention to  revoke  the  appellant's
    refugee status.

 3. Although not relevant for the purposes of my decision, it  is  of  note
    that the appellant is not at the hearing today because he is once again
    in detention as a consequence of his criminal actions,  having  further
    offended in January 2018, the details of which are not relevant.

SSHD's Decision

 4. The decision which underpins this appeal is that made by the SSHD on 14
    March 2018, headed: "Decision to Revoke Refugee Status".   Therein  the
    Secretary of State concluded: (i) that the appellant has been convicted
    of a particularly serious crime; (ii)  that  he  is  a  danger  to  the
    community; and consequently, (iii)  that  his  refugee  status  can  be
    revoked pursuant to paragraph 339AC(ii) of the Immigration  Rules.  The
    SSHD further found that the exception identified in  Article  33(2)  of
    the Refugee Convention to the principle of non-refoulement  applies  to
    this appellant [44] and  further  certified  that  the  presumption  in
    s72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  Act  ("2002
    Act") applies [43]. The Secretary of State concluded  his  decision  by
    confirming that: (i) although the appellant's refugee status  had  been
    revoked, his indefinite leave to remain would  remain  in  place;  and,
    (ii) the SSHD does not intend to return the appellant to Eritrea.

Appeal against SSHD's Decision to the FtT

 5. Before turning to the First-tier Tribunal's decision, it is prudent  to
    set out the statutory grounds of appeal upon which  the  appellant  was
    entitled to rely before the First-tier Tribunal, which are to be  found
    in section 84(3) of the 2002 Act:

         "(3) An appeal under Section  82(1)(c)  (revocation  of  protection
             status) must be brought  on  one  or  more  of  the  following
             grounds -

             (a)  that the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  protection
                  status breaches the United Kingdom's obligation under  the
                  Refugee Convention;

             (b)  that the decision to revoke  the  appellant's  protection
                  status  breaches  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   in
                  relation to persons eligible for a grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection."

 6. It  is  these  grounds  that  form  the  framework  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's consideration  of  the  appeal.   Unfortunately,  this  fact
    appears to have  bypassed  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal confined itself  almost  exclusively  to  a  consideration  of
    whether the provisions of section 72 of the 2002 Act bite  in  relation
    to this appellant i.e. it asked itself  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant had rebutted the presumption that  he  is  a  danger  to  the
    community, concluding against the appellant.

Grounds of Appeal against FtT's Decision

 7. The grounds of appeal (upon which permission was granted by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nightingale) assert generally that the FtT took  account
    of immaterial matters and failed to take account of material matters in
    its assessment of the application of section 72 of the 2002 Act.

 8. It is, first, asserted that the FtT failed to make  a  forward  looking
    assessment of the issue of whether the appellant constitutes  a  danger
    to the community.  I reject this ground.  It is plain, when  the  FtT's
    decision is looked at as a whole, that it undertook  the  consideration
    on exactly the basis that the grounds assert it did not.  Although  the
    FtT took account of  historic  matters  -  such  as  the  reports  from
    probation service etc - it was perfectly entitled to  do  so.   It  was
    important to put the appellant's offending and the  assessment  of  the
    likelihood of him being a danger to the community in the future, in its
    proper context.  The fact that  the  Tribunal  looked  at  the  current
    position is made perfectly clear in paragraph 74 of its  decision  (for
    example, see the reference therein to a recent probation service letter
    recording the appellant's  excellent  compliance  and  subsequent  good
    communication).  The FtT also records other aspects of that same report
    which were positive to the  appellant's  case,  observing  that  he  is
    currently assessed as high risk. It also took account of the fact  that
    it is  likely  that  risk  posed  by  the  appellant  would  have  been
    reassessed  as  medium,  had  there  not  been  uncertainty  over   his
    immigration status [74].

 9. By his second ground the appellant asserts a failure by the FtT to give
    adequate  weight  to  specified  documentation  before  it.  Particular
    reference is made in the grounds to paragraph 54 of the FtT's  decision
    and a "probation letter" quoted therein.  Once  again,  I  reject  this
    ground. The FtT plainly took account of such evidence - referring to it
    not only in paragraph 54 of its  decision  but  also  in  paragraph  74
    thereof.

10. Issues of weight are a matter for the Tribunal, and it cannot  be  said
    that the FtT's approach to this or indeed any other evidence before  it
    was irrational, or otherwise unlawful.  This finding also  disposes  of
    the third and fifth grounds. As  to  the  fifth  ground,  the  Tribunal
    clearly had cognisance of the  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant's
    family members. It was not required to set out this evidence in detail,
    having observed that such evidence was given in  paragraph  76  of  its
    decision.

11. The  Tribunal  was  also  correct  to  take  account  of  the  features
    identified in paragraph 75 of its decision relating to the  appellant's
    lack of settled address.  It is not being said therein that the lack of
    settled address  equates  to  the  appellant  being  a  danger  to  the
    community, but this is plainly a relevant matter in the context of  the
    assessment of such issue as a whole.

12. In his sixth ground the  appellant  asserts  that  the  FtT  failed  to
    appreciate that his father lives in Leeds and  that  contact  with  his
    father necessarily involves residence in or visiting Leeds.  I find  it
    difficult to understand how such a failure on the part of the FtT could
    be material and I conclude that it is not, even  if  it  did  not  have
    cognisance of the fact that the appellant's father lives in Leeds.  The
    seventh ground mischaracterises the FtT's perfectly lawful treatment of
    the appellant's present lack of access to benefits or employment.   The
    eighth ground, which also has no merit, makes a confused  reference  to
    paragraph 80 of the FtT's decision - in which the FtT's finding of fact
    is unimpeachable.

13. By his final ground the  appellant  asserts  that  the  FtT  failed  to
    lawfully conduct the balancing exercise required under  section  72  of
    the 2002 Act, in  particular  by  giving  insufficient  weight  to  the
    positive factors  and  undue  weight  to  historic  factors.   I  again
    conclude that this ground is not made out.  The  FtT  was  entitled  to
    give whatever weight it thought appropriate to  each  of  the  relevant
    matters, as long as that weight was not irrational - which it was  not.
    The  FtT  carefully  looked  at  all  the  relevant  features  of   the
    appellant's circumstances and rationally  concluded  that  he  had  not
    rebutted the presumption that he is a danger to the community.

14. For the reasons given above, I find that the appellant has not made out
    any of the pleaded grounds. Had he done so I  would  nevertheless  have
    dismissed his appeal because, for the reasons which follow,  any  error
    in the FtT's decision would not have  been  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal.

15. I have set out above the grounds that the  appellant  was  entitled  to
    deploy before the FtT, which refer to the need to demonstrate that  the
    decision leads to a breach of the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under
    the  Refugee  Convention.  Given  that  the  appellant   has   retained
    Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK I invited Mr Howard to identify an
    obligation under the Refugee Convention which it is said that the  SSHD
    has breached by revoking the appellant's refugee status. He was  unable
    to do so. In this case the appellant has ILR  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    without  the  possibility  of  being  refouled  to  Eritrea  (see   the
    undertaking by the Secretary of State), and with access  to  employment
    and benefits as a consequence of having ILR.  Consequently, even  if  I
    am wrong in concluding that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in  the
    way it dealt  with  section  72  of  the  2002  Act,  the  appeal  must
    nevertheless be dismissed because the appellant is unable  to  identify
    any obligation under the Refugee Convention which has been breached  by
    the Secretary of State's decision.





Notice of Decision

For the reasons given above I conclude that there is no error of law in  the
Fist-tier Tribunal's decision capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  this
appeal, and that the First-tier Tribunal's decision stands.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                Date: On 10 January 2019






