
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00018/2020

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely via Teams                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2021                               |On 25 June 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     PM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe  who  was  born  in  1986.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State made on 2 March 2020 to refuse  his  claim  for  international
    protection, to invoke section 72 of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 and, by way of a  separate  decision  letter,  to  revoke  his
    refugee status. The appellant had been granted leave as a refugee on  3
    April 2009. A decision by the Secretary of State in 2013 to revoke  the
    appellant's refugee  status  and  to  deport  the  appellant  had  been
    successfully appealed to the First-tier Tribunal by  the  appellant  in
    February  2014.  That  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and  the  second
    revocation decision of March 2020 are not on the Tribunal  file;  their
    absence has clearly caused problems for Judge Malik who  dismissed  the
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  by  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    November 2020. It is against  that  decision  that  the  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has been convicted of several sexual offences since 2011.
    Most recently, on 8 January 2015, the appellant  was  sentenced  to  10
    years' imprisonment for rape of a male.

 3. Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State  at  the  initial
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, told me  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the judge had fallen into error by failing to  apply  the
    appropriate cessation provisions in deciding  the  appeal  against  the
    decision to revoke the appellant's refugee status.

 4. The judge refers to the revocation of asylum status very briefly in her
    chronology at [13]  but  thereafter  that  element  of  the  appeal  is
    conspicuous  by  its  absence.  The  judge  refers  to  a   change   in
    circumstances at [57] but only as  regards  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's family members who had revisited Zimbabwe and only in order
    to reject the findings of the previous Tribunal in 2014.  At  no  point
    does  the  judge  properly  address  the  test  of  durable  change  of
    circumstances in Zimbabwe whilst  she  only  refers  to  the  appellant
    having failed to discharge the burden of proof; she does not appear  to
    recognise that, in the cessation appeal, the burden of proof is on  the
    Secretary of State and that the standard of proof  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities. Her analysis of the evidence is detailed  and  thorough;
    however, if, at least in one part of the appeal, she  has  not  applied
    the correct law to her findings of fact,  her  decision  falls  to  set
    aside for legal  error.  Findings  based  on  the  application  of  the
    incorrect burden of proof also infect  her  assessment  of  the  expert
    evidence. The judge has approached the report only having rejected  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence on the basis that the burden of
    proof throughout was on  the  appellant  and  without  considering  the
    report as part of the whole evidence (see Mibanga v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  [2005] EWCA Civ 367)).

 5. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. I stress again that the
    absence of important  documents  may  have  hampered  Judge  Malik.  Mr
    McVeety told me that the Home Office cannot locate a copy of the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision of 14 May 2014 although he did helpfully  file
    and serve a copy of the 2009 asylum grant minute. I shall try to locate
    the previous file (DA 015852013) in the Tribunal's archives so that  it
    is available for the next judge to hear the appeal. The  decision  will
    need to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal after a hearing de novo.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.




    Signed   Date 16 June 2021


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

