

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00031/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10th May 2019                                 |On 14th May 2019               |
|                                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                  SAJAD [H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, instructed by Turpin & Miller (Oxford)
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONs

         1. For reasons set out in a decision by First-tier Tribunal  judge
            E.E.M.Smith promulgated on 18th January 2019, she dismissed the
            appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the   respondent
            refusing his protection and human rights claim.  Permission  to
            appeal the decision was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  on
            8th April 2019 on the grounds that it was arguable  the  First-
            tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  consider   the   appellant's
            humanitarian protection grounds and had  failed  to  take  into
            account material matters.


         2. In his Rule 24 respondent  the  respondent  sought  to  'cross-
            appeal' on what  he  says  was  a  failure  by  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge to engage  with  the  detailed  reasons  in  the
            respondent's decision, in particular that the appellant  as  no
            longer a refugee.


         3. Both parties agreed, albeit for  different  reasons,  that  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to engage fully  with  the
            issues under appeal and the decision could not stand. The judge
            has erred in law in her  findings  of  fact,  failing  to  make
            findings of fact and failing to give reasons  for  findings  of
            fact made.

         4. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does
            not assign the function of primary fact finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal.


         5. When I have set aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
            s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case  to  the
            First-tier with directions or remake it  for  ourselves.  Where
            the facts are disputed or unclear, as here, I conclude that the
            decision should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
            determine the appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard by the First-
    tier Tribunal judge, no findings preserved.






                                    Date 10th May 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
