
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00131/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd January 2020                         |On 4th February 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     IMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") made an anonymity direction and it is
      appropriate to continue that direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal
      or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him
      or any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the
      appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Somalia.  His appeal against the
      respondent's decision that his entitlement to refugee status has
      ceased, that he is excluded from the protection of the Refugee
      Convention and that his deportation to Somalia will not be in breach
      of his human rights, was allowed on Article 3 grounds only by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart ("the judge") for reasons set out in
      a decision promulgated on 15th October 2019.


   3. The appellant appeals the decision of the judge that the respondent is
      entitled to invoke Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention such that
      notwithstanding the previous grant of refugee status to the appellant,
      the Refugee Convention ceases to apply to him. Permission to appeal
      was granted to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 13th
      November 2019.  There is a cross-appeal by the respondent against the
      decision to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds. Permission to
      appeal was granted to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Beach on 16th December 2019.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart


   4. The judge refers to the background, including the appellant's
      immigration history and his criminal convictions at paragraphs [3] to
      [7] of her decision.  The Judge noted the appellant was convicted at
      Wood Green Crown Court of two counts of possession/control of identity
      documents with intent and sentenced to 3 months imprisonment. He was
      also convicted of five counts of dishonestly making false
      representations to make gain for himself or another.  On 5th June 2017
      he was sentenced to 27 months imprisonment concurrent on each count,
      but consecutive to the three-month sentence of imprisonment, making a
      total of two years and six months imprisonment.


   5. The judge referred to the previous grant of refugee status at
      paragraph [13] of her decision, noting in particular:


          "... The appellant was 14 at the time of application. He stated he
          is from Mogadishu and faced persecution Somalia (sic) as a member
          of the Reer Hamar-Faqi minority clan. The claim was accepted, and
          he was granted refugee status...."

   6. The judge noted the respondent had contacted the UNHCR inviting
      comments regarding the intention to revoke the appellant's refugee
      status, and at paragraphs [17] to [23] the judge set out the response
      from the UNHCR.  At the hearing of the appeal the judge heard evidence
      from the appellant, his sister, and two brothers. Their evidence is
      set out at paragraphs [41] to [60] of the decision.


   7. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [62] to
      [93] of the decision. The judge noted, at paragraph [64], that the
      first issue for determination is the presumption under section 72(2)
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appellant's
      conviction on 24th August 2017 and sentence of two years and six
      months imprisonment imposed on 5 June 2017 was not challenged.  The
      judge rejected the appellant's claim that he had not been convicted of
      a 'particularly serious crime' for reasons set out at paragraph [66]
      of her decision.  The judge went on to consider whether the appellant
      constitutes a danger to the community of the United Kingdom.  For
      reasons set out at paragraphs [68] to [73], the judge found the
      appellant does not constitute a danger to society and concluded the
      appellant had rebutted the presumption in s72(2) and could not be
      excluded from protection under the Refugee Convention.


   8. The judge nevertheless went on to consider the respondent's decision
      relying upon Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.  The judge
      referred to the previous grant of refugee status and summarised the
      appellant's claim as put before the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph
      [75] of her decision:


              "The appellant was granted refugee status because of his own
          experiences in his home country Somalia.  The Secretary of State
          accepted that the appellant and his family are members of the Reer
          Hamar minority clan who at the time were at risk from majority
          clan members and had no protection. The appellant's evidence is
          that he and the rest of his family left Somalia and fled to
          Ethiopia when he was eight years old. Some members remain in
          Ethiopia and others in Kenya. The majority of his siblings are in
          the UK, providing financial assistance to his parents and siblings
          in Ethiopia. There is no suggestion that any of these family
          members have returned to Somalia. There is no evidence of any
          direct family members there. The Secretary of State's position is
          that there has been a durable change in Somalia and protection is
          available to the appellant."

   9. The judge referred to the country guidance set out in MOJ & Others,
      and at paragraph [79], noted the appellant's claim that the country
      guidance should not be followed, and the appellant's reliance upon the
      expert report of Dr Hoehne dated 16th September 2019. The evidence set
      out in the expert's report is referred to at paragraphs [79] to [86]
      of the decision.  Insofar as Article 1C(5) is concerned, at paragraphs
      [87] to [89], the judge concludes as follows:


              "87.     Dr Hoehne accepts that in line with case law the
          individual circumstances of the returnee must be considered. The
          appellant is now 35 years old. He has been away from Somalia for
          most of his life. I find no reason to reject his evidence that he
          has no direct family in Somalia. While his siblings will not be
          able to provide regular remittances, the appellant has his uncle
          whom he said was his guardian, is a businessman and travels
          regularly to Kenya. Even if his siblings were unable to assist,
          they are evidently a close family and I am satisfied that they
          would provide assistance to their brother in the short or long
          term as they have been doing for their other relatives who have
          lived regularly in Ethiopia for very many years.

              88. The appellant also has academic qualifications which he
          obtained at school and college. His evidence is that he also
          applied himself to study whilst he was imprisoned. He obtained
          functional skills qualifications in English and ICT and completed
          an e-learning course in personal finance. He completed a
          resettlement workshop a year ago and held paid employment in
          prison. He was working in the UK until 2008. It was his drug and
          alcohol abuse that prevented him returning to work at that time.
          He said that he is no longer abusing drugs and alcohol. He is
          familiar with the language and although he is now experiencing
          some mental health issues, there is insufficient evidence to
          suggest that this would prevent him from working. Although there
          is little supporting evidence in respect of his mental health
          condition, from an early stage he had also mentioned to the
          Offender Manager his depression and insomnia from which he has
          suffered from (sic) many years and recollection of things that he
          saw there.

              89. The number of killings of civilians has increased and the
          risk of indiscriminate killing is high. The UNHCR and Dr Hoehne
          provide objective country information to demonstrate that Al-
          Shahaab continue to be a threat. I accept that there is the
          possibility of the appellant securing access to a livelihood in
          Somalia but that is not the same as any real likelihood when he
          does not have any initial contacts or sources of initial support
          or accommodation. He left Somalia as a child and is unlikely to
          have any real knowledge of life there. I do not accept the
          assertion in the decision letter that having left at the age of 14
          he would still have initial social networks in Somalia. I am
          satisfied that the appellant would face the prospect of living in
          circumstances falling below that which is acceptable in
          humanitarian protection terms. Consequently I find that the
          Secretary of State is entitled to invoke Article 1C(5) in the
          particular circumstances and deportation would not breach the
          Refugee Convention."

  10.  The judge addressed the Article 3 and 8 claims at paragraphs [90] to
      [93] of her decision. The judge found, at paragraph [91], the evidence
      is enough to show a serious and individual threat to the appellant by
      reason of indiscriminate violence in or around Mogadishu or other
      parts of southern Somalia.  At paragraph [92] of her decision, the
      judge noted there was little evidence of a formal diagnosis in respect
      of the appellant's mental health.  The judge concluded:


              "...as the appellant has now initial former (sic) support in
          Mogadishu and in light of the circumstances described there by Dr
          Hoehne, I consider it likely that the appellant would be destitute
          or find himself in an IDP camp.  I accept the submission that
          there would be a real risk of violation of Article 3 if the
          appellant was deported to Mogadishu."

  11. The judge did not expressly consider Article 8, but stated, at
      paragraph [93], that for similar reasons she finds there are very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into Somalia
      and there are very compelling circumstances over and above those set
      out in paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules that outweighs the
      public interest in the appellant being deported from the UK.


The appeal before us


  12.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr Sellwood submits that, although the
      judge refers to the decisions of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v MA
      (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994 and SSHD -v- MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA
      Civ 1345, the judge failed to adopt the 'mirror image' approach that
      must be applied.


  13. Mr Sellwood submits the judge relied upon the country guidance set out
      in MOJ & Others, but fails to give any or any adequate for reasons
      rejecting the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the
      judge should depart from the country guidance in view of the expert
      evidence of Dr Hoehne, that the judge appears to accept.  It is said
      that in considering whether there has been a significant and non-
      temporary change in circumstances in Somalia, the judge failed to
      consider all the country material, including the respondent's CPIN,
      the report of Dr Hoehne and the position advanced by UNHCR.


  14. In reply to the respondent's cross-appeal, Mr Sellwood submits it was
      open to the judge to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds, and in
      doing so the judge had regard to all of the appellant's circumstances
      including inter alia the fact that he belongs to a minority clan, the
      absence of any direct family in Mogadishu, the length of his absence
      from Mogadishu, and, the absence of any initial contacts or sources of
      initial support and accommodation.  Mr Sellwood submits the judge
      reached her decision following a careful assessment of the appellant's
      personal circumstances and not simply because the appellant would find
      himself in an IDP camp.


  15. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan submits there is a fundamental
      error in the conclusion reached by the judge regarding the Article 3
      claim.  The judge appears to allow the Article 3 claim on the premise
      that the appellant will be destitute upon return to Mogadishu and find
      himself in an IDP camp.  He submits the judge made contradictory
      findings and failed to give clear reasons for the conclusion that the
      deportation of the appellant to Somalia would be in breach of Article
      3. He submits the judge found at paragraph [87], that whilst the
      appellant's siblings will not be able to provide regular remittances,
      the appellant has an uncle who is a businessman and travels regularly
      to Kenya. The judge found that even if the appellant's siblings were
      unable to assist, they are evidently a close family and the judge was
      satisfied that they would provide assistance to the appellant in the
      short or long term as they have been doing for their other relatives.
      The judge also noted, at paragraph [88], the appellant has academic
      qualifications, functional skills qualifications and experience from
      his employment in the past. The judge noted the appellant is familiar
      with the Somali language, and at paragraph [89], accepted that there
      is a possibility of the appellant securing access to a livelihood in
      Somalia, albeit qualified.  Mr Tufan submits those findings are
      difficult to reconcile with the judge's conclusion at paragraph [92],
      that the appellant would be destitute or find himself in an IDP camp.
      Mr Tufan submits there is no reason why the appellant would not be
      able to secure a livelihood in Mogadishu in light of the findings made
      and the evidence of an economic boom in Mogadishu in any event. Mr
      Tufan submits that evidence of some discrimination is insufficient to
      establish an Article 3 claim.


  16. In reply to the appellant's appeal, Mr Tufan accepts the closing
      sentence of paragraph [89] of the decision is somewhat confusing and
      makes little sense, but he submits that the country guidance set out
      in MOJ & Others demonstrates that there has been a durable and non-
      temporary change in Somalia particularly insofar as members of
      minority clans are concerned. He submits the judge carried out an
      analysis of the evidence, including the views of UNHCR and the opinion
      expressed by the expert, and reached a decision that was open to her.


Discussion


  17. In our judgment the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart
      is vitiated by material errors of law and must be set aside. We allow
      the appellant's appeal and the cross appeal by the respondent so that
      the appropriate course is for the appeal to be reheard with no
      findings preserved.


  18. The judge appears to have considered the evidence that was before the
      Tribunal at some length.  The judge states at paragraph [89] that she
      was satisfied that the appellant would face the prospect of living in
      circumstances falling below that which is acceptable in humanitarian
      protection terms. She concludes; "Consequently, I find that the
      Secretary of State is entitled to invoke Article 1C(5) the particular
      circumstances and deportation would not breach the Refugee
      Convention".  As Mr Tufan candidly accepts, the ultimate conclusions
      set out in paragraph [89] make little sense. In our judgment it is
      entirely unclear what the judge had in mind and the test that she was
      addressing.


  19. The Refugee Convention makes provision for refugee status to end in
      certain circumstances. Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention states:


              "C:  This Convention shall cease to apply to any person
          falling under the terms of section A if:

              ...

              (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection
          with which he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to
          exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection of
          the country of his nationality ..."

  20. In SSHD -v- MA (Somali) Arden LJ made clear that there should be a
      symmetry between the grant and cessation of refugee status. The proper
      approach to the 'cessation' decision was held to be:


                  "...A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision
         determining refugee status. By that I mean that the grounds for
         cessation do not go beyond verifying whether the grounds for
         recognition of refugee status continue to exist. Thus, the relevant
         question is whether there has been a significant and non-temporary
         change in circumstances so that the circumstances which caused the
         person to be a refugee have ceased to apply and there is no other
         basis on which he would be held to be a refugee...."

  21. The Court of Appeal held that a State seeking to terminate a person's
      status as a refugee did not have to investigate whether there would be
      a violation of Article 3 if the refugee was returned to their country
      of origin. All that is required, on a proper construction of Abdulla
      -v- Germany (C-175/08), is for the circumstances leading to the grant
      of refugee status to have ceased to exist such that it could be
      described as 'significant and non-temporary' within the terms of
      article 11(2) of the Qualification Directive. At paragraph [47] Arden
      LJ stated:


              "....there is no necessary reason why refugee status should be
         continued beyond the time when the refugee is subject to the
         persecution which entitled him to refugee status or any other
         persecution which would result in him being a refugee, or why he
         should be entitled to further protection. There should simply be a
         requirement of symmetry between the grant and cessation of refugee
         status"

  22. It is now well established that whilst it is an error of law to fail
      to follow a country guidance case, unless there is a good reason
      explicitly stated for not doing so, equally, where a reason for not
      following a country guidance case is put forward the decision maker is
      bound to consider it, and a failure to do so would be an error of law.
       The judge was plainly entitled to have regard to the country guidance
      set out in MOJ & Others, and in reaching her decision had regard to
      the opinions set out the expert report of Dr Hoehne.  There is no duty
      on a judge in giving reasons to deal with every argument presented by
      a party in support of thier case.  It is sufficient if what is said in
      the decision demonstrates the basis on which the judge reached the
      decision.  Here, whatever was in the mind of the judge when reaching
      her conclusions at paragraph [89], we simply cannot be satisfied that
      the judge addressed the question that arises when the respondent has
      made a decision to revoke refugee status, that is, whether there has
      been a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances so that
      the circumstances which caused the appellant to be a refugee have
      ceased to apply, and there is no other basis on which he would be held
      to be a refugee.  The question was not whether the appellant would
      face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below that which
      is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.  As Arden LJ confirmed
      in MA Somalia), humanitarian standards are not the test for a
      cessation decision.


  23. In our judgment, having concluded that the respondent was entitled to
      revoke the refugee status of the appellant, in reaching her decision
      to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds, the judge again fell into
      error.  The judge found the appellant has been away from Somalia for
      most of his life and accepted that he has no direct family remaining
      in Somalia. The judge also accepted that the appellant left Somalia as
      a child and is unlikely to have any real knowledge of life there.
      However, the judge also found that the appellant's siblings would
      provide assistance to the appellant in the short or long term and the
      appellant has academic qualifications and other skills including
      experience of paid employment.  The judge found the appellant is
      familiar with the Somali language and that there is at least the
      possibility of the appellant securing access to a likelihood in
      Somalia, albeit the judge qualified that finding by saying that is not
      the same as any real likelihood when he does not have any initial
      contacts or sources of initial support or accommodation.  In the end,
      the judge considered it likely that the appellant would be destitute
      or find himself in an IDP camp.  The conclusion that the appellant
      would be destitute is at odds with the finding that the appellant's
      siblings would provide assistance to the appellant as they have been
      doing for their other relatives living in Ethiopia.


  24. Insofar as the judge reached her decision on the premise that the
      appellant would find himself in an IDP camp, as the basis for a
      successful Article 3 claim, in our judgment, she fell into error.  The
      judge acknowledged, at paragraph [77], that the Court of Appeal
      considered the country guidance at paragraph 407 - 408 of MOJ & Others
      was the wrong legal test. That is undoubtedly correct.  The guidance,
      as the parties both acknowledge, was disapproved by the Court of
      Appeal in Said -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 422 in so far as it purports
      to establish the circumstances in which removal to Somalia would
      infringe Article 3.  In MS (Somalia), Hamblen LJ stated at paragraph
      [76]:


              "By relying upon and applying paragraph 408 of the MOJ
         decision in determining whether there would be a breach of Article
         3 ECHR the FTT accordingly applied the wrong legal test, as Said v
         SSHD makes clear."

  25. The country guidance in MOJ makes clear that it will be for the person
      facing return to explain why he would not be able to access the
      economic opportunities that are being produced by the economic boom in
      Mogadishu and it will only be those with no clan or family support,
      who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have no
      real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return, who will
      face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below that which
      is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.


  26. It is well established that the nature of the prohibition imposed on
      States by Article 3 ECHR is absolute, irrespective of the conduct of
      the individual.  It is however difficult to discern from the reasons
      set out at paragraphs [91] and [92] any rational basis upon which the
      judge allowed the Article 3 claim beyond her conclusion that the
      appellant would be destitute or find himself in an IDP camp.  There
      was no evidence before the FtT that the appellant has no real prospect
      of securing access to a livelihood.  In fact the judge had found, at
      paragraph [88], that the appellant's siblings would provide assistance
      to the appellant, and at paragraph [89], that there is at least the
      possibility of the appellant securing access to a livelihood in
      Somalia.


  27. We are satisfied the decision of the judge is infected by material
      errors of law.  As to the disposal of the appeal, as we allow both the
      appeals before us, we have decided that it is appropriate to remit
      this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In our view, in determining the appeal, the nature
      and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary, will be extensive.
      The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Decision:


      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated on
      15th October 2019 is set aside and matter is remitted for rehearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          23rd January 2020


 The Hon. Lord Uist
 and
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


