
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00077/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 July 2021                       |On 5 August 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  k N (DRC)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Toby Lindsay, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Mathias Ume-Ezeoke of Counsel, instructed by
Chris Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of K N who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission from the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision on 9 May 2016 to cease international  protection  with
    reference to Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.  The Secretary of
    State did not offer humanitarian protection leave  or  grant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds. The claimant is a
    citizen of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

 2. Mode of hearing.  The remaking hearing was a face to  face  hearing  at
    Field House.

Ambit of this appeal.

 3. The appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal for remaking, in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v KN (DRC) [2019] EWCA Civ  1665  (09  October  2019).   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside, save  that  the
    evidence given before the First-tier Judge forms part of the claimant's
    evidence for the remaking hearing.

 4. The Court of Appeal directed the Upper Tribunal to conduct 'for a  full
    investigation  as  required  by  Article  1C(5)  as  to   whether   the
    circumstances in connection with which KN was recognised as  a  refugee
    have ceased to exist'.

 5.  In  addition,  the  claimant  has  become  involved   in   sur   place
    oppositionist activities in the United Kingdom.   The  claimant  is  an
    active  member  of  APARECO  (UK)  (hereafter  'APARECO')  and  another
    diaspora opposition group, CRC Platform.  Upper Tribunal must  consider
    whether the claimant's sur place activities create a new risk entitling
    him to international protection.

 6. It is common ground that these are the only issues to be dealt with  in
    the remaking hearing: the claimant has not challenged the rejection  of
    his Article 8 ECHR claim, and the Secretary of State does not challenge
    the finding that he has rebutted the section 72 presumption.

Background

 7. The claimant's father was an opposition politician  during  the  Mobutu
    years and is now a supporter of Mr Felix Mubake's UDPS breakaway group,
    which opposes the coalition government of  President  F�lix  Tshisekedi
    ('President Tshisekedi') and the former  President,  Mr  Joseph  Kabila
    Kabange ('Mr Kabila'), who governed  DRC  in  coalition  following  the
    Presidential election in December 2018 at  which  President  Tshisekedi
    was the successful candidate.   President  Tshisekedi  was  elected  on
    behalf of the UDPS Party, but there has  been  a  subsequent  three-way
    split in that party, caused by concerns about  the  coalition  with  Mr
    Kabila.

 8. The claimant's father was granted asylum on application, and remains  a
    recognised refugee, with political opinion as  his  Convention  reason.
    His evidence in these proceedings that he remains politically active in
    opposition groups in the United Kingdom, in particular, keeping up with
    the anti-coalition UDPS activities of Mr Mubake at regular meetings.

 9. The claimant, his mother and siblings joined his father in  the  United
    Kingdom in 1991, when he was 10 years old, by  way  of  refugee  family
    reunion.  They were in due course granted indefinite leave to remain on
    that basis.   The claimant is 30 years old now.  When younger,  he  was
    for a  time  involved  in  criminal  activity,  and  received  numerous
    convictions for various  offences,  culminating  in  a  conviction  for
    conspiracy to commit robbery for which on 8 June 2012 he was  sentenced
    to  4�  years'  imprisonment,  triggering  the  automatic   deportation
    provisions of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

10. The Secretary of State accepts that the  claimant  has  not  reoffended
    since 2010, that his mother and siblings remain in the United  Kingdom,
    and that he has a British  citizen  partner  and  two  British  citizen
    children.  The elder boy has already reached the age of  majority;  the
    younger, a daughter, is 10 years old now.   It  is  accepted  that  has
    rebutted  the  dangerousness  presumption  in   section   72   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

Cessation decision

11. On 9 May 2016, the claimant was notified of the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to cease his refugee status, following consultation  with  his
    representatives and with UNHCR, and her intention to remove him to DRC.



12. The Secretary of State can produce  only  an  incomplete  copy  of  the
    letter from UNHCR on which she relied in making her  decision.   It  is
    clear that this is not a question of  misnumbering  of  paragraphs,  as
    there are two numbered footnotes omitted also.

13. I approach this decision on the basis that the Secretary of  State  did
    not take into account whatever is omitted from the copy of  the  letter
    on her files:

Previous proceedings

14. The First-tier Judge allowed the claimant's appeal in 2017, finding the
    claimant and his witnesses to  be  credible  historians  and  that  the
    Secretary of State had not carried out the assessment of durable change
    which Article 1C(5) requires.

15.  The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  citing
    inadequacy of reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal's decision regarding
    cessation.  The Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal for material error of law, but then remade the decision to the
    same effect as the First-tier  Judge,  namely,  that  the  decision  to
    revoke the claimant's refugee  status  breached  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention.

16. The Secretary of State then appealed to the Court of Appeal.



Court of Appeal

17. On 9 October 2019, the Court of Appeal set aside the  decision  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal,  which  it  found  to  have  adopted  too  narrow   an
    interpretation of Article 1C(5) of the  Convention.   At  [38]  in  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Baker, with whom  Lord  Justices  Leggatt  and
    McCombe agreed, he said this:

         "38. It is true, as Mr Malik  pointed  out,  that  a  person  is  a
         refugee if he satisfies the definition  of  a  refugee  in  article
         1A(2) of the Convention, even if his status has not or not yet been
         recognised by a contracting state. As stated in paragraph 28 of the
         UNHCR Handbook, a person "does not  become  a  refugee  because  of
         recognition, but is recognised because he is a  refugee".  ...  the
         refugee has a legitimate expectation that he will not  be  stripped
         of the status save for demonstrably good and sufficient reason. Any
         individual who has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  under  Article
         1A(2), and who is not liable to refoulement  under  Article  33(2),
         can only be deported if the Convention ceases to apply to  him  for
         one of the reasons set out in article 1C."   [Emphasis added]

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

18. I heard oral evidence from the claimant,  and  received  into  evidence
    documents,  including  a  short  witness  statement  from  his  father,
    comprised in a bundle prepared by Chris Solicitors, as well as the Home
    Office bundle.  The claimant's father remains a recognised refugee  but
    was  unable  to  attend  and  give  oral  evidence,  because   he   was
    accompanying the claimant's mother to a hospital appointment.

19. I have had regard to all evidence and argument before me, whether  oral
    or documentary, in particular that to which the parties directed me  at
    the hearing, whether or not it is set out in detail in  these  Reasons.
    I have also had regard to the oral evidence given by  the  claimant  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing, which the First-tier Judge accepted as
    credible.  In cross-examination,  Mr  Lindsay  did  not  challenge  the
    credibility of the evidence given today.

20. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

UNHCR letter

21. On 12 February 2015, following consultation by the Secretary of  State,
    UNHCR gave advice to the Secretary of State on the  proposed  cessation
    decision.  The copy of the UNHCR letter on the file is missing page  6:
    Mr Lindsay said that the archived copy in the respondent's GCID records
    was the same and that  (despite  a  direction  to  do  so),  given  the
    circumstances of the Covid pandemic, the Secretary  of  State  had  not
    been able to produce a full copy of the letter.  It  is  plain  that  a
    page is missing, since although the text flows reasonably from  page  5
    to page 7, there are two numbered footnotes missing, which  would  have
    been on page 6.

22. I approach the letter on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision is based on the incomplete copy.  UNHCR expressed concern that
    the Secretary of State applied  a  policy  of  reviewing  international
    protection for  cessation  purposes  when  an  individual  committed  a
    criminal offence.  The claimant, having  been  granted  refugee  status
    based on his father's political opinion, had not yet  been  interviewed
    to see what his personal risk might be.

23. The Secretary of State had emphasised in her letter to UNHCR  that  she
    '[did] not apportion any weight  to  an  individual's  conviction  when
    considering whether cessation  is  appropriate'  but  nevertheless,  an
    approach  whereby  a  criminal  conviction  was  used  to  trigger   an
    individual consideration  of  Article  1C(5)  was  considered  to  risk
    erroneously introducing an Article 33(2) gloss into the application  of
    the cessation clauses.

24. UNHCR recommended that the application of the cessation clauses  should
    entail   'a   restrictive   and   well-balanced   approach   to   their
    interpretation, ...a strong presumption in favour of retaining  refugee
    status, and a high threshold  of  proof  for  the  application  of  any
    cessation  clause'.   UNHCR  referred  to  country  evidence  in  2014,
    including the Freedom House Report, Freedom in the  World  2011,  which
    confirmed violence, harassment and pressure on UDPS members.  This,  of
    course, was before the end of President Mobutu's government.    Nothing
    in the letter can assist the Tribunal with the situation today.

CPIN 2019

25. The Secretary of State's 2019 CPIN  is  relevant,  because  it  is  her
    summary of the international materials, and is used by caseworkers.

26. At 4.3 of the CPIN, the Secretary of State records that President Felix
    Tshisekedi of the UDPS became president of the DRC on 24 January  2019,
    following which there was a compromise between his party  and  that  of
    former President Joseph Kabila, who are working together in government.
    At 7.4, details are given of the Congolese  Support  Group  (CSG),  the
    principal expatriate DR Congolese organisation.

27. At 7.4.3, the CPIN  deals  with  the  Alliance  de  Patriotes  pour  la
    Refondation du Congo (APARECO).  The report says that the Secretary  of
    State has not been able to find any  information  on  how  APARECO  and
    similar groups  in  the  diaspora  are  currently  viewed  by  the  DRC
    authorities.  The November 2019 CPIN contains  nothing  about  Valentin
    Mubake and the split in the  UDPS.   Other  sources  indicate  that  Mr
    Mubake was expelled from the UDPS in 2017 for engaging in  negotiations
    with Mr Kabila without the input of the UDPS leadership.

US State Department Report 2020

28. The 2020 US State Department Report on the DRC says that:

         "Arbitrary Arrest: Security personnel arrested and  detained  civil
         society activists, journalists, and opposition  party  members  and
         sometimes denied them due process (see sections 1.a., 2.a., and 5).
         Security  forces  regularly  held  protesters  and  civil   society
         activists incommunicado and without charge  for  extended  periods.
         The United Nations reported the SSF arbitrarily arrested  at  least
         1,327 persons across the country as of June 30, compared with 2,947
         persons during the same period  in  2019.  Human  rights  defenders
         continued to be subject to arbitrary arrest and detention without a
         fair public trial. ...

         Pretrial Detention:  Prolonged  pretrial  detention,  ranging  from
         months to years, remained a problem. A  local  NGO,  the  Congolese
         Association for Access to Justice, estimated that between 75 and 80
         percent  of  the  prison  population  was  in  pretrial  detention.
         Judicial  inefficiency,   administrative   obstacles,   corruption,
         financial  constraints,  and  staff  shortages  also  caused  trial
         delays. According to a Deutsche Welle report in May,  prisoners  in
         Kasai-Oriental capital Mbuji Mayi's central prison and at the Ndolo
         military prison in Kinshasa were often  denied  their  right  to  a
         trial."

Claimant's evidence

29. The claimant adopted two witness statements.  In the  first,  dated  23
    February 2017, he stated that his father left Zaire (now DRC) in  1988,
    when the claimant was about  7  years  old.   His  father  was  granted
    refugee status in 1989 directly upon application.

30. In early 1991, the claimant, his mother and his siblings  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom, and were granted refugee status in  line  with  his
    father, as was then the Secretary of  State's  policy.    The  claimant
    attended school in the United  Kingdom.   He  began  to  commit  crimes
    because 'I was lazy, it  was  easy  money,  and  I  was  greedy'.   His
    friendship group were also committing crimes.  It did not occur to  the
    claimant that this behaviour could compromise his  refugee  status  and
    lead to his being deported to DRC.

31. The claimant's father was a difficult, controlling  man,  probably  for
    cultural reasons.   He  kept  all  the  family's  important  documents,
    including the claimant's  status  document  and  travel  document,  the
    claimant not seeing any of them until he was much older.  The  claimant
    did not realise until 2008 that he  could  travel  outside  the  United
    Kingdom and did not see his  immigration   status  document  until  his
    solicitor showed it to him.

32. In 2000, when the claimant would have been about 19 years old,  he  met
    his partner, who was then 16 years old.  His  parents  were  not  happy
    that the claimant was in a relationship with a white woman: in 2017, he
    said he had no contact with his parents. The  claimant  was  in  prison
    when his partner's mother died and feels that he let her down badly  by
    not being there to support her. They have  children  together  and  the
    relationship has survived his  bad  behaviour  and  also  his  parents'
    disapproval.

33. The claimant's understanding of  the  situation  in  DRC  was  that  on
    return, people were detained and questioned and that after such a  long
    absence, and with no local family, things would be very  difficult  for
    him.  He had no remaining connections to DRC. The claimant  was  really
    scared to return to such a violent place.  He had heard that those with
    no family were detained on return.  Return to DRC would tear  him,  and
    his family, apart.

34. The claimant in 2017 did not know and had never been told in detail why
    his father was granted refugee status: his understanding was  that  his
    father was a fairly high-ranking member of the UDPS,  when  it  was  an
    oppositionist party under President Mobutu.   The  claimant  could  not
    say, one way or the other, whether the authorities  in  DRC  would  now
    connect him with his father, if he were returned.  However,  he  feared
    that his name might spark interest in him as his father's son,  putting
    him at risk if he were returned.

35. The claimant gave evidence at the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 7 July
    2017.  He adopted his witness statement summarised above, and said that
    due to a difficult relationship with his  controlling  father,  he  had
    left home as soon as he could.  He had  four  siblings  in  the  United
    Kingdom and some extended family in Paris.

36. The relationship between him and his partner  had  now  lasted  for  17
    years.  They had two children together.  His partner  had  visited  him
    every week in prison and the claimant had plenty of time to think.   He
    had decided that whatever he was chasing before was not worth the  loss
    of time with his family, or the emotional and  financial  consequences.
    He considered that he could now be a good example to his children.

37. The claimant had tried to get work in the construction industry, but it
    was difficult because of  the  weekly  reporting  requirement.  Such  a
    regular absence could not be explained away.  It  forced  him  to  tell
    employers of his criminal history, and then he did  not  get  the  job.
    The Job Centre were aware of the difficulty and the family  was  living
    on benefits. The claimant's son  and  partner  also  gave  evidence  in
    support of his appeal.

38. The First-tier Judge found the witnesses' evidence, including  that  of
    the claimant, to be generally credible.   The judge considered that the
    Secretary of State's decision breached the United Kingdom's obligations
    under the Refugee Convention and allowed the asylum appeal.  The  human
    rights element of the appeal was dismissed.

39. In March 2020, the claimant made a second witness statement,  which  he
    also adopted as part of his evidence today. Since 2017, he  had  become
    more interested in DRC and its politics, and had taken the time to find
    out more about his father's political past.  He now understood that the
    elections in DRC were unfair and that opposition parties were silenced.
     He had researched the available organisations and had  joined  APARECO
    in July 2017, learning about the corruption in politics and  leadership
    in DRC.

40. The claimant had joined two other United Kingdom-based pressure groups,
    Conseil  des  Resistants  Congolais  Platform   (CRC   Platform),   and
    Resistance Combattants  Kongolais  (RCK)  both  of  which  opposed  the
    coalition Tshisekedi/Kabila government in DRC.  He went to meetings  of
    these three groups, regularly every month, usually in London but  often
    in Birmingham.  The claimant was attending as  many  demonstrations  as
    possible, distributing leaflets and engaging with youth members.

41. It was now almost 30 years since the claimant had been to DRC,  and  10
    years since his last criminal offence.  He had lived blamelessly in the
    community with his family since his release in  2014,  reporting  every
    week, without further incident.

42. The claimant gave oral evidence at the hearing  today.   In  answer  to
    supplementary questions from his Counsel, he said that he was sure that
    the groups of which he was  a  member  were  monitored,  and  that  the
    authorities in the DRC would be aware of  everything  they  did.   When
    President Felix Tshisekedi visited the  United  Kingdom,  the  and  the
    organisations with which  he  was  connected  held  discussions,  group
    meetings, and a group chat on WhatsApp,  discussing  the  situation  in
    DRC.

43. He still belonged to APARECO and another  organisation  whose  name  he
    could not remember.  Both were against what the government in  DRC  was
    doing.

44. The claimant knew from experience  that  the  DRC  authorities  watched
    Facebook and social media.  They would be able to recognise  people  at
    the airport and would question you as to  who  you  are,  and  who  was
    behind the group, and so on.  He knew of a couple  of  people  who  had
    problems.  A friend of his had returned 5 years ago and not been  heard
    from since his return.

45. In cross-examination, the claimant said that he had become involved  in
    political organisations in the United Kingdom because he wanted to  see
    whether it was safe to go back to DRC.  A friend had introduced him  to
    the group: he had learned that there was no employment and  nothing  to
    go home to.  He was attracted to the group, so he joined.

46. The claimant had read up on his father's history now and understood it.
     His father  remained  politically  active,  holding  meetings  in  the
    expatriate community to keep up to date.  The claimant  confirmed  that
    he  had  strongly  held  political  beliefs  regarding  the   political
    situation in the DRC. If returned to DRC, he would tell the truth about
    what happened to him and what he believed.

47. His father was involved with the UDPS breakaway party  of  Mr  Valentin
    Mubake,  not  APARECO.   They  were  not  in  the  same  organisations.
    However, the claimant was now sure that if he were returned to DRC  and
    the authorities asked about his father, he would  be  'digging  my  own
    grave'.

48. In re-examination, the claimant said that his father gave out  leaflets
    and 'stuff like that' and once a month, or once every  two  months,  he
    went to meetings to find out what Mr Mubake was doing.

Claimant's father

49. The claimant produced his father's original asylum statement  on  which
    international protection was  granted.   It  records  that  his  father
    became involved with the UDPS  at  the  end  of  1987  and  distributed
    pamphlets in his home area.   He was a founder member of a human rights
    council which emerged from the UDPS in January 1988 and on  10  January
    1988, a meeting was raided by  CNRI  agents,  who  arrested  6  people,
    including the appellant's father.  They were tortured,  and  told  they
    would  be  tried.   Following  an  intervention  by   the   appellant's
    grandmother, the appellant's father was helped to escape by a  colonel,
    and left Zaire (as it then was) in February 1988, coming to the  United
    Kingdom via Belgium where he was granted  international  protection  on
    application.

50. There was a witness statement from the claimant's father, dated 16  May
    2021.  The claimant's father did not  attend  the  hearing  as  he  was
    required to accompany his wife, the claimant's mother,  to  a  hospital
    appointment.  The statement is so short that it can be quoted in full:

         "[Name and address details].  I am a British citizen; I came to the
         United Kingdom in February 1988, claimed asylum and was  recognised
         as refugee.  I can confirm that  my  party  UDPS-People  which  was
         created and managed by Mr Valentin Mubake is in opposition with the
         ruling party - UDPS of Felix Tshisekedi.  I am still in  opposition
         party as a member of UDPS-People of Valentin Mubake.  If my son  is
         deported, his life will be at risk and  he  will  be  killed.   The
         above statement I made are true to the best  of  my  knowledge  and
         belief."

Other documents

51. The claimant produced a membership document dated 5 December 2019  from
    Mbala Ndongosi, Territorial representative of  APARECO  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   The document, which Mr Lindsay has not challenged,  confirms
    that the claimant became a member  of  APARECO  on  18  July  2017.   A
    statement  from  Mr  Livingstone  Moundele,  deputy  representative  at
    APARECO's London branch, dated 6 March 2020, stated his  strong  belief
    that the claimant is at high risk of serious harm  on  return  to  DRC.
    APARECO 'always opts for a Popular Uprising in order to truly  liberate
    DR Congo from criminal system and to end the occupation of the Congo'.

52. Mr Moundele says that as President Tshisekedi's party is  in  coalition
    with the Mr Joseph Kabila's  party,  nothing  had  changed.   President
    Tshisekedi had not won  the  presidency,  but  his  elevation  was  the
    subject of 'an apparent corrupt bargain' between him  and  Mr  Kabila's
    party.   When  accepting  the  Presidency,  President  Tshisekedi   had
    described  Mr  Kabila's  opposition  group  as  not  adversaries,   but
    partners.

53. The claimant had shown his face at different  APARECO  events  and  his
    photograph  had  been  published  on  APARECO's  official  website  and
    Facebook page, which the DRC secret services were known to monitor.  In
    particular, on August 16 2019. Mr Moundele and the  claimant  had  been
    photographed together at  a  demonstration  in  front  of  the  Rwandan
    Embassy, and on 29 March 2019 at a demonstration outside the  Congolese
    Embassy.  On 19 January 2020  and  15  February  2020,  they  had  both
    demonstrated when President Tshisekedi came to London.

54. The claimant produced his CRC Platform and  RCK  membership  cards.   A
    letter from  the  Chair  of  both  organisations,  Mr  Lutete  Kasongo,
    confirmed that CRC Platform is a pressure movement of Congolese  people
    in the United Kingdom, while RCK is an international coalition, in both
    cases working to combat the coalition between President Tshisekedi  and
    Mr Kabila.  The claimant had been tasked with spreading the ideology of
    the movement among Congolese people in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  had
    shown great commitment to the main aim, 'to make clear to the coalition
    regime that the Congolese  people  will  not  continue  tolerating  his
    dictatorship and his pillage of the country wealth  at  the  industrial
    scale'.  The movement had witnessed a surge in support in the Congolese
    community.

55.  The  current  regime  was  described  as  'cracking  down  all   civil
    liberties'.  Political, student and  human  rights  activists  were  in
    prison and many more were killed or kidnapped for exercising freedom of
    speech or daring to challenge the coalition government.  Mr Kasongo was
    sure that the claimant would be in danger on return: all  CRC  Platform
    and RCK members and  associates  were  considered  as  enemies  by  the
    Tshisekedi/Kabila coalition government, a 'barbaric regime with a track
    record of human rights abuse'.

Secretary of State's submissions

56. For the Secretary of State, Mr Lindsay relied on the skeleton  argument
    filed by Mr Steven Kotas on 21 October 2020.  In relation to cessation,
    Mr Kotas relied on Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  JS
    (Uganda)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1670,  arguing  that  this  decision   was
    dispositive of the cessation issue in the Secretary of State's favour.

57. As regards the claimant's  sur  place  activities  and  the  risk  they
    created, Mr Kotas' argued that even taking the  claimant's  account  at
    its highest, membership of  APARECO,  the  CRC  Platform  or  RCK  (all
    oppositionist groups) was not sufficient to put the claimant at risk on
    return.  None of them were major political parties in modern DRC, where
    there were 'hundreds of political parties' (see CPIN).

58.  The  Upper  Tribunal  should  be  prepared  to  depart  from,  or   to
    distinguish, the claimant's position  from  that  of  'leaders,  office
    bearers or spokespersons' in APARECO, as  set  out  in  the  Tribunal's
    country guidance given in BM and others  (returnees - criminal and non-
    criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293  (IAC).  At  [87]  in  BM,  the  Upper
    Tribunal had found that the DRC government monitors opposition  in  the
    United Kingdom, in particular APARECO, and that it was likely to report
    periodically to the DRC government,  in  particular  its  ANR  and  DGM
    agencies.   Leaders, office bearers and spokespersons of  APARECO  were
    likely to be known both to the DRC Embassy in the United Kingdom and to
    the government in DRC.

59. There had been a change in government and an improvement in the overall
    situation of opposition parties.  In April 2021, the coalition had been
    definitively ended by President Tshisekedi, who had ejected  Mr  Kabila
    and all those who supported him  from  his  government.   The  claimant
    could not have now any objectively well-founded fear of persecution  if
    returned, and the circumstances in which he had been  recognised  as  a
    refugee had ceased to  exist.   The  current  sur  place  claim  was  a
    disingenuous and self-serving fabrication  to  bolster  the  claimant's
    prospects of remaining in the United Kingdom.

60. In oral submissions, Mr Lindsay accepted that  the  factual  matrix  in
    this appeal was distinguishable from that in JS (Uganda),  because  the
    Upper Tribunal was being asked to investigate the current circumstances
    of this particular individual in his own country.   Mr Malik had argued
    the case before the Court of Appeal on the basis that  current  country
    conditions in DRC were accepted to be relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    those circumstances.

61. Mr Lindsay said that it was for the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether
    the claimant fell to be treated as a credible witness, which the First-
    tier Judge had found him to be.  If his account were credible, he could
    not be expected  to  lie  about  his  political  views  or  his  family
    connection to his father, and the risk  had  to  be  assessed  on  that
    basis: see HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31.

62. The Secretary of State's position remained that  there  was  a  durable
    change in the DRC.  President Mobutu had lost power in May  1997.   The
    Secretary of State would continue to rely on  her  November  2019  CPIN
    Opposition to the Government, Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo.   Mr
    Lindsay contended that there was no evidence that the  father's  former
    political involvement would put him at risk now, or  that  the  present
    UDPS government remained interested in pre-1997 Mobuto  oppositionists.



63. 'Opposition' in DRC needed to  be  construed  broadly  and  Mr  Lindsay
    acknowledged that the CPIN remained somewhat equivocal  as  to  country
    conditions. The CPIN did not completely resolve the question of whether
    those who supported other UDPS groups than  that  currently  in  power,
    following the split in the UDPS, remained at risk.

64. There remained the question whether the  claimant,  by  his  sur  place
    activities, had put himself at risk in his own right.   The  First-tier
    Judge had found him to be a credible witness and  Mr  Lindsay  accepted
    that in his oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the  claimant  had
    given  no  obvious  basis  to  go  behind  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    credibility assessment.

65. The claimant's evidence had been that if asked about  his  politics  on
    return, he would tell the truth.  His  involvement  with  oppositionist
    groups in the United Kingdom would constitute a risk on return, if  his
    evidence were accepted  as  credible.    In  that  case,  even  if  the
    original basis for the grant of international protection fell away, the
    claimant would remain a refugee, for new reasons.

66. Mr Lindsay said that he was not instructed to concede  the  appeal  and
    asked the Upper Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
    appeal.

Claimant's submissions

67. For the claimant, Mr Ume-Ezeoke relied on a skeleton argument  prepared
    by Chris Solicitors on 15 May 2021.  In  that  skeleton,  the  claimant
    indicated that he would rely on his bundle and on material  from  Jeune
    Afrique, translated and included with the  skeleton,  as  well  as  the
    updating statement from his father already mentioned.

68. The claimant contended that he would still face persecution if returned
    to DRC now.  The burden of proof of a durable  and  significant  change
    such that the fear of persecution can no longer be  regarded  as  well-
    founded lies on the Secretary of  State:   see  Salahadin  Abdulla  and
    others v Bundesrepublik Deutschland  (Area  of  Freedom,  Security  and
    Justice) [2010] EUECJ C-175/08 (02 March 2010).  In the present appeal,
    the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice of the  European  Union  held
    that:

         "2.  When the circumstances  which  resulted  in  the  granting  of
         refugee status have ceased to exist and the  competent  authorities
         of the Member State verify that there are  no  other  circumstances
         which could justify a fear of persecution on the part of the person
         concerned either for the same reason as that initially at issue  or
         for one of the other reasons set out in Article 2(c)  of  Directive
         2004/83, the standard  of  probability  used  to  assess  the  risk
         stemming from those other circumstances is the same as that applied
         when refugee status was granted."

    Following the United Kingdom's EU Exit, that decision no  longer  binds
    the United Kingdom, but it continues to have  persuasive  force  as  an
    international decision on the issue before the Upper Tribunal today.

69. The claimant argued that the Secretary of State should have  considered
    at the date of decision (or,  indeed,  today  in  the  context  of  the
    present remaking), whether the circumstances in DRC  had  changed  such
    that the claimant's father would not  face  persecution  in  DRC.   The
    Secretary of State had not challenged the claimant's case that the UDPS
    had split into three parties, one of which was  the  ruling  Tshisekedi
    party, while the other two remained opposition parties.  The claimant's
    father remained actively involved in anti-government activities.

70. The current government of DRC continued to be guilty  of  human  rights
    abuses: see the November 2019 CPIN at 6.3.8-6.3.9, 6.3.12,  6.4.1,  and
    6.5.36.5.4.  the claimant's father remained at risk.

71. The claimant himself was now at risk because  of  his  activities  with
    APARECO, CRC Platform and RCK.  He had  attended  many  anti-government
    demonstrations in the  United  Kingdom,  where  he  had  addressed  the
    public.  He was a refugee in his own right.

72. In oral submissions, Mr Ume-Ezeoke relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.
    There was not yet a fundamental and durable change in DRC, despite  the
    overthrow of the Mobutu regime.   He asked me to allow the appeal.

Analysis

73. I begin by considering the Article 1C(5) issue.  Article 1C(5)  of  the
    Refugee Convention is as follows:

         "C. This Convention shall cease to  apply  to  any  person  falling
         under the terms of section A if: ...

         (5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in connection  with
         which he has been recognized as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,
         continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
         country of his nationality;

         Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a  refugee  falling
         under section  A  (1)  of  this  article  who  is  able  to  invoke
         compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing
         to avail himself of the protection of the country  of  nationality;
         ..."

74. The circumstances in  which  the  claimant  was  granted  international
    protection when he came to the United Kingdom,  many  years  ago,  were
    that his father was  an  anti-government  oppositionist,  opposing  the
    Mobutu regime through UDPS.  As already stated, the UDPS government  of
    President Tshisekedi remains in power, but  the  claimant's  father  is
    opposed to that branch of  the  Party  and  supports  a  splinter  UDPS
    movement  led  by  Mr  Felix  Mubake.    He  remains,   therefore,   an
    oppositionist.

75. The November 2019 CPIN was written barely 100 days into the life of the
    now-defunct coalition government,  but   there  are  specific  examples
    therein of ill treatment of opposition groups by the new regime: see in
    particular 6.1.2, which noted that a report of the Human Rights Council
    recorded 141  human  rights  violations  in  the  month  following  the
    election, including the arbitrary killing of 20 people, including three
    women and three children, 32 violations of the  right  to  liberty  and
    security of persons (mass arrests of 371 people, including at least  19
    women and 50 children) and 23 incidents of violation of  the  right  to
    physical integrity, affecting 62 people, including  14  women  and  two
    children.

76. In June 2019, UNJHRO responded to a request from the FCO concerning the
    treatment of returnees to DRC:

         "Following the December 2018  elections  and  commitments  made  by
         President Tshisekedi to improve the human rights  situation,  there
         has been a slight opening up of the  democratic  space.   The  most
         visible signs of this positive development were the release of some
         political prisoners,  and  prisoners  of  opinion,  the  return  of
         political   exiles   and   the   holding   of   several    peaceful
         demonstrations.

         However, obstacles to freedom of the  press,  attacks  and  threats
         against human rights defenders and other civil society  actors  and
         the repression of  several  peaceful  protests,  including  through
         lethal force, continue to be observed.  The vast majority of  these
         violations were committed by state agents, mainly from the national
         police." [Emphasis added]

77. The Secretary of State, who  bears  the  burden  of  proof  of  durable
    change, has not produced any updated  material  indicating  that  these
    problems have  reduced  since  June  2019.   The  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal is not sufficient to establish that there has been  a  durable
    change and that the claimant's father is no longer at risk.

78. The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  challenged  the  father's  witness
    statement, which says that he remains opposed to the  Tshisekedi/Kabila
    coalition, which he regards as illegitimate, and that  he  supports  Mr
    Mubake's splinter UDPS, which also opposes the current government.   My
    primary finding therefore is that on the facts,  the  circumstances  in
    which the claimant was granted refugee status, that  he  was  a  family
    member of a political opponent of the DRC government, have  not  ceased
    to exist.

79. As Mr Lindsay acknowledged, the decision in JS (Uganda) is not  on  all
    fours with the facts of the present appeal.   The  circumstances  which
    had led to JS's being granted leave in line with his mother, that is to
    say, the risk in Uganda, had ceased to apply in that case.  JS (Uganda)
    is best understood as an exception to the more usual  position  that  a
    risk of persecution or serious  harm  to  the  political  opponents  of
    President Tshisekedi extends to the paradigm particular  social  group,
    the family members of the primary refugee.   At [90] in the judgment of
    Lord Justice Underhill, agreeing with  Lord  Justice  Haddon-Cave,  who
    wrote the principal judgment, he said this:

         "90. I should like to observe, at the  risk  of  spelling  out  the
         obvious, that this issue only arises in cases  where  the  risk  of
         persecution which leads to the grant of protection to the "primary"
         refugee does not also extend to his or  her  family  members:  very
         often of course  it  will,  either  because  they  share  the  same
         characteristic as gives rise to the risk or because the  persecutor
         will extend his persecution of, say, a political activist to his or
         her family members irrespective of their own conduct or opinions. I
         do not wish to be understood as saying that there may not  be  very
         strong reasons for the admission of family members even where  they
         personally are not at risk: I say only that those  reasons  do  not
         derive from the Convention itself." [Emphasis added]

80. Turning to the second point, the risk from the claimant's own sur place
    activity, I begin by considering the country guidance in BM and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293  (IAC)  which
    held that:

         "3. A national of the DRC who has a significant and visible profile
         within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning to his country of
         origin, at real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or
         serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of
         falling within one of the risk categories identified by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return) Democratic  Republic
         of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023. Those belonging  to  this  category
         include persons who are, or are perceived to  be,  leaders,  office
         bearers or spokespersons. As a general rule,  mere  rank  and  file
         members are unlikely to fall within this  category.  However,  each
         case will be fact sensitive, with particular attention directed  to
         the likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents."

81. That guidance relates to evidence about the pre-coalition government of
    President Mobutu.  It is most  unfortunate  that  the  writers  of  the
    November 2019 CPIN were apparently unable to access information written
    in French, for example on APARECO's website.  French is not an  unusual
    language and it is surprising that the Secretary of State has  no  case
    workers available who can read it.  The evidence in the  CPIN  relates,
    as already stated,  only  to  the  first  100  days  of  the  coalition
    government.

82. There is some evidence in the public domain.  The most recent US  State
    Department Report for DRC,  dealing  with  events  in  2020,  does  not
    indicate that durable  change  had  yet  occurred.   In  its  Executive
    Summary, the Report said this:

         "The  [coalition]  government  took   some   steps   to   identify,
         investigate, prosecute, and punish officials  who  committed  human
         rights abuses, although there was impunity for  many  such  abuses.
         Authorities often did not investigate, prosecute, or  punish  those
         who were responsible, particularly at higher levels. The government
         convicted some  officials  on  counts  of  murder,  rape,  torture,
         arbitrary  detention,  and  corruption,  and   sometimes   punished
         security force officials who committed abuses.

         Government security  forces,  as  well  as  illegal  armed  groups,
         continued to  commit  abuses,  primarily  in  the  restive  eastern
         provinces and the Kasai  region.  These  abuses  included  unlawful
         killings, disappearances, torture, destruction  of  government  and
         private property, and sexual and gender-based violence. ..."

83. In relation to political opinion, the Report stated:

         "Political Parties and Political Participation: The law  recognizes
         opposition parties and  provides  them  with  "sacred"  rights  and
         obligations. Government authorities and the SSF, however, prevented
         opposition parties from holding public  meetings,  assemblies,  and
         peaceful  protests.  The  government  and  the  SSF  also   limited
         opposition leaders' freedom of movement.  The  SSF  used  force  to
         prevent or disrupt opposition-organized events.

         State-run media, including television and radio stations,  remained
         the largest sources of information for the  public  and  government
         (see section 2.a.). There were reports of  government  intimidation
         of political opponents, such as denying opposition groups the right
         to assemble peacefully (see section 2.b.), and exercising political
         influence in the distribution  of  media  content."       [Emphasis
         added]

84. Mr Lindsay did not challenge the veracity of the  claimant's  assertion
    that he is himself, now, a  political  oppositionist,  being  a  United
    Kingdom member of APARECO, CRC Platform and RCK, who has taken part  in
    meetings and youth outreach, as well as demonstrations, and  would  not
    be prepared to lie about them on  return.   Mr  Lindsay  accepted  that
    conditions in detention  in  the  DRC  are  such  that  any  period  of
    detention longer than one day would be likely to  involve  torture  and
    prison conditions which breach Article 3 ECHR: see  the  2019  CPIN  at
    6.7, passim.

85. If this alternative question is reached, I am satisfied  to  the  lower
    standard  applicable  to  international  protection  cases,  that   the
    claimant's activities would be known to the DRC authorities  and  would
    put him at risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

86. Accordingly, I remake the decision  in  this  appeal  by  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  cease
    protection.

Costs of the July 2020 hearing

87. There were a series of adjournments of the remaking hearing,  including
    one in July 2020 on which the Upper  Tribunal  expressly  reserved  the
    question of costs, following  significant  under-preparation  for  that
    hearing and failure to comply with directions  by  Counsel  Ms  Shivani
    Jegarajah, and a dispute between her and her instructing solicitors  as
    to whose fault that was.  I reserved the position on  costs,  and  must
    therefore make an order today thereon.

88. Mr Lindsey did not seek to pursue the Secretary of State's costs of the
    October 2020 hearing.  The claimant is  now  represented  by  different
    solicitors and Counsel, who have made every effort to comply  with  the
    Upper Tribunal's directions, including those previously  breached,  and
    to prepare the case properly for hearing.

89. I am satisfied that the normal situation in  statutory  appeals  of  no
    order for inter partes costs is appropriate.



DECISION

90. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the claimant's appeal.
    I make no order for inter partes costs.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      28 July
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



