
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00018/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd November 2016                     |On 7th December 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                              MOHAMED JIMACALE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms H Short, counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The  appellant  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  because  it  was
      "arguable that in the assessment of the appellant's  circumstances  on
      return to Somalia in the Article 3 and Article 8 assessment, the First-
      tier Tribunal judge took an incorrect approach particularly concerning
      the appellant's ability to support himself in Somalia by working given
      his limited employment history, special needs diagnosis etc".




        Immigration history

   2. The appellant is a Somali national, born on 5th January 1989. He  left
      Somalia aged about 10 or 11 years and arrived in the UK  aged  13  for
      family reunion with his father who had been recognised as a refugee.

   3. The appellant was convicted in 2007 of having an article with a  blade
      or sharp point. The index offence was for  possession  and  supply  of
      Class A drugs for which he was arrested  and  charged  on  25th  March
      2013, convicted on 2nd December 2013  and  sentenced  to  five  years'
      imprisonment on 12th May 2014. He was released  on  licence  in  April
      2016.

   4. On 8 February  2016,  the  respondent  made  a  deportation  order  in
      accordance with the automatic  deportation  provisions  and  certified
      that he was, subject to rebuttal, presumed  to  be  a  danger  to  the
      community, pursuant to s72  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002.

   5. There was no dispute that he is a minority clan member.

        First-tier Tribunal decision

   6. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not
      rebutted the s72 presumption. Permission to appeal  that  finding  was
      not sought and it therefore stands.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal decision  is  muddled.  The  judge  finds  the
      appellant has not rebutted the s72 presumption. He considers  whether,
      in the context of the country guidance case of MOJ & others (Return to
      Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  the  appellant  can  no
      longer avail himself of  the  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention
      because the circumstances in which he was recognised as a refugee have
      ceased to exist. Having concluded that he cannot, he then  finds  that
      his deportation would not result in a breach of Article 3.

   8. Having reached that conclusion, the judge then  proceeds  to  consider
      whether the deportation  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8.  Having
      referred  to  the  Immigration  Rules  being  a  'complete'  code,  he
      nevertheless considers the evidence before him outside the  Rules.  In
      reaching his conclusion that the deportation would not be a breach  of
      Article 8, the judge considers the  appellant's  social  and  familial
      ties and his private life in  the  context  of  his  serious  criminal
      conviction. The judge  considers  all  relevant  matters  in  deciding
      whether deportation would be disproportionate. Although  the  decision
      is somewhat muddled, the judge plainly considers all relevant  matters
      in the context of Article 8 and finds that there is no material  error
      of law in his conclusion that deportation would not  be  a  breach  of
      Article 8.

   9. In so far as Article 3 is concerned, the muddle in  the  decision  has
      infected those findings. Although the judge refers to MOJ and  recites
      the headnote, refers to him being from a minority clan, that  he  will
      not have remittances from the UK and has no finance, the judge  refers
      to significant obstacles but also to those obstacles  not  being  very
      significant. It is not clear what the judge means by this or what  the
      consequences would be in the context of Article 3  and  the  risks  on
      return to Mogadishu. Mr Walker accepted that there was  some  lack  of
      clarity in the judge's findings with reference to  MOJ  but  submitted
      that when read as a whole the decision could stand. I  do  not  agree.
      The muddled decision of the judge in considering the relevance of  MOJ
      in the context of the Article 8 discussion rather than risk on  return
      amounts to a material error of law in so far as the decision  on  risk
      on return in a protection context is concerned because of the  failure
      to make specific findings on risk

  10. At the hearing before me  I  found  the  decision  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge on Article 8 was not infected by a  material  error  of
      law but that the decision on the availability of Article 3 protection.
      I set aside the decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  on
      Article 3 but the decision on Article 8 stands. The findings  of  fact
      made by the First-tier Tribunal judge stand.

  11. Both  parties  agreed  that  there  was  no  requirement  for  further
      evidence. I proceeded  to  hear  submissions  from  both  parties  and
      reserved  my  decision  on  the  substantive  issue  of  whether   the
      appellant's deportation would be a breach of his Article 3 rights.

        Remaking the decision

  12. The findings of fact retained are:

        i) The appellant was born on 5th January 1989 in Somalia;  he  left
           Somalia aged 10 or 11 to travel to Ethiopia and  then  travelled
           to the UK on 22nd March 2002 aged 13 to join his father who  had
           been recognised as a refugee.

       ii)  The  appellant  is  from  a  minority  clan  and  has  no  clan
           affiliation; he is unlikely to be able to have  family  or  clan
           associations to call upon for assistance.

      iii) The appellant has no contact with any family members who may  be
           in Somalia.

       iv) There is no financial support available  to  him.  His  brother,
           with whom he lives, could provide him with  employment  (in  his
           football coaching company) and somewhere to live in the  UK  but
           nothing else. His partner had encouraged him to find  employment
           since his release from prison on licence.

        v) He has no adverse profile in Somalia either as a  minority  clan
           member, or as a westernised returnee.

       vi) He is a westernised non-practising Muslim.

      vii) He speaks fluent English; he spoke Somali until at least the age
           of 13/14 and although his language skills may have become  rusty
           he will have subsisting skills  and  will  swiftly  be  able  to
           reacclimatise himself to the Somali language. (The OASys  report
           says the appellant confirms he continues to  be  able  to  speak
           Somali.)

  13. The appellant claims that he has learning difficulties.  Although  not
      directed  by  his  representative  to  evidence  that  supported  that
      assertion I subsequently found in the papers  before  me  a  reference
      from his form tutor at Acton High  School  for  admission  to  William
      Morris Academy dated 23rd May 2005 which states "Mohamed came  to  AHS
      from abroad 05/02. He was placed on SEN record for  moderate  learning
      difficulties 17/12/02. In 7/12/04 was  added  to  Action  plus  +  saw
      school  counsellor".  There  is  no   other   evidence   of   learning
      difficulties or what the consequences of this are or were in  his  day
      to day life or ability to function. The  school  reports  relied  upon
      refer to his positive  attitude,  that  he  completed  sixth  form  at
      William Morris Academy, that his punctuality and attendance have  been
      "fantastic" and that he was  "hardworking  and  well  motivated".  The
      OASys  report  specifically  considers   whether   he   has   learning
      difficulties  and  records  "no  problems".  The  Report  specifically
      records that he has no problems with reading, writing or numeracy  and
      that   he   has   "no   problems'   regarding    his    attitude    to
      education/training.  I am satisfied that although he may have had some
      difficulties when he first arrived these  were  not  prolonged  and/or
      have not resulted in any long-term problems such as would  impede  his
      ability to  access  education  or  training  or  employment.  He  has,
      according to the OASys report, obtained GCSE's (Grade C) in 3 subjects
      English, Maths and an unidentified subject together with a  BTEC  pass
      in Business Studies. He  completed  vocational  training  in,  amongst
      others, painting, decorating and bricklaying whilst in custody.

  14. The OASys report considers  the  appellant's  employment  history  and
      records that he would not be unemployed on release but that there  had
      been some previous employment problems. These problems related to  him
      leaving his father's home after an argument which  left  him  homeless
      and it was this that led to him associating with those  with  whom  he
      committed his criminal offences  and  thus  to  him  no  longer  being
      employed. After leaving education he had worked as  a  football  coach
      with Chelsea Football club for 4-5 years until his arrest.

  15. The OASYs report records that there was no evidence the appellant  had
      any psychological issues, that he said he was  not  socially  isolated
      and was reasonably happy with himself. The  report  (prepared  on  9th
      March 2015) records the appellant as  saying  he  wanted  to  complete
      courses in gym, tiling, hospitality and hairdressing  to  improve  his
      chances of employability on release from custody. He is assessed as at
      low risk of re-offending. It is not apparent  from  the  evidence  the
      parties put before me whether he did in fact complete those courses or
      any of them.

  16. Included in the material relied upon by the appellant is a certificate
      as a peer  mentor  which  notes  his  good  communication  skills  and
      teamwork, wall and  floor  tiling  Level  1  award  City  and  Guilds,
      professional cleaning skills, football coaching.

  17. Ms  Short  submitted,  in  essence,  that  whilst  the  appellant  has
      subsisting language skills, there was no  realistic  prospect  of  the
      appellant living in a community in Mogadishu such  as  to  enable  his
      language to improve and no realistic prospect that he would be able to
      access any support from his clan. He has no experience  of  living  in
      Somalia since he was a young child and that  although  he  has  gained
      some basic skills whilst in custody this was no indication that he had
      a realistic possibility of obtaining employment. The respondent's  own
      guidance and Amnesty all indicate that the situation in Mogadishu  has
      deteriorated since MOJ was reported and that the appellant  would  not
      be able to access employment with the consequent result that he  would
      have to live in an IDP camp.

  18. Mr Walker submitted that the guidance  relied  upon  was  relevant  to
      outside Mogadishu, not Mogadishu. He relied upon the findings  in  MOJ
      of the availability of  employment  and  that  although  there  was  a
      finding that this appellant would not have financial support from  his
      family and that there were no family or clan members he could turn  to
      for support, he had a full employment record prior to his  arrest  and
      had since acquired skills and  certificates  additional  to  those  he
      previously held. Mr Walker  submitted  that  the  appellant  was  well
      placed  over  others  returning,  and  had  prospects  of  securing  a
      livelihood on return to Mogadishu.

  19. The issue at large in this appeal is  whether  there  is  a  realistic
      prospect the appellant will not be able to access  a  livelihood  such
      that he would have to resort to an IDP camp although it is  now  clear
      from Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 that a real risk of ending up in an  IDP
      camp in Mogadishu does not result in the appeal falling to be  allowed
      on the basis of rights protected by Article 3 of the ECHR. It was  not
      argued that he was anything other than an "ordinary civilian" although
      it was submitted,  as  can  be  seen  above,  that  the  situation  in
      Mogadishu had deteriorated to the extent that he would be at real risk
      of being persecuted or real risk of harm.

  20. The headnote of MOJ,  where  relevant  to  this  appellant,  reads  as
      follows

             (ii) Generally, a person who is "an ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.
             not  associated  with  the  security  forces;  any  aspect  of
             government  or  official  administration   or   any   NGO   or
             international organisation) on returning to Mogadishu after  a
             period of absence will face no real  risk  of  persecution  or
             risk of harm such as to require protection under Article 3  of
             the ECHR or Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.  In
             particular, he will not be at real risk simply on  account  of
             having lived in a European location for a period  of  time  of
             being viewed with suspicion either by  the  authorities  as  a
             possible supporter of Al  Shabaab  or  by  Al  Shabaab  as  an
             apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic   integrity   has   been
             compromised by living in a Western country.

             (iii)    There has been durable change in the sense  that  the
             Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there  is
             no real prospect of a re-established presence within the city.
             That was not the case at the  time  of  the  country  guidance
             given by the Tribunal in AMM.

             (iv) The level of civilian casualties, excluding  non-military
             casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab  target  groups
             such as politicians, police officers, government officials and
             those associated with NGOs  and  international  organisations,
             cannot be precisely established by  the  statistical  evidence
             which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it is established
             by the evidence considered as a whole that there  has  been  a
             reduction in the level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
             largely due to the cessation of confrontational warfare within
             the city and Al Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
             carefully selected targets.  The present level  of  casualties
             does not amount to a sufficient  risk  to  ordinary  civilians
             such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

             (v)  It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to  reduce
             further still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral
             damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was
             not targeted at him by avoiding areas and establishments  that
             are clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it
             is not unreasonable for him to do so.

             (vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab
             for civilian  citizens  of  Mogadishu,  including  for  recent
             returnees from the West.

             (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living
             in the city, for assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and
             securing a livelihood.  Although  a  returnee  may  also  seek
             assistance from his clan members who are not close  relatives,
             such help is only likely to be forthcoming for  majority  clan
             members, as minority clans may have little to offer.

             (viii)   The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu  has
             changed.  Clans  now  provide,  potentially,  social   support
             mechanisms and assist with access to  livelihoods,  performing
             less of a protection function than previously.  There  are  no
             clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan
             based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for   minority   clan
             members.

             (ix)  If it is accepted that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
             Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family  or
             close relatives in the city to assist him  in  re-establishing
             himself on return, there will need to be a careful  assessment
             of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations   will
             include, but are not limited to:

             .    circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

             .    length of absence from Mogadishu;

             .    family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

             .    access to financial resources;

             .    prospects of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self employment;

             .    availability of remittances from abroad;

             .    means of support during the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

             .    why his ability to fund the journey to the West no longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

             (x)  Put another way, it will be for the person facing  return
             to explain why he would not be able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.

             (xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

             (xii)     The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply
             those who originate from  Mogadishu  that  may  now  generally
             return to live in the  city  without  being  subjected  to  an
             Article 15(c) risk or facing a real risk  of  destitution.  On
             the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu  for  a  person  of  a
             minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access  to
             funds and no other form of clan, family or social  support  is
             unlikely to be realistic  as,  in  the  absence  of  means  to
             establish a home and some form of  ongoing  financial  support
             there will be a real risk of having no alternative but to live
             in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
             real possibility of having to live in  conditions   that  will
             fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.

  21. Paragraphs 337 to  343  of  MOJ  consider  the  significance  of  clan
      membership and paragraphs 344 to 352 consider the "economic boom".

             Significance of clan membership in Mogadishu today

             337. The evidence  establishes  clearly  that,  in  Mogadishu,
             there is no inter-clan violence taking place and no real  risk
             of serious discriminatory treatment being experienced  on  the
             basis of clan. We have  set  out  above  the  broad  range  of
             evidence to this effect,  including  comments  from  NGOs  and
             others well placed to comment on the  situation  in  Mogadishu
             today, including these, that  were  set  out  in  Dr  Mullen's
             report and discussed above at paragraphs 79:

             "...It does not matter whether you belong to  a  strong  or  a
             weak clan, or an ethnic minority group...  The  clan  has  now
             become a social structure rather than a protective structure."

             "Clan protection is no longer important as there are  no  clan
             based militias in Mogadishu. Persons returning from abroad are
             not at particular risk because of their clan affiliation";

             "...it is a huge step forward  that  clan  affiliation  is  no
             longer a concern. Even marginalized groups such  as  the  IDPs
             and minority groups are no longer  marginalized,  harassed  or
             intimidated only because of their clan affiliations. Thus, the
             security situation for members of small, weak clans and ethnic
             minority groups has increased  considerably  during  the  last
             year. It is not important which clan or group you belong to.";

             "The representatives of an  international  agency,  Mogadishu,
             agreed that the clan is no longer a main issue in Mogadishu...
             According to Mohamed Farah Siad,  Mogadishu,  clan  is  'zero'
             today in Mogadishu; clans do not offer any protection as there
             are no clan  militias  threatening  people.  Clanism  is  only
             common among "primitive clans in the bush."

             338. This was reinforced by the  expert  evidence,  Ms  Harper
             confirming that she had not seen any  evidence  of  inter-clan
             violence and Dr Hoehne saying that there are no clan  militias
             as such. If and when a need arises, a person will  assemble  a
             group drawn from his own clan to address a particular purpose.
             Ms Harper's evidence that militias were still to  be  regarded
             as clan-based groups that could be activated  when  needed  by
             powerful  business  figures  or  politicians  does   not   sit
             comfortably with the evidence of Dr Mullen and Dr  Hoehne  who
             spoke of militias being "assembled" when needed,  rather  than
             remaining intact to be "activated", or  with  the  documentary
             evidence generally. Thus, we do not accept that  in  Mogadishu
             today there exist clan based militias in the sense  of  formal
             armed groups assembled to provide on going protection to  clan
             members in a given area and exerting de facto control over the
             lives of local inhabitants.

             339.  That  is  not  to  say  that  clan  membership  has   no
             significance to those living in Mogadishu. It was observed  in
             the Danish 3 report that:

             "On the other hand, whenever a person is planning to settle in
             Mogadishu he or she will most likely consider his or her  clan
             affiliation before deciding where to settle down."

                  And one local commentator has observed that:

             "... clans are  only  relevant  when  it  comes  to  business,
             marriage, respect and work, and stated that "clans should  not
             be involved in politics".

             Which chimes with what is said in the Danish 3 report:

             "The clan has now become a  social  structure  rather  than  a
             protective structure. This could be  due  to  lessons  learned
             during the previous clan conflicts and the civil  war.  People
             are now relating to government structures rather  than  clans,
             especially when it comes to business."

             And a little later in the same report:

             "Regarding access to livelihood  in  Mogadishu,  UNHCR-Somalia
             explained  that  the  presence  of  a  nuclear  family  is   a
             requirement for livelihood support, as clan will not help with
             livelihood."

             340. We find that the  evidence  relating  to  Mogadishu  does
             indeed establish a change in the  significance  of  clan  from
             being a protective mechanism to one  of  social  and  economic
             support. That does  not  mean  that  clan  membership  has  no
             relevance to protection issues at all. Support for  that  view
             is found, again in the Danish 3 report:

             "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone in Mogadishu
             will not be at risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
             different clan, although clan  dynamics  in  combination  with
             other factors are an important element when considering  risk,
             including for the IDP population. It is obvious  that  one  is
             safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated  by  his
             or her own clan or if one has good relations with a dominating
             clan."

             Where a person sees a need to make arrangements  for  personal
             security for a particular purpose he will probably look to his
             own clan first of all, those being persons from whom he  might
             anticipate assistance being available more readily, especially
             if he does not have significant financial resources with which
             to pay for  "commercial"  security.   Also,  some  trades  are
             dominated by one particular clan so that access  may  be  made
             easier with clan sponsorship but there is no evidence that  an
             individual would be barred because of an absence of it.

             341. There is evidence also from a number of sources that  the
             importance of what has been termed "the  nuclear  family"  has
             become more significant than membership of a  clan.  This  was
             recognised by UNHCR in the  report  dated  25  September  2013
             which is mentioned above and to which we will return below. It
             is plain that the significance of clan membership has  changed
             and,  increasingly,  residents  of  Mogadishu  look  to  their
             nuclear  family  for  support,  protection  and  access  to  a
             livelihood. But, of course, the close relatives involved would
             invariably also be members of the same  clan  but  it  is  the
             family relationship, rather than clan membership, that  is  of
             significance.  It  is,  perhaps,  entirely  unsurprising  that
             people choose to live in areas where relatives are established
             or that district police forces, being drawn from the  area  in
             which they operate, reflect the  numerical  dominance  of  the
             clan predominately present:

             "UNHCR-Somalia, Mogadishu, confirmed that someone in Mogadishu
             will not be at risk  today  solely  because  he/she  is  of  a
             different clan, although clan  dynamics  in  combination  with
             other factors are an important element when considering  risk,
             including for the IDP population. It is obvious  that  one  is
             safer when he or she is residing in an area dominated  by  his
             or her own clan or if one has good relations with a dominating
             clan."

             342. It follows from this that for  a  returnee  to  Mogadishu
             today, clan membership is not  a  potential  risk  factor  but
             something which is relevant to the extent to which he will  be
             able to  receive  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  on
             return, especially if he has no close  relatives  to  turn  to
             upon arrival. There remains an  aspect  of  protection  to  be
             derived from clan membership, which we discuss in more  detail
             below when considering issues of  sufficiency  of  protection.
             But this is more to do with having access to a support network
             providing the opportunity to put  in  hand  security  measures
             when needed rather than a situation of being able to  look  to
             an existing clan  militia  to  provide  protection.  But  this
             source of assistance must not be overstated. As  explained  by
             Ms Harper, in her oral evidence, in  response  to  a  question
             concerning what help a returnee might expect from his clan:

             "None at present. If you arrive in Mogadishu and do  not  know
             anyone at all, you might start asking for fellow clan  members
             in the hope that they might do more for you than  others.  But
             you could not expect anything from them.

             343. We understand that  to  mean  that  while  there  was  no
             guarantee that help  would  be  available  from  clan  members
             outside the close family network of a returnee, at least there
             is more likelihood of such a request being  accommodated  than
             if made to those unconnected by the bond of  clan  membership.
             That is, perhaps, wholly unsurprising.  However, it should  be
             noted that in the UNHCR  January  2014  report  the  view  was
             expressed that a returnee might be rather  more  confident  of
             receiving help from his clan, if not a minority clan member:

             "Persons belonging to minority clans... remain  at  particular
             disadvantage in Mogadishu... There  remains  a  low  sense  of
             Somali social and ethical  obligation  to  assist  individuals
             from weak lineages and social groups.  This  stands  in  stark
             contrast to the powerful and non-negotiable obligation Somalis
             have to assist members of their own lineage."

             The "Economic Boom"

             344. The economic revival of Mogadishu can be  described  only
             as remarkable, considering what is known about  conditions  in
             the city since the civil war began in 1991. Each of the expert
             witnesses has addressed this in their evidence  that  we  have
             considered above. It is perhaps well described by a report  of
             the New York Times of April 2012:

             "But people here are sensing the moment and seizing  it.  More
             than 300,000 residents have come back to the city in the  last
             six months..... The economic boom, fuelled by an  infusion  of
             tens of millions of dollars, much of it from Somalis  flocking
             home from overseas, is spawning thousands  of  jobs  that  are
             beginning to absorb young militiamen eager to get out  of  the
             killing business..."

             An international agency referred to in Dr Mullen's  report  is
             recorded as saying:

             "Mogadishu is now a 'buzz', people are  going  around  minding
             their own business and  there  is  an  increasing  freedom  of
             movement for everyone."

             345. It is beyond  doubt  that  there  has  been  huge  inward
             investment,  large-scale  construction  projects  and  vibrant
             business activity. Land values are said to be "rocketing"  and
             entrepreneurial members of the diaspora with access to funding
             are  returning  in  significant  numbers  in   the   confident
             expectation of launching  successful  business  projects.  The
             question to be addressed is what, if any,  benefit  does  this
             deliver  for  so  called  "ordinary  returnees"  who  are  not
             themselves wealthy businessmen or highly skilled professionals
             employed by such people.

             346. According  to  the  respondent,  a  striking  feature  of
             developments in Mogadishu since AMM is the evidence that "huge
             numbers" of people have returned to Mogadishu, that is said to
             be  indicative  of  a  considerable  reduction  in  levels  of
             violence and improvements in security. Some local NGO  sources
             have said that  there  were  300,000  returning  residents  to
             Mogadishu in the six months between November  2011  and  April
             2012 alone. By August 2012 it had  been  estimated  that  more
             than 500,000 people had moved back to  the  capital  including
             the vast majority who had fled since 2007.

             347. Dr Hoehne's view was that very few people indeed  benefit
             from this. He said when asked who benefited:

             "A tiny proportion. 89% are poor. The remaining 20% will be  a
             bit better than being  poor.  A  little  better  than  "barely
             surviving". Possibly 1% or 2% of the population  benefit  from
             the last two years economic development."

             As we have observed, the arithmetic disclosed by  that  answer
             is problematic but we  have  more  difficulty  with  the  view
             expressed.

             348. Pressed further to explain  who  does  benefit  from  the
             economic development in Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne said:

             "A very tiny fraction of  the  elite.  The  vast  majority  of
             people are struggling to survive..."

             349. This is a view that is not altogether easy to  understand
             and we are unable  to  agree  with  it.  The  evidence  is  of
             substantial inward investment in construction projects and  of
             entrepreneurs returning to Mogadishu  to  invest  in  business
             activity. In particular we heard  evidence  about  hotels  and
             restaurants and a resurgence of the  hospitality  industry  as
             well  as   taxi   businesses,   bus   services,   drycleaners,
             electronics  stores  and  so  on.  The  evidence   speaks   of
             construction  projects  and   improvements   in   the   city's
             infrastructure such as the installation of some solar  powered
             street lighting. It does not, perhaps, need much in the way of
             direct evidence to conclude  that  jobs  such  as  working  as
             building labourers, waiters or drivers or assistants in retail
             outlets are unlikely to be filled by the  tiny  minority  that
             represents "the elite". Indeed, Dr Hoehne suggested that  SSM,
             on whose behalf he was being asked questions:

             "could probably get a job as a waiter..."

             although  he  said  that  there   would   probably   be   much
             competition.

             350. The respondent submits that, given the inward  investment
             that has been received into Mogadishu,  said  to  be  tens  of
             millions of dollars, it is impossible to see how the  benefits
             could be restricted to such a tiny  minority.  The  respondent
             refers to  evidence  from  the  Department  for  International
             Development in Somalia report - Autumn Update 2013 in which it
             is asserted that 56,900 jobs have been created since May  2011
             and a further 45,000 new private sector jobs will be created.

             351.  Further,  there  is  evidence   before   the   Tribunal,
             identified by Dr Mullen, to the effect that returnees from the
             West may have an advantage in seeking employment in  Mogadishu
             over citizens who have remained in the city  throughout.  This
             is said to be because such returnees are likely to  be  better
             educated and considered more resourceful  and  therefore  more
             attractive  as  potential  employees,  especially  where   the
             employer himself or herself has returned from the diaspora  to
             invest in a new business.

             352.   For those reasons we do not accept Dr Hoehne's evidence
             that it is only a tiny elite that derives any benefit from the
             "economic boom". Inevitably, jobs have been  created  and  the
             evidence  discloses  no  reason  why  a  returnee  would  face
             discriminatory obstacles to competing for such employment.  It
             may be that, like other residents of Mogadishu,  he  would  be
             more likely to succeed in  accessing  a  livelihood  with  the
             support of a clan or nuclear family.

    22. The appellant relied upon reports from the UNHCR  and  Amnesty.  In
        particular, the UNHCR wrote a report considering the  cessation  of
        the appellant's refugee status dated 10th July  2015  which  refer,
        inter alia:

        To the UNHCR paper Position on  returns  to  Southern  and  Central
        Somalia 17 January 2014; to the Human  Rights  Watch  World  report
        2015 - Somalia; a report by the UN  Secretary  General  to  the  UN
        Security Council dated 25 January 2015.

    23. The UNHCR January 2014 report was considered by the Upper  Tribunal
        in MOJ in the context of all the other evidence before  them  which
        led to the decision as referred to above. The  Human  Rights  Watch
        2015 report considers events in 2014. The references to Al  Shabaab
        reflect the evidence that  was  considered  in  MOJ  regarding  the
        targeting of civilians by  Al  Shabaab  but  the  report  does  not
        indicate a deterioration in the situation in Mogadishu such that it
        requires any alteration in consideration of risk.   The  report  by
        the UN Secretary General as referred to by the UNHCR  refers  to  a
        spike in attacks in Mogadishu "targeting primarily officials of the
        Federal Government" and refers to a hotel attack. Again these  type
        of incidents were considered in MOJ and there does not appear  from
        these documents to have been a deterioration. In  any  event  these
        are the type of targeted attacks that  were  either  not  aimed  at
        'ordinary civilians' or were aimed  at  identifiable  target  areas
        that it would be reasonable to expect civilians to avoid.

    24. The UNHCR position on  Returns  to  Southern  and  Central  Somalia
        Update 1 23 May 2016 refers to continued volatility in Somalia  and
        states, in broad terms, that particular  consideration  has  to  be
        given to the circumstances likely to be faced by  individuals  upon
        return. There is reference to the Joint  Strategy  and  Operational
        Plan envisaging the return of 435,000  Somali  refugees  in  phases
        from 2015 to 2019. The report refers to clan violence but it is not
        possible to ascertain from the report the  basis  upon  which  that
        reference is made or the evidence considered which  undermines  the
        conclusion reached in MOJ. As  was  repeatedly  said  in  MOJ,  the
        conditions and  risk  in  Mogadishu,  from  which  Al  Shabaab  has
        withdrawn, are very different from conditions outside the city.

    25. The Home Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  -  South  and
        Central Somalia; majority clans  and  minority  groups  March  2015
        refers  to  the  MOJ  guidance.  Although  there  is  reference  to
        discrimination and  violence  the  references  are  to  significant
        problems outside Mogadishu, not within Mogadishu.

    26. I was not directed to any  particular  passages  in  the  US  State
        Department Report on Somalia 2015 or the Amnesty report of February
        2016  other  than  in  general  that  the  reports  supported   the
        submissions that this appellant would be unlikely  to  be  able  to
        access employment and would thus become an IDP. In  any  event  see
        Said [31].

    27. The evidence relied upon does not indicate that the guidance in MOJ
        is no longer sustainable but rather emphasises  the  importance  of
        ensuring that  full  and  proper  consideration  is  given  to  the
        question of whether there is a real risk  that  there  is  no  real
        prospect of accessing a livelihood.

    28. This appellant has work skills  and  work  discipline;  he  has  an
        acknowledged  positive  attitude  to  work.  In  addition  to   his
        footballing  coaching  skills  and  academic  achievements  he  has
        acquired constructions skills. His Somali language was held by  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge to be rusty - although  this  contradicts
        the appellant's own claim as recorded in the OASys report  that  he
        speaks Somali. Nevertheless, I have  reached  my  decision  on  the
        basis that they are, as found by the First-tier  Tribunal  "rusty".
        There was no evidence offered or identified by the  appellant  that
        'rusty' Somali would be a hindrance to  accessing  employment.  The
        evidence in MOJ was that those returning to Mogadishu  from  abroad
        were at an advantage because they were more highly educated and had
        work skills. It is fanciful to conclude that his language would not
        improve in a city where he is amongst individuals  speaking  Somali
        as well as English or other languages.

    29. Although the appellant would have had  an  advantage  in  obtaining
        employment if he had family  members  in  Mogadishu,  the  lack  of
        family members does  not  prevent  him  accessing  employment.  The
        appellant has acquired some construction skills  and  the  economic
        boom described in MOJ (and supported by  the  recent  UNHCR  report
        which refers to  increasing  numbers  returning)  provides  further
        support to a conclusion that this appellant would be able to access
        employment. Mr Walker  referred  to  the  appellant's  acknowledged
        coaching skills and  what  he  said  would  be  increasing  leisure
        activity demands. There was no evidence for this but this appellant
        has plainly taken advantage in the UK of his skills and it  is  not
        difficult to conclude that even if he does not find  employment  in
        that field, he would utilise those skills within the community thus
        increasing his personal profile.

    30. Ms Short refers to his minority clan membership resulting in a lack
        of  'community'.  This  cannot  be  the  case.  Although  his  clan
        membership will not provide the same benefits as would be the  case
        if he were of a majority clan, there would be access to individuals
        and groups that would enable him to obtain at least some access  to
        potential employment. The evidence does not indicate that  minority
        clan membership is of little or no value.

    31. The combination of this appellant's education, work and  employment
        skills in the UK; his Somali  language  ability  and  his  positive
        attitude all seen in the context of the increasing level of returns
        to Mogadishu, the continuing economic development in Mogadishu  and
        the lack of deterioration generally in the security situation  lead
        to a conclusion that this appellant is not at real  risk  of  being
        unable to access a livelihood.

    32. Ms Short referred to the lack of available accommodation  and  thus
        the increased possibility of the appellant  having  no  alternative
        but to  move  to  an  IDP  camp.  Although  previous  accommodation
        problems in the  UK  led,  the  appellant  says,  to  his  criminal
        activity, there was  no  evidence  that  individuals  returning  to
        Mogadishu with no family support but with an ability  to  access  a
        livelihood were, in effect, forced into IDP camps. Paragraph 421 of
        MOJ in considering

             "....The "economic boom" has generated  more  opportunity  for
             employment and, as always,  self-employment  in  the  form  of
             small-scale trading  is  an  established  Somali  route  to  a
             livelihood.  For   many   returnees,   remittances   will   be
             important....."

        emphasises the importance of economic opportunity and  although  in
        this appellant's case there was a finding that there  would  be  no
        access to remittances from his family in the UK, this appellant  is
        not at real risk of  being  unable  to  access  a  livelihood;  the
        possibility of having to live in an IDP camp is remote.

    33. Taking all these matters into  account  I  am  satisfied  that  the
        appellant  will  not  be  at  real  risk  of  being  persecuted  or
        sustaining serious harm.

    34. His appeal on international protection grounds is dismissed.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker                       Date 6th December 2016
