
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00006/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd January 2020                         |On 5th February 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     THN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel instructed by Rahman &
                    Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") made an anonymity direction and it is
      appropriate to continue that direction.  Unless and until a Tribunal
      or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her
      or any member of her family.  This direction applies both to the
      appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  Her appeal against the
      respondent's decision that her entitlement to refugee status has
      ceased, that she is excluded from the protection of the Refugee
      Convention and that her deportation to Vietnam will not be in breach
      of her human rights, was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull
      ("the judge") for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 25th
      October 2019.


   3. The Judge refers to the background, including the appellant's
      immigration history and her criminal conviction at paragraphs [2] to
      [4] of her decision. The judge sets out the relevant legal framework
      at paragraphs [5] to [9] of the decision. At paragraph [10] the judge
      identifies the documents that were placed before the Tribunal.


   4. It was uncontroversial that the appellant had been recognised as a
      refugee and was granted refugee status on 19th October 2010.  The
      appellant accepted that she had been convicted of an offence of
      kidnapping, and, on 22nd April 2013, she was sentenced to a 11 years
      and 6 months term of imprisonment. The judge recorded, at paragraph
      [19], the concession made on behalf of the appellant that in light of
      the circumstances giving rise to the conviction, the appellant is
      unable to rebut the presumption set out in s72 of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  The consequence of
      that concession is that the appellant cannot benefit from the
      prohibition from expulsion or return, set out in Article 33 of the
      Refugee Convention, and the Tribunal was obliged to dismiss the appeal
      in so far as the appellant claimed that removal of the appellant from
      the UK, or a decision to revoke the appellant's protection status,
      would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


   5. Nevertheless, the judge properly went on to consider the respondent's
      decision to revoke protection status and whether the criteria in
      Article 1C(5) of the refugee convention are met.  That is, the
      appellant can no longer, because the circumstances in connection with
      which she has been recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist,
      continue to refuse to avail herself of the protection of the country
      of her nationality. The judge considered whether the appellant would
      be at risk of persecution in Vietnam such that her return would be in
      breach of the Refugee Convention.  Although not expressed in that way,
      the judge appears to have adopted the 'mirror image' approach to the
      'cessation' decision, that was referred to by Arden LJ in SSHD v MA
      (Somalia) [2019] 1 WLR 241:


                  "...A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision
         determining refugee status. By that I mean that the grounds for
         cessation do not go beyond verifying whether the grounds for
         recognition of refugee status continue to exist. Thus, the relevant
         question is whether there has been a significant and non-temporary
         change in circumstances so that the circumstances which caused the
         person to be a refugee have ceased to apply and there is no other
         basis on which he would be held to be a refugee...."

   6. Arden LJ further stated at [47]:


              "....there is no necessary reason why refugee status should be
         continued beyond the time when the refugee is subject to the
         persecution which entitled him to refugee status or any other
         persecution which would result in him being a refugee, or why he
         should be entitled to further protection. There should simply be a
         requirement of symmetry between the grant and cessation of refugee
         status".

   7. The appellant initially sought and was granted permission to appeal on
      two grounds. First, in reaching her decision the judge failed to apply
      the correct legal principles and/or give adequate reasons for her
      decision that the respondent was entitled to revoke the appellant's
      refugee status.  The appellant claims the reasons given by the judge
      were directed to an assessment of the merits of an asylum claim,
      rather than the question to be determined when addressing 'cessation',
      that is, whether there has been a significant and non-temporary change
      in circumstances in Somalia.  Secondly, in considering the claim on
      medical grounds, the judge ought to have considered both the test set
      out in Paposhvili -v- Belgium, in which the appellant claims the ECtHR
      sets out the correct approach to be taken in Article 3 health cases,
      and the test set out in N.


   8. At the hearing before us, Mr Allison confirmed that having had an
      opportunity of considering the rule 24 response filed by the
      respondent and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AXB (Article 3
      health; obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 000397, the
      appellant no longer relies upon the second ground of appeal before us.


   9. However, the appellant has made an application to amend the grounds of
      appeal, to include a further ground. In the new ground of appeal, the
      appellant claims the decision of the judge is this vitiated by
      procedural unfairness.  In reaching her decision regarding the risk
      upon return to Vietnam, including issues of 'sufficiency of
      protection' and 'internal relocation', the judge refers to a 'Home
      Office fact-finding report of 2019 on Vietnam' that was not before the
      Tribunal and had not been relied upon by the respondent.  The
      appellant had adduced expert evidence from Dr Tran Thi Lan Anh
      addressing the risk and obstacles that the appellant would be exposed
      to on return to Vietnam. The expert was expressly instructed to give
      an opinion as to the availability of protection and support for the
      appellant, and in particular, the protection available to victims of
      human trafficking.  The appellant claims that fairness demanded that
      the appellant be given an opportunity to at least comment upon and
      address the evidence the judge considered as relevant to her decision.




  10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan accepts that the 'Home Office
      fact-finding report of 2019' had not been referred to by the
      respondent in the respondent's decision, or at the hearing of the
      appeal.


  11. Directions had been issued by the Upper Tribunal on 20th December
      2019, expressly requiring the appellant to file with the Tribunal, and
      serve upon the respondent, a skeleton argument by 14th January 2020.
      No such skeleton argument was filed on behalf of the appellant.  It is
      unfortunate that the appellant's representatives failed to comply with
      the direction.  Before us Mr Allison claimed that no skeleton argument
      was filed because there was nothing to add to the grounds of appeal.
      We note that not only is the 'Home Office fact-finding report of 2019
      on Vietnam', referred to several times by the judge in her decision,
      but it was also referred to by the respondent in the respondent's rule
      24 response dated 24th December 2019 and in the respondent's skeleton
      argument dated 31st December 2019, filed in readiness for the hearing
      of the appeal before us.


  12. Although it is important that the Tribunal is not a slave to form, the
      Tribunal Rules and directions made provide procedural requirements for
      good reason. Time is wasted if issues are not identified clearly and
      succinctly in the grounds of appeal, supported by arguments set out in
      a skeleton argument. Compliance ensures that appeal hearings are
      properly focused. Here, the appellant made no application, or no
      reasonably prompt application, to amend and introduce another ground
      of appeal until the morning of the hearing of the appeal and
      ordinarily the appellant should not expect an appeal court to be
      sympathetic.  However, we are mindful of the issues at stake in this
      appeal and in the circumstances, we granted permission for the
      appellant to rely upon the further ground of appeal.


  13. Mr Tufan accepts that there is an issue of fairness.  He candidly
      accepts the judge has referred to background material in reaching her
      decision that was not in fact referred to by the respondent in her
      decision or referred to by the respondent at the hearing of the appeal
      before the First-tier Tribunal.


  14. We acknowledge that a judge is entitled to rely on matters within his
      or her own knowledge, provided such matters are disclosed to the
      parties so as to afford them a fair opportunity to deal with them.
      This is particularly so where, as here, there was expert evidence
      commissioned by the appellant that addressed the background material
      that was relied upon by the respondent.   In AM (fair hearing) Sudan
      [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) it was held that if a judge is cognisant of
      something conceivably material which does not form part of either
      party's case, this must be brought to the attention of the parties at
      the earliest possible stage, which duty could in principle extend
      beyond the hearing date.


  15. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) the Upper
      Tribunal held that where there is a defect or impropriety of a
      procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance, this may
      amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the First-
      Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside. The authorities referred to
      by the Upper Tribunal in MM make it clear that upon an appeal such as
      this the criterion to be applied is fairness and not reasonableness.


  16. We accept the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law on
      the third ground and that in the circumstances, the appropriate course
      is for the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull to be set aside
      and for the matter to be remitted for rehearing in the First-tier
      Tribunal afresh, with no findings preserved.  In the circumstances we
      do not need to address the first ground relied upon by the appellant.


Decision:


      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated on 25th
      October 2019 is set aside and matter is remitted for rehearing before
      the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          22nd January 2020


 The Hon. Lord Uist
 and
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


