
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00048/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2020                   |On 21 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MOULDER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr i q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Radford of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 3 October 2019.  Permission was  granted  on  4
    November 2019.

 2. Mr Lindsay appears for the Secretary of State and Miss Radford for  the
    respondent.





    Background

 3. The background to this matter in brief is  that  the  respondent  is  a
    citizen of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1995.   He  claims  to  have
    entered the UK on a lorry on 12 November 2007.   On  the  same  day  he
    applied for asylum.  This was refused but he was granted  discretionary
    leave until 30 March 2011.  On 26 June  2008,  following  a  successful
    appeal, he was granted asylum and leave to remain until 25  June  2013.
    On 21 August 2013 he was granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   On  13
    January 2014 at Oxford Crown Court the respondent pleaded guilty to  an
    offence of sexual activity with a male child under the age of  16.   He
    was sentenced to 27 months' detention in a Young Offenders' Institution
    and placed on the Sex Offenders' Register for ten years.  He  was  also
    made the subject of a Sexual Offences Prevention Order for five  years.
    On 4 July 2014 the Secretary of State served on the  respondent  notice
    of liability to deportation.  He was informed that Section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002  Act")  applied
    and invited to rebut the presumption that his presence was a danger  to
    the community.  His representatives replied that he would be at risk on
    return to Afghanistan because of his sexuality.   On  7  May  2019  the
    Secretary of State decided to revoke his refugee  status.   On  14  May
    2019 the respondent appealed.

 4. Following the hearing in September 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe
    allowed the respondent's appeal.  The judge found  that  the  appellant
    had rebutted the presumption  that  he  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community of the UK; that he was at risk on return to his home area  of
    Jalalabad and that internal relocation to Kabul would be  unreasonable,
    unduly harsh and a breach of his Article 8 rights.


    Grounds


 5. The grounds of appeal which are advanced by the Secretary of State are:

      i) that the judge failed to take into account or resolve a conflict on
         a  material  matter  in  finding  that  the  presumption  that  the
         respondent constituted a danger to the community had been rebutted.



     ii) that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  the  conclusion
         that it would be unduly harsh to relocate.

    Legal Framework


 6. The legal framework is Section 72 of the  2002  Act.   Sub-section  (2)
    provides:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is:-

      a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence; and

      b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years."

    Sub-section (6) states: "A presumption under sub-section (2) ... that a
    person constitutes a danger to the  community  is  rebuttable  by  that
    person."


    Submissions


 7. It was submitted for the Secretary of State that at paragraph 26 of the
    judgment the judge made reference to the sentencing remarks and to  the
    submission made that the appellant had passed on the  victim's  contact
    details, a fact that he continued to deny.  It was  submitted  for  the
    Secretary of State that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  not  dealt
    with this issue in his judgment and that the failure to deal with  this
    specific matter meant that the outcome of the decision might have  been
    different, that it could have affected his conclusion as  to  the  risk
    which the respondent poses.

 8. In relation to ground 2 it was submitted for  the  Secretary  of  State
    that despite the heading of the ground this was in effect an  assertion
    that the judge had materially misdirected himself in law in that he had
    failed to apply the relevant country guidance.  It was  submitted  that
    the judge had failed to consider the particular  circumstances  of  the
    respondent which it was submitted is clearly required  and  this  court
    was referred to the head note  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan
    [2018] UKUT 00118.  It was submitted for the Secretary  of  State  that
    there had been no consideration by the Tribunal Judge of anything other
    than the health of the  respondent;  the  judge  had  made  no  express
    findings as to whether or not members of the respondent's family  other
    than those involved in the dispute might be able to travel to Kabul and
    provide assistance to him.  It was also  submitted  that  although  the
    judge had had regard to the psychiatrist report of Dr Davies there  was
    no finding in the judgment that the conclusions of that report had been
    accepted.  It was submitted that merely because the respondent  was  in
    dispute with some members of his family did not mean that others  could
    not provide support.

 9. For the respondent it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had clearly had regard to the sentencing remarks as is evident from the
    references to them in the judgment.  It was submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had had regard to the professional evidence of Dr  Davies
    that the risk of reoffending had declined. In relation  to  the  second
    ground it was submitted that the Country Guidance sets out the position
    that in general it will not be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a
    single adult male in good health to relocate, but it was submitted that
    the head note makes clear that it is the particular circumstances which
    must be taken into account and in this case the mental  health  of  the
    respondent is clearly referred to in the judgment as is the  nature  of
    his family links.  It was submitted that if the respondent  is  not  in
    good health then it is clear that the general rule does not apply.


    Discussion


    Ground 1:


10. In relation to ground 1, failing to take  into  account  or  resolve  a
    conflict on a material matter, it is clear that the judge had read  and
    considered the sentencing remarks.  The judge referred to them  in  his
    judgment at both paragraphs 35 and 41 of the  judgment  in  particular.
    The Tribunal Judge noted that in the sentencing remarks the  sentencing
    judge had found that the appellant had no real insight into his conduct
    and he found that the appellant posed a high risk of serious  emotional
    harm to children and in particular young males, "and until you find out
    and understand what effect your conduct had, whether or not as  he  did
    in this instance, he agreed, that risk will remain".

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on to consider the more  recent
    evidence before him, in particular, at paragraph 37 of the judgment the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the two OASys Reports, one dated 3
    November 2014 and the second dated 16 October 2015.  The Tribunal Judge
    noted the conclusions of those two reports.  In the second  report  the
    Tribunal Judge  states  it  was  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    diagnosed with chronic  schizophrenia  in  March  2015.   He  had  been
    identified as presenting a risk to children; he was found to present  a
    medium risk of harm to children in the community.

12. The judge then went on at paragraph 38 to consider  the  evidence  from
    the probation officer and then  at  paragraph  39  the  Tribunal  Judge
    referred  to  the  report  from  Dr  Davies,  a   consultant   forensic
    psychologist who had interviewed the respondent on  4  September  2019.
    The Tribunal Judge noted at paragraph 39 of his judgment that:-

         "In her opinion the appellant 'currently presents  a  low  risk  of
         sexually violent offending.  He presents a moderate risk of serious
         harm if he were to reoffend, although  current  likelihood  of  him
         committing further offences of serious or sexual harm is considered
         to be low'.  She said that he had significant mental  health  needs
         requiring medication  and  long  term  support  to  assist  in  his
         recovery." [emphasis added]

13. This Tribunal notes that in the report of Dr Davies she made an express
    reference to  the  fact  that  in  the  course  of  his  offending  the
    respondent passed  on  the  details  of  the  victim  to  another  male
    (paragraph  3.0.23  of  her  report)  and  her  overall  conclusion  at
    paragraph 9 of her  report,  specifically  paragraph  9.0.5,  therefore
    takes into account this particular finding.

14. The conclusion of the Tribunal Judge is set out in  paragraphs  42  and
    43, in particular.  At  paragraph  42  the  Tribunal  Judge  notes  the
    "progressive reduction in the risk posed by the  appellant"  and  notes
    that the findings in the expert's report  were  not  challenged.   This
    Tribunal does not accept the submission for the Secretary of State that
    the reference to the "expert's report" could be anything other  than  a
    reference in the context to the report of Dr Davies.  It is in our view
    clear that the Tribunal Judge accepted the findings of  Dr  Davies  and
    took into account both her report and the OASys Reports as well as  the
    sentencing  remarks  in  reaching  his  conclusion  on  this  issue  at
    paragraph 43 of his judgment.   At  paragraph  43  the  Tribunal  Judge
    stated:-

         "On what is before me I am satisfied that the appellant cannot  now
         be said to be a danger to the community.  I therefore conclude that
         he has rebutted the presumption against him."

15. There is no error shown in our  view  that  the  first  instance  judge
    failed to take into account or resolve a conflict on a material matter.
     In our view this is no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  factual
    conclusion which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  reached  and  it  is  a
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence.


    Ground 2


16. In relation to ground 2 the judge considered  the  appellant's  health.
    At paragraph 49 the Tribunal Judge stated:-

         "I have given careful consideration to the appellant's health.  The
         appellant  provided  letters  from  his   GP   and   a   consultant
         psychiatrist.  This evidence is not challenged."

    He  continues,  "The  consultant   diagnosed   chronic   schizophrenia,
    depression and learning disability.   He  was  sectioned  for  his  own
    safety in December 2018".

17. At paragraph 50 the First-tier Tribunal Judge states that he  has  been
    guided by the findings in AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  and  he
    quotes the relevant test referred to above:-

         "it will not, in general be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a
         single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul  even  if  he
         does not have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.

         However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual  applicant
         must be taken into account in the  context  of  conditions  in  the
         place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
         of  support  network/connections  with   Kabul/Afghanistan,   their
         physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,  education  and
         vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
         the general position set out above".

18. Having correctly set out the test the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  then
    concluded at [51]:

         "I have had regard to the appellant's health and find that it would
         be unreasonable and unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
         Kabul".


19. In our view the judge correctly considered the position  having  regard
    to  the  guidance  in  the  case  law.   He  considered  not  only  the
    respondent's mental health, but also (earlier in the  judgment  as  set
    out below) factors such as his family and his isolation.  At  paragraph
    45 of the judgment, having referred to the findings of the Tribunal  in
    May 2008, the First-tier Tribunal said that he saw no reason to  depart
    from the previous findings: these previous findings (quoted at [44]  of
    the judgment) were that there  was  no  effective  protection  for  the
    appellant against his cousins  or  against  exploitation  and  risk  in
    general.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted, of course,  that  the
    respondent is now an adult, however he concluded that in the absence of
    any evidence to the contrary, he was still involved in a family dispute
    which places his life at risk in his home area  of  Jalalabad  and  the
    judge stated that it follows that he cannot return there  and  that  he
    will not have family support on return.

20. In addition, the judge had  before  him  details  of  the  respondent's
    family.  At paragraph 10 of the judgment the judge  recorded  that  the
    respondent had left Afghanistan after his father was killed.   It  also
    stated that he lost contact with his uncle  and  at  paragraph  23  the
    judge noted that his mother and two sisters were in Afghanistan when he
    left but he had not been in contact with anyone there since he came  to
    this country.  His mother was not educated and did not know how to  use
    Facebook or a telephone.

21. We do not accept therefore the submission that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge needed to make any express findings in relation to the ability of
    family members to provide assistance if the respondent was to relocate.
     It had not previously been asserted by the Secretary of State that the
    respondent would in fact have family support if he were to relocate.

22. It is clear law that it is not necessary  for  the  judge  to  rehearse
    every detail or issue.  There was no conflict  in  relation  to  family
    support that needed to be  resolved.   The  judge  considered  all  the
    evidence; correctly applied the Country Guidance in  the  circumstances
    of this respondent and accordingly we find that there was  no  material
    misdirection  of  law  and  there  was  no  failure  to  give  adequate
    reasoning.  The Secretary of State would have been in no doubt why  the
    decision in this case was reached.  The conclusion that  relocation  to
    Kabul was unreasonable and unduly harsh was open to the judge.


    Conclusion


23. For all these reasons therefore the appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 17 January 2020

Mrs Justice Moulder
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


Signed                              Date

Mrs Justice Moulder
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

