
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
RP/00025/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                       |
|On 15 February 2016                   |       On 10 May 2016             |
|                                      |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                             yusuf ismail farah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 6 September 1981.  He  is
    said to have arrived in the UK on 15 September 1990.

 2. On 8 May 2015 a decision was made to make a deportation  order  against
    the appellant under the automatic deportation provisions of s.32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act").  That decision  followed  the
    appellant's conviction on 1 November 2007 for an offence of  conspiracy
    to possess firearms.  He received a sentence of 18 years'  imprisonment
    on 26 November 2007, reduced on appeal to 14 years' imprisonment  on  6
    October 2009.

 3.  As  well  as  the  deportation  decision,  the  respondent  issued   a
    certificate under s.72(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")(presumption of serious crime  and  danger  to
    the community).

 4. Furthermore, a decision was taken  to  cease  the  appellant's  refugee
    status, with reference to Article 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention  and
    paragraph 339A(v) of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decisions  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Miller  ("the  FtJ")  on  14  October  2015,
    whereby the appeal was dismissed.

 6. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal, to summarise,  contend
    that the FtJ failed to engage with the appellant's argument in relation
    to the s.72 certificate and its relationship to Article  1C(5),  taking
    into account that the appellant had been granted refugee  status  prior
    to his arrival in the UK on 15 September 1990.  The related point is in
    relation to  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  is  permitted  to  use
    criminality as a trigger for cessation of refugee status.

 7. It is further  contended  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  give  appropriate
    consideration to the appellant's case in relation to Article 3  of  the
    ECHR, bearing in mind  in  particular  the  length  of  time  that  the
    appellant had been absent from Somaliland, his convictions  in  the  UK
    and the extent to which they would be revealed on his return,  as  well
    as his protection needs on return.

 8. Permission was sought at the hearing before me to amend the grounds  of
    appeal to include the contention that the respondent's decision  notice
    is invalid for want of informing the appellant that he was entitled  to
    appeal against the  decision  to  revoke  his  protection  status,  and
    wrongly stating that he had a right of appeal against the refusal of  a
    human rights claim.  I granted permission for the grounds to be amended
    in that respect, Mr Walker having had no objections.

    The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 9. The FtJ noted that the appellant and his family  were  granted  refugee
    status prior to their arrival in the UK in September 1990.  He referred
    to correspondence between the respondent and the  UNHCR  in  which  the
    UNHCR expressed concern regarding possible conflation between  criminal
    offending and cessation of refugee status.

10. As regards the evidence before him,  he  referred  to  the  appellant's
    mother having returned to Burao,  in  Somaliland,  in  2004,  when  her
    sister died.  Her evidence was that she stayed for a  month  and  eight
    days.  He also noted that the appellant's brother said that he had gone
    to Somaliland twice, in June 2012 and September 2015, noting  that  the
    place  where  the  appellant's  brother  stayed,  Hargeisa  is   where,
    according to the decision in AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
    crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC),  return  by
    air would in general involve no real risk of serious harm.

11. In the same paragraph, [43],  he  said  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's brother's evidence that he does  not  know  anyone  in  the
    Burao area.  Having on his own admission gone to the country twice, and
    having undertaken projects for schools there, the FtJ  stated  that  he
    did not find it credible that he would not  have  formed  relationships
    with people in the area.  Whether or not the appellant still has family
    in that area he said he found "difficult to say", bearing in mind  that
    neither the appellant nor his family want him to be returned.

12. At [44] he said that he  found  it  significant  that  the  appellant's
    brother did not at any stage refer to the situation  in  Somaliland  as
    being dangerous, either in relation to his own visits there or in terms
    of the prospect  of  the  appellant  returning.   He  referred  to  the
    appellant's brother's witness statement expressing concerns about  lack
    of family there, but significantly not expressing any fear in terms  of
    risk to the appellant.

13.  Having  referred  to  extracts  from  background   evidence   in   the
    respondent's decision letter,  the  FtJ  concluded  at  [46]  that  the
    appellant would not be  subject  to  persecution  or  serious  harm  if
    returned.

14. At [47] he said that given the appellant's conviction, there are strong
    grounds for regarding him as a danger to the community  of  the  United
    Kingdom, referring also to his other convictions.

15. He considered at [48] the claim that the appellant has a son,  aged  10
    years.  He noted that the appellant's son had been cared for throughout
    his life by the child's mother and that it was only when  his  son  was
    aged 7 years that contact was made between him and the  appellant.   He
    said that he was sceptical as to the degree to which the appellant  and
    other family members are "using"  his  son  in  order  to  enhance  his
    argument for being allowed to stay in the  UK.   Furthermore,  he  made
    reference to the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

16. As regards Article 8 of the ECHR, he referred to the  appellant  having
    had at least two close relatives visit  Somalia  since  they  left  the
    country and there was no reason why, were the appellant to be  returned
    there, they would not be able to visit him.  He took into account  that
    the appellant does not suffer from any significant health problems, and
    his age of 34 years.  He found that he is familiar with the culture and
    language of Somalia, through his mother in particular, and his  brother
    and mother both admit to having Somali friends in the UK.  He concluded
    that  the   appellant   would   quickly   be   able   to   reintegrate,
    notwithstanding that he came to the UK at the age of 9 years.

    Submissions

17. Mr Haywood relied on the grounds of appeal and  the  skeleton  argument
    prepared for the hearing before me.  In relation to the point about the
    validity of the respondent's notice of decision, he referred to [10] of
    the skeleton argument, which itself refers to the  respondent's  letter
    dated 8 May 2015 addressed to the appellant.  Mr Haywood relied on  the
    fact that the letter states that the appellant does not have a right of
    appeal against the decision to deport him but  does  have  a  right  of
    appeal against "the decision to refuse your human rights claim".   With
    reference to the decision letter itself, the grounds available  to  the
    appellant included a right of appeal in relation  to  the  decision  to
    revoke his protection status.  The decision  had  to  comply  with  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003)  ("The  Notices  Regulations").
    An invalid  decision  cannot  confer  jurisdiction  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").  The decision in R (E (Russia)) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 357 was relied on.

18. In relation to ground 1  of  the  original  grounds  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal ("UT"), Mr Haywood submitted that the main point  that  should
    have been addressed is the question of  the  revocation  of  protection
    status.  To that extent there was said to  be  a  relationship  to  the
    amended ground.

19. As  regards  the  original  ground  2  (Article  3  of  the  ECHR)  the
    respondent's case was predicated on changed conditions in Somaliland in
    particular.  The cessation clauses referred to a  person's  country  of
    nationality, although Somaliland does not actually exist as a  country.
    The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  The respondent accepts  in  the
    decision letter that  people  without  a  substantial  connection  with
    Somaliland face very difficult circumstances, and people attempting  to
    relocate face deplorable conditions.  Furthermore, the UNHCR letter  to
    the respondent referred  to  how  important  it  was  to  look  at  the
    consequences  of  return  with  reference  to  any  family  ties.   The
    conditions potentially facing the appellant on return were not analysed
    by the FtJ.  The evidence before the FtJ was that the appellant has  no
    family connections there.

20. It was submitted that there was  no  engagement  with  the  alternative
    protection case in terms of someone outside  Somalia  with  a  lack  of
    familiarity with the country, and the fact that to be allowed entry one
    would need  to  show  some  connection  with  Somaliland.   His  asylum
    interview gives the impression that he  knows  very  little  about  his
    background in Somalia.  The issues of vulnerability and insecurity  all
    needed to be analysed by the FtJ.  It was not sufficient to extrapolate
    from, for example, the appellant's brother's visits to Somaliland,  and
    conclude that the appellant would have a support  network  there.   The
    FtJ's focus was on the 'asylum-style' paradigm.

21. Mr Walker referred to the background to the appellant's arrival in  the
    UK, stating that the respondent's decision letter  does  not  make  the
    history clear in that the appellant and his father's place of birth  is
    Somaliland.  Thus, the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the  appellant
    would not be at risk there.

22. It is clear from the evidence before the FtJ, and in his decision, that
    the appellant speaks Somali.  Returning to Somaliland he would be aware
    of the traditions there,  bearing  in  mind  his  background.   It  was
    submitted that RY (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  81  supports  the  Secretary  of  State's
    approach in this case in terms  of  the  appellant's  removal  and  the
    decision to cease his refugee status.

23. So far as the amendment to the grounds is concerned, the  issue  raised
    lacks force when one considers that the main focus for the Secretary of
    State was the seriousness of the appellant's criminal offence.

24. In reply, Mr Haywood submitted that the submissions on  behalf  of  the
    respondent did not undermine the validity point.

25. In relation to the appellant's return, it is  true  that  the  evidence
    indicated that the appellant spoke some Somali, and that he was born in
    Somaliland,  but  that  is  not  a  sufficient  basis  for  the   FtJ's
    conclusions.  The appellant was close to being an IDP.

26. So far as the decision in RY is concerned, that only confirms that  the
    Secretary of State is entitled to apply Article 33(2) when a  cessation
    clause is applied.  In any  event,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  the
    emphasis was on the second ground of appeal.

    My Assessment

27. Although in submissions Mr Haywood  said  that  the  cessation  clauses
    referred to a person's country of nationality, and Somaliland does  not
    actually exist as a country, the point was not developed  in  argument.
    It does not appear to have been  a  matter  advanced  before  the  FtT,
    either in the original grounds of appeal, in the skeleton  argument  or
    in submissions. It is not in the grounds to the UT or in  the  skeleton
    argument before me. As a basis for argument it  has  no  merit  in  any
    event, but I need not explore the matter further in the light of what I
    have said about it not having been raised before.

28. In terms of the 'defective notice' point,  it  would  appear  from  the
    amendment to s.84 of the  2002  Act,  brought  about  by  s.15  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, that there is no longer an  available  ground  of
    appeal that a decision (of the Secretary of State) is not in accordance
    with the law. On that basis, it could perhaps  be  said  that  what  is
    argued on behalf of the  appellant  about  the  respondent's  defective
    decision notice, could not, even if the argument is successful,  result
    in a conclusion that the respondent's decision  is  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

29. Having said that, it does seem to me that a defective  decision  notice
    may, depending on the circumstances,  result  in  a  finding  that  the
    Tribunal, whether that be the FtT or the UT, lacks jurisdiction to hear
    an appeal.  That would be on the basis that no valid decision was taken
    in the first place.

30. All that said, I do not consider that there is any merit in the amended
    ground in relation to the validity of the respondent's decision notice.
     The notice is said to be invalid because it does not comply  with  the
    Notices  Regulations.   More  specifically,  whereas   the   respondent
    informed the appellant that he  had  a  right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of a human rights claim, it did not inform him that  he  had  a
    right of appeal against the decision to revoke his protection status, a
    right of appeal provided for by the amended s.82 of the 2002 Act.

31. Regulation 5 of the Notices Regulations sets out what is to be included
    in the contents of a notice of immigration decision.  To summarise, the
    notice is required to include, or be accompanied by, a statement  which
    advises the person of his right of appeal and the  statutory  provision
    on which his appeal right is based. In addition, amongst  other  things
    it must also state the grounds on which such an appeal may be  brought.
    It is those particular provisions of the Notices Regulations  which  it
    is said on behalf of the appellant are infringed  by  the  respondent's
    decision.

32. The appellant's skeleton argument before the UT does not in fact  quote
    the applicable provision in relation to the available grounds of appeal
    in terms of revocation of protection status.   Those  grounds  are  now
    contained in s.84(3)(a) and (b).  They are that the decision to  revoke
    protection status breaches the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the
    Refugee  Convention  and/or  that  the  decision  breaches  the  United
    Kingdom's obligation in relation to persons eligible  for  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  The appellant's skeleton  argument  sets  out
    grounds of appeal in relation to a refusal of a protection claim.   For
    the purposes of the appellant's argument however, the difference is not
    material.

33. One of the respondent's letters dated 8 May 2015 does not give the full
    reasons and analysis of the respondent's decision.  It informs him that
    he had previously  been  notified  of  liability  to  deportation,  and
    records that representations were made on  his  behalf  as  to  why  he
    should not be deported.  The letter states that these have  been  taken
    as a human right claim.  The letter goes on to explain that it  is  not
    accepted that the appellant falls within any of the Exceptions set  out
    in s.33 of the 2007 Act.  It states that he does not have  a  right  of
    appeal against the decision to deport him but he does have a  right  of
    appeal against the decision to refuse a human rights  claim,  referring
    to s.82(1) of the 2002 Act, and stating that the appeal can be advanced
    from within the UK.

34. The decision letter  itself,  also  dated  8  May  2015,  provides  the
    detailed analysis of the respondent's reasons.  It is to be noted  that
    at the bottom of page 17 it tells the appellant that he has a right  of
    appeal "against the  decision  to  refuse  your  human  rights  claim",
    referring again to s.82(1) of the 2002 Act.  It goes on to  state  that
    any appeal must be on the grounds that his  removal  would  breach  the
    UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention, or the UK's  obligations
    in relation to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection,
    or that it would be unlawful under s.6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998.
    It informs him that he must not appeal on grounds which do not apply to
    him.

35. It is the case therefore, that the appellant was not informed  that  he
    had a right of appeal against the decision  to  revoke  his  protection
    status.  It was not suggested on behalf of  the  respondent  before  me
    that the 'new' appeal rights were not in  force  at  the  time  of  the
    respondent's decision.  Those new appeal rights are introduced by  s.15
    of the 2014 Act, substituting a new s.82 into the 2002 Act.  Given that
    it was not suggested that those new appeal rights were not in force  at
    the date of the respondent's decision, it is fortunately not  necessary
    for me to explain with reference to the relevant  commencement  orders,
    with their transitional and saving provisions,  the  process  by  which
    s.15 came into force.  It suffices to state that it came into force  on
    6 April 2015.

36. It does seem to me that the respondent's decision does not fully comply
    with the Notices Regulations, in that it did not notify  the  appellant
    of his right of appeal against the decision to  revoke  his  protection
    status.  The deportation element of the respondent's decision, it seems
    to me correctly, was identified within the decision to refuse his human
    rights claim, about which he was notified of his right of appeal.

37. Whilst however, the appellant was not notified of his right  of  appeal
    against  the  decision  to  revoke  his  protection  status,   he   was
    nevertheless notified  that  he  had  a  right  of  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.  Had the respondent informed  him  that  he  had  a
    right of appeal against the decision to revoke his  protection  status,
    under s.84(3)(a), that is, in almost identical  terms,  the  ground  of
    appeal which would have been notified to him.

38. Whilst, on one view, the validity  of  a  notice  of  decision  can  be
    determined on a self-contained basis and with reference to  the  notice
    alone, it is clear from E (Russia) at [31] that a defect  in  a  notice
    might be remedied  by  the  contents  of  accompanying  correspondence.
    Extending the point, it may  be  that  whether  there  is  "substantial
    compliance" with the Notices Regulations may be able to be deduced from
    other sources, such as for example, an appellant's grounds of appeal to
    the FtT.  In that way one may  be  able  to  judge  whether  there  was
    substantial compliance because an appellant was not misled in any  way.
    In the grounds of appeal before the FtT  in  the  case  of  the  appeal
    before me, at [5] complaint is made about the  decision  to  cease  the
    appellant's refugee status.  It is not the  case  therefore,  that  the
    appellant was misled.

39. Those points aside,  I  am  in  any  event  satisfied  that  there  was
    substantial compliance with the  Notices  Regulations  given  that  the
    appellant was notified of his right of appeal against the  respondent's
    decision (albeit  that  the  decision  was  wrongly  characterised)  on
    Refugee Convention grounds.  This view is consistent with what was said
    in E (Russia) at [42] in relation to "substantial compliance", examples
    included in that paragraph being where the claimant had been made aware
    by other correspondence from the respondent that he did in fact have an
    in-country right of appeal, because the FtT had accepted an  in-country
    appeal from the claimant or because he had been allowed to present  his
    appeal in the UK, having been permitted to re-enter the country  to  do
    so.  Although the appeal before me does not  concern  the  same  issue,
    i.e.  whether  there  was  an  in-country  right  of  appeal,   similar
    considerations apply.

40. It is also to be borne in mind that the validity  of  the  respondent's
    notice of decision was not an issue raised before the FtT.  I  was  not
    addressed on the question of whether  there  could  be  any  waiver  of
    invalidity, and I was not directed to any  authorities  on  the  point.
    However, the fact that the matter was not raised before the  FtT  could
    also be said to inform the assessment of whether there was  substantial
    compliance with the Notices Regulations in that it was not suggested to
    the  contrary  by  the  appellant  in  the  appeal  before   the   FtT.
    Furthermore, it is apparent from the skeleton argument that was  before
    the FtT that the issue of revocation of the appellant's refugee  status
    was canvassed on behalf of the appellant.

41. In relation to the other two grounds of appeal, as  originally  pleaded
    before the UT, Mr  Haywood  acknowledged  that  the  skeleton  argument
    before the UT does not actually refer to  ground  1,  which  is  headed
    "Section 72 Certificate and criminality as a reason for ceasing refugee
    status".  The assertion in that ground is that the FtJ failed  to  deal
    with the issue of the s.72 certificate  "in  a  proper  context".   The
    point is developed in terms of whether a refugee's criminal  conviction
    can be used as a trigger for cessation of refugee status.  The  grounds
    refer to the decision in Dang (Refugee - query revocation - Article  3)
    [2013] UKUT 00043 (IAC), also relied on in the skeleton argument before
    the FtT.

42. It is the case that the FtJ did not refer to the decision in  Dang  but
    did at [41] set out the concerns of the UNHCR expressed in  its  letter
    dated 17 December 2014 about the  potential  of  "risk  of  introducing
    substantive modifications  to  this  cessation  clause  by  adding  the
    provisions of Article  33(2)  as  a  basis  for  consideration  of  the
    cessation of refugee status under Article 1C(5)".   Article  33(2),  in
    summary, mirrors the s.72 certificate (particularly serious  crime  and
    danger to the community).

43. Whilst the FtJ did not express a concluded view about  the  entitlement
    of the respondent to invoke Article 1C(5), I cannot see that  there  is
    any error of law in his having failed to do so, or if that is an  error
    of law that it is one that requires the decision to be set  aside.   It
    is clear from the respondent's decision that the issues of cessation of
    refugee  status  and  the  appellant's  criminal  offending  were   not
    conflated in the sense of the convictions informing the  assessment  of
    whether Article 1C(5) applied.  At [8] of the respondent's decision  it
    states as follows:

         "However, it is the Home  Office  policy  when  an  individual  has
         committed an offence and is liable to deportation to  review  their
         immigration status and reconsider  whether  the  individual  is  in
         continued need of international protection.   It  should  be  noted
         that  the  Home  Office  does  not  apportion  any  weight  to   an
         individual's  conviction  when  considering  whether  cessation  is
         appropriate.  The decision reached is entirely based  upon  whether
         the subject's particular circumstances or that of  his/her  country
         of origin has changed so that international protection is no longer
         a requirement."

44. Whilst the concerns expressed by the UNHCR are entirely legitimate  and
    understandable, it is not apparent from the respondent's decision  that
    the application of Article 1C(5)  was  impermissibly  informed  by  the
    appellant's  convictions.   Likewise,  it  is  not  apparent  that  the
    decision of the FtJ made that impermissible connection.

45. It is not separately argued that there is any error of law in the FtJ's
    conclusions that the appellant has been  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime and represents a  danger  to  the  community.   In  other
    words, there is no ground of appeal in relation to  his  self-contained
    assessment of the s.72 certificate on its own terms.

46. The remaining ground of appeal alleges a failure on the part of the FtJ
    to deal with the appellant's appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.  It is
    said in the grounds  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant would face a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  if  returned  to
    Somalia.

47. However, it is apparent that the FtJ did deal with the question of risk
    on return, albeit not expressly referring to Article  3.   At  [44]  he
    referred to the lack of any concern on  that  basis  expressed  by  the
    appellant's brother in his witness statement.  He referred at  [45]  to
    some background material in terms of social and economic conditions and
    the extent to which  Somaliland  could  be  considered  to  be  stable.
    Importantly, at [46] he expressly stated that he did  not  accept  that
    the appellant would be subject to  persecution  "or  serious  harm"  if
    returned, also noting that the appellant  comes  from  the  Isaaq  Clan
    (said in the refusal letter at [25] to be sizeable  and  cohesive,  and
    occupying a large area of Somaliland).

48. Although the grounds as argued in oral  submissions  and  the  skeleton
    argument before me sought to widen the issue in terms of conditions  on
    return, for example if the appellant were in the position  of  an  IDP,
    the  FtJ's  decision  in  my  judgement  is  sufficiently  reasoned  to
    encompass such arguments.

49. Thus, the FtJ referred at [43] to  the  appellant's  mother's  evidence
    that she had returned to Burao where the family  come  from,  in  2004,
    staying for over a month.   He  referred  to  the  appellant's  brother
    having gone to Somaliland twice, in June 2012 and September  2015.   He
    noted that the visits were related to employment  but  the  appellant's
    brother also said that his reasons were to work and  to  see  what  the
    place was like.  He stayed in a hotel in Hargeisa.

50. The FtJ rejected the contention by the appellant's brother that he does
    not know anyone there.  He gave reasons for coming to  that  view.   He
    found that it was not credible that the appellant's brother  would  not
    have  formed  relationships  with  people  in  the  area.   Again,  the
    appellant's clan is relevant in this  context,  as  already  indicated.
    Admittedly in relation to the assessment of Article 8, at [51] the  FtJ
    repeated that the appellant had at least two close  relatives  who  had
    visited Somalia,  that  he  does  not  suffer  any  significant  health
    problems and that he is aged 34.  He referred to  the  appellant  being
    familiar with the culture and language of Somalia and that his  brother
    and mother both admit to having Somali friends in the UK.  He concluded
    that the appellant would quickly reintegrate, notwithstanding  that  he
    came to the UK at the age of 9.

51. In the circumstances, when read as a whole it  is  possible  to  deduce
    from the FtJ's conclusions on the facts that he was not satisfied  that
    the appellant would be at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment on any basis.
     That is not to say  that  the  FtJ's  decision  could  not  have  been
    improved in its structure, or in terms of more reference to  background
    material.  Nevertheless, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of
    law in the FtJ's decision in any respect.

    Decision

52. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            15/04/16


Corrected pursuant to rule 42 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 as to the name of the solicitors representing the appellant




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek          Amended decision dated: 10 May 2016
