
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
RP/00146/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 April 2017                      |     On 16 May 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between


                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F. Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1 June 1990.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 5 February 2010 in order to join his mother who  had  been
    granted refugee status.  Ultimately, he was granted indefinite leave to
    remain on 31 December 2012.

 2. In consequence of his criminal convictions, a decision was made  on  22
    October 2015 to make a deportation order against him.  Subsequently, on
    9 May 2016, a decision was made to revoke his refugee  status  pursuant
    to Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention (reasons for refugee  status
    ceasing to exist).

 3. The appellant's appeal against those decisions came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge L. Murray ("the FtJ") on 1 February 2017.  She concluded
    that the respondent had discharged the burden of proof in  relation  to
    Article 1C(5) and that the appellant  was  not  otherwise  at  risk  of
    persecution on Refugee Convention  grounds.   She  also  dismissed  the
    appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  with  reference  to
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") on five grounds, but permission was only granted in respect  of
    ground 3. However, for context I summarise all of the grounds.

 5. It is argued in ground 1  that  the  FTJ  was  wrong  to  consider  the
    appellant's membership of the Reer Hamar clan and his vulnerability due
    to his mental illness together, in the assessment of whether  he  would
    be persecuted on return and whether the respondent had  discharged  the
    burden of proof in relation to cessation  of  refugee  status.   Within
    that ground is a complaint about the FTJ's conclusions in terms of  the
    availability of treatment in Somalia for the appellant's mental health.

 6. Ground 2 asserts that the FTJ fell into error when she  concluded  that
    the appellant had not established that he was gay, and that accordingly
    he would not be at risk on that basis on return.

 7. Ground 3 argues that the FTJ failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    UNHCR, in a letter dated 2 August 2016, found that the  respondent  had
    breached her duty to the appellant because there was no  evidence  that
    on return he would be in receipt of  remittances  from  family  outside
    Somalia.  Not only had the FTJ failed to take this  into  account,  but
    she had in effect shifted the burden of proof  onto  the  appellant  in
    terms of his being able to secure access to a livelihood on return, and
    in relation to his living circumstances.

 8. Part of the same ground argues that the FTJ's findings in that  respect
    were perverse in  the  light  of  [39]  of  her  decision,  she  having
    concluded that the appellant was vulnerable, being described in medical
    evidence as being "extremely fragile and vulnerable".

 9. Again, within that ground it is said that whilst it was  accepted  that
    the appellant's father did not provide bank statements to  support  the
    contention that he could not provide for the appellant  financially  in
    Somalia, the FTJ had speculated that the family in the UK would be in a
    position to send him regular remittances and that he, in turn, would be
    able to secure employment there.

10. Ground 4 contends that the FTJ was  wrong  at  [51]  in  terms  of  her
    conclusions on Article 3 of the ECHR, because the appellant's case  was
    never put on the basis of poverty or deprivation, rather it was put  on
    the basis of exceptional circumstances under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11. Ground 5 asserts an error on the part  of  the  FTJ  in  terms  of  her
    assessment of the public interest considerations  in  removal.   Having
    found that he was vulnerable and fragile, and suffering  from  a  major
    depressive disorder and schizophrenia which would not be  managed  well
    in Somalia, it could not be said that his private life ties in  the  UK
    are not particularly strong.  Those conclusions are  also  inconsistent
    with the finding that his family members in the UK  would  be  able  to
    send him remittances such that he would not have  to  live  in  an  IDP
    camp.  It is also argued within that ground that there was an error  in
    the FTJ's conclusions with reference to paragraph 399A of the Rules.

12. As I say, permission was granted only in relation to ground 3.

    Submissions

13. Ms Clarke argued that the question of remittances raised  in  ground  3
    was linked to the appellant's mental health.   It  was  submitted  that
    there was no evidence that the appellant would have support in  Somalia
    as the FTJ had found at  [52].   I  was  referred  to  the  appellant's
    father's witness statement at [12] in which  he  said  that  he  was  a
    pensioner and his income and that of his wife  was  hardly  enough  for
    them.  He had said in the witness statement that he would not  be  able
    to support the appellant financially.  Although the  FTJ  had  said  at
    [50] that no bank statements  or  other  financial  evidence  had  been
    provided by the family, this was because neither the appellant nor  his
    father had been told that they needed to provide such evidence.  At the
    time of the decision the appellant was in detention.  His mental  state
    was also a relevant factor in this respect.  I was referred to some  of
    the background evidence in  relation  to  mental  health  provision  in
    Somalia.

14. Mr Jarvis suggested that the submissions on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    went beyond the basis upon which permission was granted.  The  FTJ  had
    applied the decision in MOJ & Others (Return to  Mogadishu)  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 and had applied the burden of proof correctly.

15. At [48] she  had  found  that  the  evidence  given  to  her  had  been
    inconsistent in terms of the amount of time the appellant had spent  in
    Somalia.  The appellant's father's evidence was that when they returned
    to Somalia in 2007 from Saudi Arabia they stayed in the house  of  very
    good friends in Mogadishu.

16. Mr Jarvis relied on the decision in MA (Somalia) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 49, in particular at [47] and [48],
    whereby the appellant in that case had not told  the  truth  about  his
    links and circumstances in Mogadishu and therefore the possibility that
    he was a person with connections in Mogadishu could  not  be  excluded.
    The appellant had not discharged the burden of proof.

17. Likewise, AAW (expert evidence -  weight)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  00673
    (IAC) was relied on, in particular at [47], to the effect  that  it  is
    for the appellant to explain why he would not be  able  to  access  the
    economic opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom  in
    Mogadishu.  In this case, the appellant had  failed  to  make  out  his
    case.   Furthermore,  evidence  could  have  been  provided  which  was
    reasonably available.

    Conclusions

18. To some extent the appellant's  grounds  merge,  one  into  the  other.
    However, it is clear from the grant of permission that the  issue  upon
    which permission was granted in relation to ground 3 was concerning the
    FTJ's conclusion that the appellant would be able to receive support in
    Somalia in the form of remittances from his family in the UK.

19. In order to explore the argument in ground 3 a little  further,  it  is
    necessary to refer in more detail to  the  letter  from  UNHCR  to  the
    respondent concerning the proposed cessation of the appellant's refugee
    status, and to aspects of the respondent's decisions.

20. That letter is dated 2 August 2016.  Materially, it states  on  page  7
    that it was important for  the  respondent  to  establish  whether  the
    appellant has any remaining family ties or clan affiliation in Somalia,
    and refers to the need for a "robust assessment" of the impact of those
    issues on the question of protection on return.  It refers to the  need
    to assess the viability of those issues, particularly if the  appellant
    has no immediate family or close relatives living in Somalia, and  thus
    no support network available on return.  Again, on  page  8  it  states
    that the respondent's view that the  appellant  would  have  sufficient
    connections to Somalia,  including  language  and  cultural  background
    should he decide to move to Mogadishu, appeared to be  speculative  and
    that there were no "objective facts" that can be drawn upon to  confirm
    those views.  It is said  that  the  respondent  has  not  mentioned  a
    "careful assessment" in line with  MOJ  and  Others  in  terms  of  his
    personal circumstances.  It refers to the respondent stating that it is
    not known if any of the appellant's extended family members  remain  in
    Somalia, and it suggests that consideration had not been given  to  the
    circumstances in Mogadishu prior to his  departure  or  his  access  to
    financial resources.  The respondent was urged to  carry  out  such  an
    assessment before coming to a decision about  the  appellant's  refugee
    status.

21. Finally on this issue, it states  on  page  9  that  to  determine  the
    appellant's case without the assessment referred  to,  considering  all
    relevant information relating to his return, would result in the burden
    of proof in establishing the appropriateness  of  cessation  not  being
    fully discharged.

22. Although the appellant's grounds state that "the UNHCR found  that  the
    respondent had breached her duty" because there was  no  evidence  that
    she had provided evidence that the appellant would  be  in  receipt  of
    remittances from family abroad, that is not  actually  what  the  UNHCR
    letter states.  It is true however, that it does express concern  about
    the need for individual assessment of his circumstances in the respects
    to which I have referred.

23. The argument in ground 3 also refers to the  appellant's  vulnerability
    and refers to the FTJ's conclusions about his mental state.

24. It is said in  the  grounds  that  whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant's father did not provide his bank  statements,  the  FTJ  had
    speculated in concluding that family members in the UK would  be  in  a
    position to send him regular remittances, and that he, in  turn,  would
    be able to secure employment on return to Somalia.

25. The  respondent's  letter  of  9  May  2016,  headed  "Notification  of
    intention for the revocation of refugee status", and which preceded the
    UNHCR letter, referred to the appellant, his stepmother and her  family
    having come from Mogadishu.  It refers in detail to the decision in MOJ
    and Others, referring to there  being  no  inter-clan  violence  taking
    place in Mogadishu.  It refers to background material  in  relation  to
    the Reer Hamar/Benadiri.  It  also  refers  to  background  information
    showing that the Reer Hamar in Mogadishu now have  political  positions
    within the transitional government and a number of key positions within
    regional administration of Benadir and local government  of  Mogadishu.
    It is said by the respondent that the appellant would be  able  to  re-
    establish ties with his clan in Mogadishu and remain in their  area  as
    this was where he and his family resided before leaving Somalia.

26. After referring  to  guidance  in  MOJ  and  Others  in  terms  of  the
    individual assessment needed, the respondent went on to state  that  it
    was not known whether any of his extended family  members  remained  in
    Somalia but it  was  considered  that  on  his  return  "and  with  the
    assistance of family members abroad" he could re-establish contact with
    any relatives there and re-initiate access to his clan  with  whom  his
    family is affiliated.  It refers to the appellant being an adult,  aged
    25, having arrived in the UK aged 19.  It is said that he had shown the
    ability to assimilate  in  a  foreign  country  and  culture  and  that
    therefore any difficulties he may encounter on return to Somalia  could
    be overcome given that  he  remained  familiar  with  the  culture  and
    language  of  Somalia.   Furthermore,  any  skills  or  qualifications,
    including academic ones, could transfer with  him  on  his  return  and
    assist in re-integration.

27. The medical evidence in relation to the appellant's mental  state,  and
    background material, is also dealt with.

28. The revocation of refugee status letter dated 2 September  2016  refers
    to the appellant having been provided with  an  opportunity  to  submit
    representations in support of his  continuing  entitlement  to  refugee
    status.  It  states  that  no  representations  in  that  respect  were
    received.  The letter refers to the UNHCR letter.

29. The actual decision to revoke protection  status  and  refuse  a  human
    rights claim, dated 18 October 2016, again refers to the UNHCR's letter
    and the points raised in it.  It refers to the burden of proof being on
    the respondent in terms of cessation of refugee status  but  reiterates
    the assertion that the appellant could re-establish ties with his  clan
    in Mogadishu.

30. So far as the decision of the FTJ is concerned, there is  no  room  for
    argument in relation to the FTJ's findings in terms of the  appellant's
    assertion that he would be at risk of persecution on account  of  being
    gay.  Permission was refused in that respect.

31. Likewise, insofar as any of the grounds criticised the FTJ's assessment
    of the evidence in relation to the appellant's  mental  state  and  the
    extent to which that would result in  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
    treatment on return, permission was also refused.  The FTJ's assessment
    of those issues is free from any error of law.

32. Specifically in relation to the  issue  of  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant would be able to be provided with remittances from the UK, at
    [50] the FTJ referred to it being the appellant's case  that  he  would
    not be in receipt of remittances from the UK because his father  was  a
    pensioner and  his  siblings  students.   Clearly  therefore,  the  FTJ
    appreciated the basis of the appellant's case  in  this  respect.   She
    referred to the appellant's stepmother as not  having  given  evidence,
    and there being no witness statement from her.  She referred to [12] of
    the appellant's  father's  witness  statement,  to  which  I  was  also
    referred in submissions, to the effect that his wife's income is hardly
    enough for them to get by.  She then stated as follows:

         "However, there are no bank statements or  any  financial  evidence
         showing that the family do not have access to sufficient  funds  to
         provide remittances to the Appellant were he to return to  Somalia.
         In the absence of such evidence I do not  accept  their  assertions
         that they would not be able to send him funds on  return.   Further
         the Appellant has worked as a sales assistant in the past from 2011
         to 2012.  He speaks Somali and although he has now been absent from
         Somalia since 2010 on my findings was an adult when he left".

33. On the appellant's behalf the assertion had been made that no financial
    support could be expected from family in the UK because of  a  lack  of
    funds available.  However, that assertion was not made good in terms of
    the evidence put before the FTJ.  She was entitled to take into account
    the lack of supporting evidence in terms of bank  statements  or  other
    financial evidence.

34. It is also to be borne in mind that the FTJ also  found  that  credible
    evidence had not been given in relation to when the appellant was  last
    in Somalia.   She  referred  to  the  dates  and  details  having  been
    "entirely inconsistent" [49]. In that same paragraph she concluded that
    the appellant and his father were not telling  the  truth  about  their
    connections in Somalia and said that she did not accept  that  they  do
    not have family and friends there.    She concluded that the  appellant
    would not be without clan support  or  the  support  of  relatives  and
    friends on return.

35. Not only are those  conclusions  relevant  to  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim that there would be no financial  remittances  to  be
    expected from the UK, they were also relevant to the  extent  to  which
    the appellant could expect support from other sources in Somalia.

36. Likewise, at [52] she concluded that because he would  not  be  without
    support on return, it was not the case  that  he  would  be  unable  to
    access the medication that he requires  for  his  mental  health.   She
    linked those findings to the conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he would end up in an IDP camp  or  face  destitution.
    Those conclusions were linked to the Article 3 aspect of the appeal.

37. It is not the case that the mere fact  that  the  FTJ  found  that  the
    appellant had  not  provided  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  that
    financial support would not be forthcoming  from  the  UK,  meant  that
    there was any reversal of the burden of proof in relation to  cessation
    of refugee status, that burden lying on the respondent.  As a matter of
    principle, it cannot be the case that because  the  overall  burden  of
    proof is on the respondent she therefore has to  prove  every  fact  in
    issue in relation to revocation of  refugee  status.   Provided  it  is
    appreciated where the overall burden of proof lies, the  appellant  can
    reasonably be expected to adduce evidence of facts that he asserts,  or
    relies on.

38. When dealing with  Article  8,  in  the  context  of  deportation,  she
    referred to the fact that the appellant had only been in the UK  for  a
    relatively short period of  time,  but  accepting  that  his  immediate
    family were all in the UK.  She found however, that he  did  not  enjoy
    family life with them "for the purposes of Article 8  as  there  is  no
    evidence of dependency over and above the normal ties".  She found that
    he has some private life ties with his father and siblings, although it
    was not clear what the position with his stepmother was as she did  not
    give evidence or provide  a  witness  statement,  the  FTJ  said.   She
    referred to medical evidence to  the  effect  that  the  appellant  was
    living with friends on the streets and his relationship with his family
    had broken down.  In consequence, she stated that she  did  not  accept
    that his relationships with his family  "are  currently  strong".   She
    found that his private life  ties  in  the  UK  are  not  "particularly
    strong" and that the public interest in removal was not  outweighed  by
    his Article 8 private life.

39. I mention that aspect of the FTJ's decision given that  the  matter  is
    referred to in the grant of permission, which is drawn from  ground  5,
    in respect of which permission was actually refused.   That  aspect  of
    ground 5 however, is again concerned with the issue of remittances.

40. I consider that it was perfectly legitimate of the FTJ to conclude that
    the appellant's relationship with his family in the UK was not such  as
    to amount to family life for the purposes of Article  8.   Even  though
    she concluded that his relationships with his family are not  currently
    strong, that is not inconsistent with her conclusion  that  the  family
    would be in a position to provide support in the form  of  remittances.
    After all, it was not asserted that the family would not be willing  to
    provide him with financial support, but that they would be  unable  to.
    As indicated, the FTJ did not accept that evidence.

41. It is not the case that the mere fact  that  the  FTJ  found  that  the
    appellant had  not  provided  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  that
    financial support would not be forthcoming  from  the  UK,  meant  that
    there was any reversal of the burden of proof in relation to  cessation
    of refugee status, that burden lying on the respondent.  As a matter of
    principle, it cannot be the case that because  the  overall  burden  of
    proof is on the respondent she therefore has to  prove  every  fact  in
    issue in relation to revocation of  refugee  status.   Provided  it  is
    appreciated where the overall burden of proof lies, the  appellant  can
    reasonably be expected to adduce evidence of facts that he asserts,  or
    relies on.  [Move this paragraph]

42. In summary, I am not satisfied  that  the  FTJ  erred  in  law  in  the
    respects contended for.  Her decision reveals a  careful  and  thorough
    assessment of all the evidence within a  correct  appreciation  of  the
    relevant legal framework, in particular including with  regard  to  the
    burden of proof.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            11/05/17


