
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00100/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th May 2017                          |On 23rd May 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morron promulgated on 6  December
    2016,  in  which  AO's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  his
    protection and human rights claim and to revoke his  protection  status
    (following a deportation order signed on  22  October  2015)  dated  23
    October 2015 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with AO as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State for the Home Department as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a Russian national,  born  on  [  ]  1991,  who  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in  2004  and  was  a  dependent  on  his
    mother's  application  for  asylum  made  in   November   2004.    That
    application was  initially  refused  but  the  appeal  against  it  was
    successful and the Appellant and his other family members were  granted
    refugee status with leave to remain to 1 November 2012.  The  Appellant
    was granted indefinite leave to remain on 7 February 2013.

 3. On 14 March 2014, the Appellant was convicted of false imprisonment and
    following an appeal, sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment.  The Appellant
    was notified of his liability to deportation on 8 May 2014 and  of  the
    application of section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 to him on 23 June  2014  as  he  was  presumed  to  have  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom.  On 9 March  2015,  the  Appellant
    was notified of the Respondent's intention to cease his refugee  status
    and a further letter was sent to the UNHCR notifying them of  the  same
    and inviting them to make representations.

 4. The Respondent made a Deportation order against  the  Appellant  on  22
    October 2015.  The decision to revoke his refugee status and to  refuse
    his protection and human rights claim was dated 23 October  2015.   The
    Respondent applied section  72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 on  the  basis  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would not be a danger to the community if he were  to  remain
    in the United  Kingdom,  nor  that  the  crime  he  committed  was  not
    particularly serious.  Reference was made  to  the  sentencing  remarks
    following the Appellant's  conviction.   Pursuant  to  the  certificate
    under this section, the Appellant's asylum claim was refused.

 5. Further, the  Appellant's  refugee  status  was  ceased  under  Article
    1(C)(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and  paragraph  339A(v)  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that there has been  a  fundamental  and
    non-temporary change in Russia.  The Respondent referred to  the  UNHCR
    response about the Appellant where doubts  were  expressed  as  to  the
    application of Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention, but  did  not
    accept those concerns in light of available  background  evidence  that
    the incidence of racially  motivated  attacks  has  decreased  and  the
    Russian authorities had made concerted efforts  to  introduce  laws  to
    convict those accused of committing racially motivated crimes.  Overall
    it was considered that  the  security  landscape  of  Russia  had  much
    improved since the Appellant was granted refugee status  in  2007  such
    that his circumstances on return on the basis of his ethnic affiliation
    were not such that he would be at real risk of ill-treatment or harm on
    return.  The Respondent did not consider that there would be  a  breach
    of Articles 2 or 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  for  the
    same reasons.

 6. The Respondent separately considered the Appellant's right  to  respect
    for private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights through the provisions of paragraph  398  following  of
    the Immigration Rules and sections 117A to  117D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would have built up a private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    during his time here but referred to the fact that he  was  single  and
    had no children.  As he had been sentenced to a period of  four  years'
    imprisonment, the public interest  required  deportation  unless  there
    were very compelling circumstances over and above  the  exceptions  set
    out in the  Immigration  Rules.   No  such  circumstances  were  found.
    Although the Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for 11 years, he
    had been convicted of a serious criminal offence involving  an  act  of
    violence.  It was not accepted that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in Russia because he was  not  estranged
    from that country and had spent his childhood in formative years there.
     He was familiar  with  the  lifestyle  and  culture  as  well  as  the
    language.

 7. On 6 December 2016, Judge Morron upheld the section 72 certificate such
    that the Appellant was excluded from protection status.  He allowed the
    appeal under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  It was found that the Appellant had committed  a  particularly
    serious crime and had not rebutted that presumption during  the  course
    of his  appeal.   Notwithstanding  that  the  Appellant  had  no  prior
    convictions, was a model prisoner and had  been  making  good  progress
    since his release, it was of concern that the Appellant continue to see
    himself as a victim rather than a perpetrator and did not fully  accept
    responsibility for his  actions  which  led  to  his  conviction.   The
    Appellant had stated  he  was  willing  to  accept  treatment  but  his
    mother's clear evidence was that had this had been offered  to  him  on
    several occasions but refused.  Judge  Morron  found  that  unless  and
    until  the  Appellant  was  prepared  to  acknowledge  and  accept  the
    treatment he needs, he would be a danger to the community such that the
    section 72 certificate remained and he was excluded from the protection
    of the Refugee Convention and from a grant of humanitarian protection.

 8. In considering Articles 2  and  3  of  the  European  Convention  Human
    Rights, the starting point was  the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal  being
    allowed in 2007.  The Appellant's ill-treatment prior to his  departure
    from Russia was not disputed and the issue was only whether the country
    situation in Russia with regard to the treatment of ethnic  minorities,
    particularly Armenians had improved since the  Appellant  had  left  in
    2004 and was granted refugee status in 2007.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered the background evidence relied on  by  the  Respondent,  the
    UNHCR response in this case and the background  evidence  submitted  by
    the Appellant, including a report from Dr Rano Turaeva-Hoehne dated  17
    October 2016 (which itself included  reference  to  further  background
    material).  Judge Morron found that the Respondent had  not  considered
    the most up-to-date country information which suggested that the  level
    of  discriminatory  violence  against  ethnic   minorities,   including
    Armenians had  begun  to  increase  rather  than  having  significantly
    decreased since 2007.  The Appellant was found  to  be  conspicuous  by
    reason of his non-Slavic appearance.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that the high  threshold  for  protection
    under Articles 2 and 3 were met by the Appellant in this case, for  the
    reasons above and also by reference to the psychological report of Lisa
    Davies, which included the Appellant's tendency to freeze  as  well  as
    continuing experience of trauma symptoms and suicidal thoughts.  It was
    accepted that the Appellant would be unlikely to  access  treatment  in
    Russia.  In a  single  paragraph,  Judge  Morron  found  that  internal
    relocation within Russia was not considered a  viable  alternative  for
    the Appellant because of his mental state, his traumatised history  and
    his appearance, all of which  made  him  particularly  vulnerable.   He
    would further not be able to rely on the protection of the State.

10. In relation to Article 8 and paragraphs 398 to 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules, Judge Morron found that the Appellant had lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2004, including his formative years  of  adolescence  and
    adulthood during which time he was well  integrated  here.   He  speaks
    fluent English and is likely to  complete  his  education  and  earn  a
    living in the United Kingdom without support of the state.   His  leave
    to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  has  always  been  lawful  and  not
    precarious.  These  factors  were  not  however  considered  enough  to
    outweigh the strong public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment.  However, the appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 because of  the  additional  reasons  that  the
    Appellant is emotionally and financially dependent on his parents  with
    whom he lives and that he would face a  very  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm on return to Russia for  the  reasons  already  identified
    above.

The appeal

11. The Respondent appeals the decision  of  Judge  Morron  on  three  main
    grounds.  First, in relation to  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, that Judge Morron failed to give due weight
    to the objective evidence before him of the reduction in  incidents  of
    racial attacks and that the authorities had introduced new laws against
    these.  He had also failed  to  address  or  give  any  weight  to  the
    evidence that the Appellant's mother had returned to Russia three times
    since the grant of her refugee status without any  incident.   Finally,
    there was no proper consideration of whether there was a sufficiency of
    protection available to the Appellant in Russia.   Secondly,  that  the
    errors of law in relation to Articles 2 and 3 in the  first  ground  of
    appeal led to a misdirection as to the need to identify very compelling
    circumstances for the  purposes  of  paragraphs  398  to  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Thirdly, that Judge Morron did not have any medical
    evidence of the Appellant's claimed  suicidal  tendencies  nor  of  any
    mental health treatment that he was receiving and in the  circumstances
    there had been no proper assessment of the interference with  any  such
    treatment of his removal to Russia.  In particular, the  case  of  J  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 had  not
    been followed as to suicide risk.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kekic on  all  grounds  on  8
    March 2017.

13. On the first ground of  appeal,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    referred to the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal as  to
    the current situation  in  Russia  compared  to  in  2007.   There  was
    evidence of a decline in ethnic violence from 2007 to 2012 and although
    it is accepted that evidence referred to in the UNHCR letter  from  the
    Minority  Rights  Group  International  'Protecting   the   Rights   of
    Minorities and Indigenous Peoples in the Russian Federation: Challenges
    and Ways Forward' dated 1 December 2014 was to the effect  that  ethnic
    violence was no longer declining by 2013,  there  was  no  support  for
    Judge Morron's finding that it was increasing and that there  had  been
    no  significant  decrease  since  2007/8.   There  was  evidence  of  a
    significant Armenian population in Russia including the building  of  a
    new church in 2013 at a time when violence was said to  be  increasing.
    There was a failure to take into account the Appellant's mothers return
    to Russia on three occasions without incident.  In contrast, the expert
    report relied upon by the Appellant was very brief, was found by  Judge
    Morron to have been lacking in  neutrality  and  in  any  event  relied
    primarily  on  evidence  only  up  until  2012  (save  for  very  broad
    statements about the human rights position in  Russia  generally)  such
    that it offered no more up-to-date country information than that relied
    upon by the Respondent.

14. In response on this ground, Counsel for the  Appellant  submitted  that
    decision under  appeal  in  paragraphs  102  to  113  provided  careful
    reasoning and analysis of the evidence by  the  Tribunal.   The  expert
    evidence report, as well as the UNHCR response was  clearly  preferred.
    If there was any suggestion that the finding  that  the  expert  report
    lacks  neutrality  will  continue  to  be  relied  upon,  then  a  late
    application for permission to cross-appeal would be made.  Overall,  it
    was submitted that the Appellant was at risk because he was of Armenian
    ethnicity, because he had a non-Slavic appearance and because he  would
    be required to do military service on return to Russia.  Given that the
    last two of these risk factors would  not  apply  to  his  mother,  her
    return to Russia for brief  visits  staying  with  a  friend  were  not
    relevant or material to  an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  risk  on
    return.

15. On the second ground of appeal,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that it was unclear what very compelling  circumstances  were
    relied upon  by  Judge  Morron  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation in accordance with paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules.
    Some of the factors that were relied upon in paragraphs  124  and  125,
    that the Appellant speaks fluent English and would be likely to in  the
    future be able to maintain himself  without  public  support  were,  in
    accordance with the Court of Appeal's decision in Rhuppiah v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803  at  best  neutral
    and not positive factors in the Appellant's favour.  In any  event,  it
    was submitted that if the appeal under the first ground was successful,
    the misdirection and unsupported findings on Articles 2 and  3  of  the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights  would  render  the  decision  on
    Article 8 unsafe.

16. Although Counsel for the Appellant did not accept that the  outcome  of
    the first ground of appeal was  determinative  of  the  appeal  on  the
    Article 8 assessment, it was accepted that it was the findings of  risk
    on return and in relation to the Appellant's mental health which tipped
    the balance in favour of the Appellant to outweigh the public  interest
    in deportation.

17. Finally, in relation to the third ground of appeal, it was submitted on
    behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   reached
    conclusions which were not supported by any medical evidence and  there
    was no consideration of the evidence that the Appellant had  failed  to
    engage in treatment offered to him to date.  In response,  Counsel  for
    the Appellant relied on the qualification of the fifth criteria in J as
    set out by Lord Justice Sedley in Y (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 that account must be  taken
    of the fact that the Appellant's psychological problems were caused  by
    mistreatment in Russia and  that  his  subjective  fear  of  return  is
    sufficient when considering the suicide  risk.   There  was  sufficient
    medical evidence of the same as well as evidence from  the  Appellant's
    family.

Findings and reasons

18. In relation to the first ground of appeal, I find that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in law in the assessment of risk on return to
    this Appellant under Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The findings made by Judge Morron  in  this  regard  are
    unclear in a number of respects and not supported by the evidence  that
    was before him.  There is a simple conclusion in paragraph 113 that the
    country  information  does  not   show   that   racial   violence   and
    discrimination against ethnic minorities in Russia, including Armenians
    has significantly decreased since 2007/8.  However, the Respondent  had
    submitted evidence that there had been a decrease in racially motivated
    violence at least until 2012 and  although  there  was  later  evidence
    quoted in the UNHCR response that such violence was no longer declining
    by 2013, there was no evidence that it had since  then  increased,  nor
    that it had returned to the peak of 2007/8.  The Respondent's  reliance
    on this evidence was criticised as lacking consideration of  up-to-date
    country information, however little evidence beyond 2013,  specific  to
    the issue of racial abuse and violence, was available to the First-tier
    Tribunal nor specifically relied upon in the decision under appeal.

19. It is entirely unclear what reliance, if any, was placed on the  expert
    report of Dr Rano Turaeva-Hoehne  dated  17  October  2016  given  that
    following a summary of its contents there is an  unexplained  statement
    that it is lacking in neutrality.  The only part  that  appears  to  be
    expressly relied upon is a quote  from  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office report of a general deterioration in the human rights  situation
    in Russia in 2014.  Although the  general  human  rights  situation  in
    Russia may be relevant as part of the fact-finding exercise,  it  seems
    that it has been given significant weight in the present appeal in  the
    absence of more specific background country information.

20. Further, although there is  a  finding  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    conspicuous by  reason  of  his  non-Slavic  appearance,  there  is  no
    detailed  consideration  of  this  as  a  separate  risk  factor.   The
    Appellant also put his claim on the basis of risk on return  by  reason
    of forced military service but there are no express  findings  on  this
    either save for a brief reference to liability to military  service  in
    the context of internal relocation.

21. There are no clear findings as to whom the Appellant is at  risk  from,
    whether it is from state agents or non-state  actors  which  is  highly
    relevant to the question as to whether there would be a sufficiency  of
    protection for him in Russia.  Without  any  fuller  assessment,  Judge
    Morron simply concludes that due to the Appellant's vulnerabilities, he
    would not be able to rely upon the protection of the state.  No reasons
    are given for that and reliance is not the correct test to apply.   The
    decision does not disclose that there has been any detailed  assessment
    of whether the Appellant would have  a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Russia or not.

22. The Respondent further complained that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to take into account and give weight to the Appellant's mother's return
    to Russia on three occasions.  I do not find that this of itself  would
    have been a material error of law given the brief periods for which she
    returned, on a British passport and given that there are differences in
    the claimed risk factors between her and the  Appellant.   However,  in
    the context of the findings above, it would have  been  preferable  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to have addressed this issue expressly.

23. For all of these reasons, I find that there has been a  material  error
    of law in the assessment of risk on return for this Appellant where the
    findings are unclear, not rationally based on the available  background
    evidence, fail to consider all of the risk factors relied upon and fail
    to undertake any meaningful assessment of sufficiency of protection.

24. As to the second ground of appeal, although  an  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds by reference to paragraphs 398 and following of the Immigration
    Rules does not necessarily stand or fall with a claim under Articles  2
    and 3, I find that in the present case it does because of the nature of
    the findings made by Judge Morron.  In paragraph 127, as is accepted by
    Counsel for the Appellant, it is clear that the tipping point at  which
    the public interest in deportation was outweighed was the real risk  of
    the Appellant suffering serious harm on return to  Russia.   Given  the
    errors of law in the assessment of evidence and giving  of  reasons  in
    relation to Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    set out above, the reliance on  these  findings  for  the  purposes  of
    finding very compelling circumstances is also rendered unsafe.

25. For completeness, I also find a material error of law in paragraph  124
    of the decision which contrary to the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Rhuppiah, attached positive weight in the  Appellant's  favour  to  his
    level of English and ability to support himself in the  United  Kingdom
    under sections 117B(2) and (3)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  These factors can at best only be neutral.

26. The final ground of appeal relates to the assessment of the Appellant's
    mental health and finding that his return to Russia would be  a  breach
    of Articles 2 and/or 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  for
    this  reason.   Judge  Morron,  in  paragraph  117,   refers   to   the
    psychological report and the conclusions set out there in and  goes  on
    to find that contrary to the Respondent's conclusion that the Appellant
    would be able to defend or stand up for himself against  harassment  or
    discrimination, that  there  is  a  reasonable  risk  or  a  very  real
    likelihood that when faced with the threat  of  violence  he  would  be
    unable to defend himself and that he would be seriously injured or take
    his own life.  There is reference to the likelihood of treatment  being
    available in Russia for the Appellant but that it would  take  time  to
    arrange it and the Appellant would be unlikely to access it.  The  high
    risk of suicide was referred to.

27. It is unclear from this paragraph as to whether the Appellant's  mental
    health, and in particular his risk of suicide,  was  itself  considered
    sufficient to cross the  high  threshold  to  allow  his  appeal  under
    Articles 2 and/or 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  or
    whether this was simply an additional factor aggravating  the  risk  on
    return for the other reasons found.   If  the  former,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has had no regard to the Court of Appeal's decision in J which
    identified the  following  five  stages  of  the  correct  test  to  be
    considered in such cases.

    27. First, the test requires an assessment to be made of  the  severity
        of the treatment which it is said that the applicant would suffer if
        removed.  This must attain a minimum level of severity.   The  court
        has said on a  number  of  occasions  that  the  assessment  of  its
        severity depends on all the circumstances of the case.  But the ill-
        treatment must "necessarily be serious" such that it is "an  affront
        to fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to  a
        country where he is at risk of  serious  ill-treatment":  see  Ullah
        paras [28-39].

    28. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the  act  or
        threatened act of removal or expulsion  and  the  inhuman  treatment
        relied on as violating the  applicant's  article  3  rights.  Thus
        in Soering at para [91], the court said:

        "In so far as any liability  under  the  Convention  is  or  may  be
        incurred,   it   is   liability   incurred   by   the    extraditing
        Contracting State by reason of its having taken action which has as
        a direct consequence the exposure of an individual to proscribed ill-
        treatment."(emphasis added).

        See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court  said  that  the
        examination of the article 3 issue "must focus  on  the  foreseeable
        consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."

    29.  Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3 threshold
        is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case. And it  is
        even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not the direct or
        indirect responsibility of the public authorities of  the  receiving
        state, but results from some naturally occurring  illness,  whether
        physical or mental. This is made clear in para [49] of D and  para
        [40] of Bensaid.

    30.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a suicide
        case (para [37] of Bensaid).

    31.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach  of
        article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is whether the
        applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state upon which
        the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively well-founded.
        If the fear is not well-founded, that will  tend  to  weigh  against
        there being a real risk that  the  removal  will  be  in  breach  of
        article 3.

    32.  Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance  is  whether
        the removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to
        reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms,  that
        too will weigh heavily against an  applicant's  claim  that  removal
        will violate his or her article 3 rights.

28. The fifth principle was further qualified by the Court of Appeal  in  Y
    (Sri Lanka)  but  has  not  been  considered  either.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision does not show that any of these parts of  the  test
    have been substantively considered and there has been no assessment  of
    the limited nature of the evidence available to the Appellant's  mental
    health.  There is in particular no assessment of the likely severity of
    any adverse impact on the Appellant's mental health on return to Russia
    and what, if anything, this would  mean  for  the  possibility  of  him
    receiving appropriate treatment.

29. Even if the Appellant's mental health and risk of  suicide  were  taken
    into account only as an aggravating factor to the  other  risk  factors
    already identified and used to demonstrate  why  the  consequences  for
    this Appellant may be more severe than for others,  there  is  again  a
    lack of substantive assessment of  the  Appellant's  mental  health  in
    light of what medical evidence is available and the likely  effects  on
    return to Russia.

30. For these  reasons  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  also
    materially erred in law in the  assessment  of  risk  on  return  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  when
    considering the Appellant's mental health and risk of suicide.

31. For the reasons set out above, I allow the Respondent's appeal  on  all
    three rounds and find that the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred
    in law on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of material errors of law.  As such it is necessary to set aside  the
decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing.  There are no preserved findings of fact although it  should
    be noted that there is no dispute about  the  Appellant's  history  and
    experiences in Russia which were accepted by Judges Carroll and Herbert
    in a determination promulgated on 16 April 2007.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeal a skeleton argument setting out relevant  issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal may issue further directions as required.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Taylor  House  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be listed  before  any  Judge  except  Judges
    Morron, Carroll, Herbert or Brown.


 3. There is a time estimate of 3 hours for the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   [pic]             Date     19th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


