
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00022/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 6 January 2017                  |On: 11 January 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MOHAMED SALAH OMAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr  Omar's  appeal  against
the respondent's decision to cease his refugee  status  and  to  refuse  his
human rights claim further to a decision to deport him pursuant  to  section
32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Omar  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.


The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 15 February 1980.  He  claims
to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  3  July  2003.  He  was  granted
refugee status and indefinite leave to remain on 13  February  2004  further
to a successful appeal against a decision to refuse  his  asylum  claim,  on
the basis of his membership of the minority Reer Shikh, Reer Hamar  minority
clan.


On 22 December 2009 the appellant was convicted of wounding with  intent  to
do grievous bodily harm and wounding/ inflicting grievous  bodily  harm  and
was sentenced, on the same day, to ten years' imprisonment.


On 18 March 2010 the appellant was notified of his  liability  to  automatic
deportation in accordance with section 32(5) of the 2007  Act  and  he  made
representations in response. On 14 November 2013 the respondent invited  the
appellant to  seek  to  rebut  the  presumption  under  section  72  of  the
Nationality,  Immigration  Act  2002  that  he  had  been  convicted  of   a
particularly serious crime and constituted a danger  to  the  community.  He
responded in a letter dated 28 November 2013. On 4 June 2014  the  appellant
was notified of the respondent's  intention  to  cease  his  refugee  status
under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention  and  paragraph  339A  of  the
immigration rules on the basis that the  circumstances  in  connection  with
which he had been recognised as a refugee had ceased to  exist.  On  9  July
2014 the respondent notified the UNHCR of  the  same,  to  which  the  UNHCR
responded on 1 August 2014.

On 27 April 2015 the respondent made a decision  to  cease  the  appellant's
refugee status and notified him of his right of appeal under  section  82(1)
of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision  to
revoke his protection status. On 1 May 2015 the respondent made  a  decision
to deport the appellant under section 32(5) of the  2007  Act.  On  17  June
2015 the respondent made a decision to refuse the appellant's  human  rights
claim and on the same day issued a deportation  order  pursuant  to  section
32(5) of the 2007 Act.

In her decision of 27 April 2015 ceasing  the  appellant's  refugee  status,
the respondent accepted that she was unable to conclude that he would be  at
no risk on return to his home area, and  accepted  that  he  had  no  recent
experience of living in Somalia. However the respondent considered  that  he
could relocate to Mogadishu where he would not be at  risk.  The  respondent
concluded that the situation regarding minority clans, which was  the  basis
upon which he had initially been granted refugee status, had since  changed.
The respondent relied on the country  guidance  in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
Mogadishu) (Rev 1) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 in regard to minority clans and  the
current improved situation in Mogadishu and considered  that  the  appellant
no longer required  international  protection  on  the  basis  of  his  clan
membership and that he would not be at risk of becoming a vulnerable IDP  in
breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. The respondent therefore decided to  revoke
the appellant's refugee status.


In her decision of 17  June  2015  refusing  the  appellant's  human  rights
claim, the respondent noted that the appellant  had  not  responded  to  the
deportation decision of 1 May 2015 and had not made any assertions  that  he
fell within the exceptions to automatic deportation under section 33 of  the
2007 Act. The respondent nevertheless  considered  the  appellant's  earlier
representations made in February 2014 and considered Article 8 of the  ECHR,
concluding that the appellant could not meet the requirements  in  paragraph
399(a) and (b) or 399A of the immigration rules and that there were no  very
compelling  circumstances   outweighing   the   public   interest   in   his
deportation. The respondent found that the appellant could not meet  any  of
the exceptions to automatic deportation in section 33.

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decisions was heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal on 18 November 2015 by a panel consisting of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Borsada and a non-legal member, Ms Endersby. It  was  argued,
before the panel, that the  respondent  had  failed  to  meet  the  test  of
demonstrating a fundamental and  durable  change  in  the  circumstances  in
Somalia so as to justify revoking the appellant's refugee status,  and  that
the appellant fell within an "at risk" category as  identified  in  MOJ,  as
being a minority clan member with no support network in  Mogadishu.  It  was
asserted on behalf of the appellant that there was  no-one  in  the  UK  who
could send him financial remittances to assist him in  establishing  himself
in Mogadishu and that he had no family members  remaining  in  Somalia,  his
father and brother having been  killed  in  the  conflict,  his  mother  and
sister living in a refugee camp in Yemen and the  whereabouts  of  his  wife
and other sister being unknown. It was asserted that he  would  most  likely
find himself living in an IDP camp in conditions in breach of his Article  3
rights. In addition, it was argued  that  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the
presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act.


The panel accepted that the appellant had no family or other connections  or
associations in Mogadishu and no external means of  support  and  considered
that  it  would  be  difficult  for  him  to  find  employment   given   the
exploitation and discrimination of his clan and his limited skill  set.  The
panel accepted that the appellant had rebutted the  presumption  in  section
72 of the 2002 Act and  found  that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Mogadishu. They allowed the appellant's appeal.


The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
asserting that  the  panel  did  not  provide  adequate  reasons  for  their
conclusions on section 72 and in regard to cessation.  With  regard  to  the
latter the grounds asserted that the panel failed to give  adequate  reasons
why the appellant would be without clan support in Mogadishu and that  their
finding that the appellant would find it difficult  to  find  employment  in
Mogadishu was at odds with the evidence and guidance in MOJ.  Permission  to
appeal was granted on 15 December 2015.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 6 January 2017.   Both  Ms  Rutherford  and  Mr
Mills were in agreement with a point I raised, namely that whilst the First-
tier Tribunal had made  findings  on  section  72  and  the  respondent  had
challenged those findings in the grounds of appeal, the  respondent  had  in
fact never issued a certificate to the effect  that  the  presumption  under
section 72(2) applied, pursuant  to  section  72(9)(b).  I  noted  that  the
respondent had issued a section 72 notice on 14 November 2013  inviting  the
appellant to rebut the presumption, and that the appellant had responded  on
27 November 2013 seeking to rebut the presumption. There  was,  however,  as
far as I could ascertain, no indication in  the  cessation  decision  of  27
April 2015, the deportation decision of 1 May 2015 or  the  decision  of  17
June 2015 refusing his human rights claim, that the respondent had  actually
certified that the  presumption  applied.  The  parties  were  therefore  in
agreement that that was not a matter that the First-tier Tribunal  ought  to
have considered, but in any event it was accepted  that  it  was  in  effect
immaterial. Mr Mills agreed that even if  section  72  had  applied  to  the
appellant, and he therefore was excluded from protection under  the  Refugee
Convention and humanitarian protection, he  could  still  seek  to  rely  on
Article 3 and therefore the main issue  in  the  appellant's  case  and  the
grounds of challenge was the cessation decision and the question of risk  on
return.

It was Mr Mills' submission that the panel's decision was  contrary  to  the
guidance  in  MOJ,  in  particular  to  the  question  of  ability  to  find
employment in Mogadishu. It was clear from MOJ that clan membership  was  no
longer a risk factor and the relevant paragraphs in  MOJ  referring  to  the
economy provided no support for the panel's conclusion  that  the  appellant
would not be able to find employment and would find himself in an IDP  camp.
There was  no  reason  why  the  appellant  could  not  find  employment  in
Mogadishu and he could not, therefore, succeed. Mr Mills  asked  me  to  set
aside the panel's decision and re-make it by dismissing the appeal.


Ms Rutherford submitted that the panel considered all  relevant  matters  at
[8] and reached a conclusion that was open  to  them.  Clan  membership  was
relevant insofar as majority clan members  would  have  support  in  finding
employment. She asked me to uphold  the  decision  of  the  panel  but  also
accepted that if I decided that the panel had  erred  in  law  as  Mr  Mills
suggested, then  the  only  outcome  would  be  to  re-make  the  appeal  by
dismissing it. She confirmed that there was no realistic Article 8  argument
and that the only basis upon  which  the  appellant  could  succeed  was  in
regard to risk on return.

Consideration and findings.

As stated above, and as the parties agreed, the  only  relevant  ground  was
the second ground which related to the  question  of  cessation  of  refugee
status. The question facing the panel was therefore whether there  had  been
a fundamental and durable change in the situation in Somalia, in  particular
Mogadishu to where it was accepted that the appellant would be  expected  to
relocate.

It is clear that MOJ found there to be a durable change in the situation  in
Mogadishu, in particular in the security risks that  had  previously  arisen
as a result of Al Shabab's presence in the city. It was also found  in  MOJ,
at [337] to [343] that clan membership was no  longer  a  significant  issue
and that membership of a minority clan  was  no  longer  a  risk  factor  in
itself. However, other than acknowledging at [10] the references in  MOJ  to
the general improvement in the  security  situation  in  Mogadishu  and  the
revival of the economy, the panel did  not  engage  with  these  issues  and
focussed solely on the risk factors to  the  appellant  as  a  member  of  a
minority clan, in terms of availability or lack of  support,  concluding  at
[8] that owing to the exploitation and discrimination of his clan  he  would
have difficulty finding employment.


The respondent challenges such a conclusion as being inconsistent with  MOJ.
Ms Rutherford sought to persuade  me  that  the  respondent's  grounds  were
simply a disagreement  with  the  panel's  decision  and  that  the  panel's
findings were open to them, but I have to disagree. Although  it  was  found
in MOJ, and I refer in particular to [343], that clan support  could  be  of
assistance, it did not provide the  converse,  namely  that  an  absence  of
support as a member of a minority clan would prevent  access  to  employment
or other opportunities. Indeed, the Tribunal found at [342], with regard  to
clan support, that "this source of assistance must not be overstated".


Paragraphs [344] to [352]  of  MOJ  provide  details  of  the  opportunities
available to returnees as a  result  of  the  economic  boom,  referring  to
opportunities in unskilled work such as building labour, and emphasising  at
[351] the advantages for returnees from  the  West  in  seeking  employment.
These are matters that the panel failed to consider. As Mr Mills  submitted,
there is nothing in the evidence provided in MOJ in these paragraphs or  the
preceding paragraphs dealing with the significance  of  clan  membership  to
support  the  panel's  findings  that  the  appellant  would  have   extreme
difficulty finding employment  as  a  result  of  his  clan  membership  and
limited skill set. On the contrary the evidence before the  panel  was  that
the  appellant  had  undertaken  various  courses  in  the  UK  including  a
pneumatic nailing dispenser course and  various  English  language  courses,
yet no consideration was given to such matters, particularly in the  context
of the findings in MOJ about employment opportunities.


Accordingly, whilst the panel were perfectly entitled to take  into  account
and place weight upon the considerations in [ix] of  the  head-note  to  MOJ
applicable  to  the  appellant,  namely  the  fact  that  he  was  not  from
Mogadishu, that he was from a minority clan, that he had no  family  support
in Mogadishu and no financial support from family in the UK, they failed  to
make proper and reasoned findings, consistent with the evidence set  out  in
MOJ, as to his prospects of securing a livelihood. The evidence  before  the
panel did not demonstrate that the appellant had met  the  burden  of  proof
set out at [x] and did not demonstrate that the appellant  fell  within  the
category of people set out at [xi] of the head-note and their findings  that
the appellant would end up in an IDP camp were  simply  not  sustainable  in
the light of the evidence in MOJ. On the contrary the  evidence  before  the
panel, including the evidence provided by the appellant and the evidence  of
employment opportunities in Mogadishu, and  the  appellant's  profile  as  a
young, healthy male with various qualifications in the UK suggested that  he
would  have  no  problem  securing  a  livelihood  in  Mogadishu   and   re-
establishing himself there.

For all of these reasons it seems to me that there had been fundamental  and
durable changes in Somalia since the appellant was granted  refugee  status.
The basis upon which he was granted refugee status, namely membership  of  a
minority clan, no longer  provided  grounds  for  demonstrating  a  risk  on
return. The security situation in Mogadishu for returnees,  including  those
not  originally  from  Mogadishu,  had  substantially  improved,   and   the
appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  re-
establish himself in that city and secure  a  livelihood  for  himself.  The
evidence did not suggest that he would find  himself  in  an  IDP  camp  and
there was no basis for concluding that his deportation would breach  Article
3 of the ECHR  or  that  he  was  in  need  of  humanitarian  protection  or
international protection as  a  refugee.  The  respondent  was  entitled  to
revoke the appellant's refugee status and the panel erred in law  concluding
otherwise.


Accordingly I set aside the panel's decision and, for the same reasons,  and
given Ms Rutherford's properly made concession that there was  no  realistic
Article 8 argument, re-make the decision by dismissing Mr Omar's  appeal  on
all grounds.


DECISION


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Omar's appeal on all grounds.












                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
