
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)     |Decision and Reasons Issued          |
|On 8 September 2020                  |On 11 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                MS (somalia)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 4 September 2017, the First-tier Tribunal issued a decision allowing
    the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  revocation  of  his
    protection status.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by the Upper Tribunal on 21 March 2018.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed to the Court of  Appeal.   That  appeal
    was heard by Underhill, Hamblen and Newey LJJ on 11 July 2019.   On  29
    July 2019, the Court of Appeal handed down a judgment (MS  (Somalia)  v
    SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1345) in which it allowed the Secretary of State's
    appeal against the Upper Tribunal's  decision.   The  decision  is  now
    reported at [2020] QB 364 and might properly be said to be the  leading
    domestic authority on the cessation of refugee status.   The  Court  of
    Appeal quashed the decisions of the FtT  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    remitted the appeal to the Upper Tribunal to be heard afresh, either by
    the Upper Tribunal or by the FtT, if so directed.

 3. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Court.
    Permission was refused on 30 June 2020, as a result of which  it  falls
    to the Upper Tribunal to consider  the  order  made  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  To that end, there was a Case  Management  Hearing  before  me
    today.  Mr Khubber, for the appellant, had produced a very helpful note
    in advance of the hearing.  He noted, amongst other  things,  that  the
    appellant is currently serving a sentence of imprisonment and that  the
    case involves a number of legal and  factual  issues  relating  to  the
    Refugee Convention.  Orally, he added that there were  also  Article  8
    ECHR issues to be considered, not least because the appellant has  been
    in the UK since 2002.  Given the scope of the issues to be  considered,
    it was Mr Khubber's submission that the appeal should  be  remitted  to
    the FtT to be heard afresh.

 4. Mr Clarke did not disagree with any part of Mr  Khubber's  submissions.
    He agreed, in particular, that the proper course was for the appeal  to
    be reheard in the FtT.  It is fair to  say  that  both  representatives
    accepted that the complexity of the case militated  in  favour  of  the
    appeal being retained in the Upper  Tribunal  but  that  remission  was
    considered by both, on balance, to  be  the  just  course.   With  some
    hesitation, I accept these submissions.  The law  is  now  clear  as  a
    result of the Court of Appeal's judgment  -  cessation  is  the  mirror
    image of recognition and the availability of  internal  relocation  may
    give rise to a fundamental and durable change such  that  cessation  is
    appropriate - although it is simpler to state these principles than  to
    apply them.  Given the quashing of the FtT's decision and the scope  of
    the issues upon which findings are required, I  accept  the  submission
    made on both sides that the proper course is remission.

 5. The appellant is currently detained at HMP  Moorland,  near  Doncaster,
    and is not due for release until January 2021.  The nearest FtT hearing
    centre is in Bradford, and it is to that centre that the appeal will be
    remitted.  As Mr Khubber accepted, it is not for me to case manage  the
    appeal post-remission.  That falls to the Resident Judge  at  Bradford.
    For the assistance of the FtT, however, I note that Mr Khubber  submits
    that a full day's listing is appropriate; that further expert  evidence
    is being sought and will be available in early  December;  and  that  a
    fully 'attended' hearing would  be  necessary,  given  the  appellant's
    detention  and  his  vulnerability.   The  FtT  might  wish,   in   the
    circumstances, to have a further CMR on remission.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT was quashed by order of the Court  of  Appeal.   The
appeal is remitted to the FtT to be heard afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity has been ordered throughout  and  it  is  plainly  appropriate  to
continue that order as this is  an  international  protection  appeal.   The
order is in the following terms:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                                M.J.Blundell
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

