
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00001/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House remotely by     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Skype                                |                                     |
|On 23rd October 2020                 |On 10th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr a a
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bayati, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless hereinafter I shall refer to the parties as  they
    were described in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed with permission against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies promulgated on 10th March 2020 in
    which the judge allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision  to
    revoke his refugee status, allowed his appeal on human  rights  grounds
    (Article 3 European Convention  on  Human  Rights)  and  dismissed  his
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somali born  on  4th  February  1981  (38
    years old at the date of the hearing) and he was granted refugee status
    on 21st October 1998 on the basis he  was  a  member  of  the  minority
    Ashraf clan.  He was also given indefinite leave to remain owing to his
    refugee status.

 4. The respondent revoked the appellant's indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    3rd September 2009 because he had  committed  criminal  offences.   The
    judge recorded that there  was  no  PNC  printout  of  the  appellant's
    history of convictions but the appellant admitted that he had committed
    offences.  Nonetheless he was granted discretionary leave to remain  in
    place of his indefinite leave valid until 4th October  2012.   On  16th
    December 2012 he was served with a notification  IS151A  notifying  him
    that he was now an overstayer and given temporary admission.   He  then
    absconded.  On 20th December 2019 the respondent decided to  cease  the
    appellant's refugee status and explained in her letter that  there  had
    been significant changes in the general country conditions  in  Somalia
    and ordinary civilians returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence
    would in general not face a real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
    such  as  to  require  protection  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. There was no indication that the  appellant
    was liable to or had been served with a certificate  under  Section  72
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The appellant made submissions that his removal to Somalia would be  in
    breach of the UK obligations under the 1951 UN  Geneva  Convention  and
    contrary to the Refugee or Person in Need of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as well  as  a  breach  of  his  human
    rights.

 6. The judge made the following recordings and findings:

    i.   The judge noted that the Court of Appeal held in Said [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 442 that there was no violation of Article 3 by reason only  of
         a person being returned to a country  which  for  economic  reasons
         cannot provide him with basic living standards.

    ii.  The  appellant  lived  with  his  parents  and  nine  siblings  in
         Mogadishu and contracted polio when  he  was  3  and  has  mobility
         issues and uses crutches.  He has two brothers and a sister in  the
         United Kingdom but they are not in contact and he  has  no  contact
         with his family in Somalia since he left in 1997  and  no  idea  of
         their whereabouts.

    iii. The judge recorded that the appellant spoke Somali but was not  as
         fluent as those who had always lived there.

    iv.  The judge did not find  the  argument  that  the  appellant  could
         contact his family in Somalia persuasive.  The  appellant  did  not
         leave Somalia recently but over 22 years ago.  The  judge  accepted
         that the appellant was not in contact with anyone  in  Somalia  now
         and it was speculative to find the contrary.

    v.   The judge accepted that the siblings in the UK could  not  provide
         the appellant with support.  He had given  a  detailed  account  of
         having been sleeping rough or at friends' homes since his  benefits
         were stopped.

    vi.  The appellant did have polio as a child and suffered as  a  result
         of reduced mobility.  The appellant attended the appeal on crutches
         and his medical records referred to the same.  The appellant is not
         fit for physical labour.

    vii. The appellant has no apparent  useful  skills  or  any  employment
         history.

    viii.    He has no employment history and it is not  disputed  that  he
         was a member of the Ashraf clan.

 7. The judge cited MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC) particularly the paragraph 407 and made the  following
    findings:

         "47. I have considered the country guidance  set  out  in  MOJ  and
             Others and note that it includes the following  (at  paragraph
             407):

             "(a)     Generally, a person who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"
                  (i.e. not associated with the security forces; any  aspect
                  of government or official administration  or  any  NGO  or
                  international  organisation)  on  returning  to  Mogadishu
                  after a period of  absence  will  face  no  real  risk  of
                  persecution or risk of harm such as to require  protection
                  under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
                  Qualification Directive."

             "(f)     A person returning to Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
                  absence will look to his nuclear family,  if  he  has  one
                  living in the  city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing
                  himself and securing a livelihood.   Although  a  returnee
                  may also seek assistance from his clan members who are not
                  close  relatives,  such  help  is  only   likely   to   be
                  forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority  clans
                  may have little to offer".

             "(g)     The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu  has
                  changed.  Clans now provide, potentially,  social  support
                  mechanisms  and  assist  with   access   to   livelihoods,
                  performing less of a protection function than  previously.
                  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,
                  and no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
                  minority clan members".

         48.  I note that this guidance does not state that clan  membership
             is no longer important in Somalia.   Indeed,  it  acknowledges
             it.  Further, I find that the Respondent's  CPIN  for  January
             2019 confirms the ongoing  significance  of  clan  membership,
             even in Mogadishu (3.1.1).

         49.  Further, the CPIN [Country Policy Information Note] goes on to
             quote various reports at as follows:

             a.   "[the lives of  minorities]  in  the  capital's  informal
                  settlements continue to be plagued by  insecurity,  sexual
                  violence and discrimination, making it  almost  impossible
                  for them to make ends meet" (at 5.1.2);

             b.   "Members of minority clans often  lack  vital  protection
                  and suffer  pervasive  discrimination  ...  Somali  ethnic
                  Bantus, as well as some other minority  clans,  reportedly
                  continue to be highly vulnerable to discrimination, severe
                  poverty, exclusion and marginalisation, and are reportedly
                  disproportionately subjected to killings,  torture,  rape,
                  kidnapping for ransom, forced recruitment, bonded  labour,
                  as well as looting of land  and  properly  with  impunity"
                  (5.1.3);

             c.   "Minority groups, often lacking armed militias,  continue
                  to be disproportionately subjected to  killings,  torture,
                  rape, kidnapping for ransom ... by  faction  militias  and
                  majority clan members,  often  with  the  acquiescence  of
                  federal and local authorities" (5.1.4);

             d.   "Members of non-dominant clans and groups are potentially
                  more vulnerable to criminal acts such as robbery and rape,
                  including  in  the  encounter  with   government   forces.
                  However ... there is no information to suggest that people
                  who do not belong to one of the dominant clans in the city
                  are systematically  subjected  to  violence  in  Mogadishu
                  today" (5.1.6)

         50.  I apply the individualised approach as set out in MA (Somalia)
             (paragraphs 49ff) and  find  that  even  if  members  of  non-
             dominant clans are not "systematically" subjected to  violence
             on account of their minority status,  the  country  background
             material, considered in conjunction with the guidance  in  MOJ
             and  Others  and  the  Appellant's  particular  circumstances,
             demonstrates that the he would  continue  to  be  at  risk  of
             persecution in  Mogadishu  and  that  there  would  not  be  a
             sufficiency of protection, such that  there  has  not  been  a
             durable change in circumstances for him.

         51.  I find that the Appellant is a  vulnerable  individual,  given
             his reduced mobility.  He is from a minority clan and will  be
             returned to a city he has not known for 22 years, where he has
             no family or support network.  His disability, lack of  skills
             and minority clan status mean that he is hardly likely  to  be
             able to make the most of the economic opportunities on  offer.
             Instead, he is disproportionately at risk of significant  ill-
             treatment that would amount to persecution."

 8. The judge added at paragraph 53:

         "If I am wrong about the revocation appeal I nevertheless find that
         the appellant's return to Mogadishu would amount  to  a  breach  of
         Article 3 ECHR.  Given his circumstances as set out above,  I  find
         the Appellant is  reasonably  likely  to  end  up  in  a  camp  for
         internally displaced persons."

 9. The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds.

         Ground 1.  The Secretary of State asserted that  the  judge  erred.
         The factors that the judge  took  into  account  at  41  to  51  in
         assessing the issue of cessation of refugee status did not arguably
         speak to whether there had been a durable and non-temporary  change
         in  Somalia  and  specifically  in  relation  to   the   issue   of
         "persecution".  He was granted refugee status  simply  as  being  a
         member of a minority clan.  Such factors as his length of  absence,
         his apparent lack of employability and lack of family ties were not
         directly  relevant.   Those  factors  related  to   a   claim   for
         humanitarian protection.  MOJ was not a case which was  looking  at
         claims for refugee status but rather it was a case  concerned  with
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         Ground 2.  The judge allowed the appeal  under  Article  3  in  the
         alternative and it was respectfully submitted  that  there  was  no
         self-direction as to the requisite standard which must be that of N
         v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and the conclusion on this was unsound.

10. As stated in the judgment of Secretary of State for the Home Department
    v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 at paragraph 31,

         "An appeal to Article 3 which suggests that  the  person  concerned
         would face impoverished conditions of living on removal to  Somalia
         should, as the Strasbourg Court  indicated  in  Sufi  and  Elmi  at
         paragraph 292, be viewed by reference to the test in  the  N  case.
         Impoverished conditions which were the result of violent activities
         may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk  suggested
         is of direct violence itself."

11. It was not suggested that the appellant would end up  in  an  IDP  camp
    because of the prevalence of violence and as such the appropriate  test
    was that of N v UK as modified by the Supreme Court  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2020] UKSC 17).   This was a stringent test and the Secretary of State
    submitted in which the facts of this appeal plainly did not reach.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on grounds 1 and ground 2 and  refused
    on a further ground in relation to credibility.

13. The grant of permission stated in relation to ground  1,  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  approach  to  the
    issue of cessation albeit that the appellant is disabled and  therefore
    me (sic) [may] be more at risk than others.  On  ground  2,  the  grant
    observed that there was  less  merit  given  the  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's  disability  and  other   findings   as   to   his   likely
    circumstances  on  return.   The  factors  found  in  this  case   were
    significantly different from those in Said [2018]  EWCA  Civ  442  (see
    paragraph 19 thereof) but there was  arguably  a  failure  properly  to
    explain the conclusions given in SB  (refugee  revocation;  IDP  camps)
    Somalia [2019] UKUT 358 (IAC).

14. At the hearing before me Ms Cunha submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the 'rules' around a cessation, did not  apply  the  'rules'
    and did not deal with the events of how the appellant achieved  refugee
    status.  There were inadequate reasons.  The case  law  had  emphasised
    that such cases should be looked at through  the  "mirrored  approach".
    The judge failed to  give  sufficient  reasons  and  materially  erred.
    Further the loser is entitled to know why.  In relation to ground 2 and
    Article 3 the judge did refer to Said but failed to identify  paragraph
    20 of Said.  In Said the Court of Appeal found the test for  Article  3
    was different when looking at destitution.  Said  was  endorsed  by  MS
    (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345.  When looking at MOJ and destitution it
    was wrong to conclude  that  it  led  to  serious  harm  in  breach  of
    Convention obligations by virtue of Article 3.  The judge had  referred
    to SB but had not mentioned it at his findings and had just applied MOJ
    ignoring that MOJ must be distinguished.

15. It was clear that the judge failed to apply the correct approach to MOJ
    and  elevated  to  the  threshold   of  N  or  now  AM  (Zimbabwe)  the
    appellant's circumstances which did not meet the threshold.

16. MA (Somalia) at paragraphs 24 to  33  explained  how  cessation  should
    interplay.

17. Ms Bayati relied on her Rule 24 submissions in that the judge  did  not
    approach cessation incorrectly and noted the test for cessation and the
    test for Article 3.  There was still an individual  approach  required.
    It was evident how the appellant had been granted  refugee  status  and
    there were important individualised considerations in relation to  this
    appellant.   The  judge  sets  out  his  findings  of  fact   and   the
    circumstances in the  first  instance  and  set  out  the  law  finding
    specifically a risk of ill-treatment.  The judge applied  the  mirrored
    approach finding a non-temporary change for this particular  appellant.
    In relation to ground 2 and the approach to Article 3 the judge set out
    the law at paragraphs 10 to 17 and appreciated the  correct  test  when
    considering Article 3.  It was not simply  that  the  living  standards
    were below the acceptable level.  The judge considered the  appellant's
    vulnerability and he did not make a  finding  on  the  basis  that  the
    general conditions in the IDP camp reached a certain threshold.

18. The Tribunal in SB addressed the question  of  cessation  and  endorsed
    what was said by MS (Somalia) on Article 3.

19. Ms Cunha reiterated that the judge had not taken into account Said  and
    paragraphs 30 to 31 was not where the rationale comes  in.   The  judge
    failed to give reasons and  conflated  considerations  in  relation  to
    Article 3 and misapplied MOJ.  Paragraph 307 should be departed from as
    it is not a breach of Article 3.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    person would avail himself of clan  support  and  get  money  from  the
    Secretary of State.

Analysis

20. In relation to ground 1 and whether the judge had taken into account in
    assessing the issue of cessation whether there had been  a  durable  or
    non-temporary change in Somalia, specifically in Mogadishu, in relation
    to the issue of persecution, it is clear that the judge  at  paragraphs
    10 to 19 set out the law and in particular noted at paragraph  14  that
    the burden of proof was on the respondent to the normal civil  standard
    of the balance of probabilities.  When directing himself the  judge  at
    paragraph 15 stated, ""Ceasing to exist" requires there to have been  a
    durable change, though it is not necessary for the  durable  change  to
    have occurred throughout the country in question."  That  reference  to
    cessation is  given  separately  from  considerations  in  relation  to
    Article 3.

21. Arden LJ in MA (Somalia) confirmed that there was  a  symmetry  between
    the grant and cessation of refugee status and albeit that 'A  cessation
    decision does not involve the  question  whether  Article  3  would  be
    violated' this does not preclude a requirement for  the  individualised
    approach'.  The judge was clearly aware of  the  authority  as  it  was
    cited and with particular reference to paragraph  49  which  states  as
    follows

         'Another way of putting the point is that  the  Refugee  Convention
         and the QD are not measures for  ensuring  political  and  judicial
         reform in the countries of origin  of  refugees.  The  risks  which
         entitle individuals to  protection  are  risks  which  affect  them
         personally and individually. It is an individualised approach. Just
         as it is no answer to an asylum claim that there is a legal  system
         which might in theory be able to protect them,  so  conversely  the
         absence of such a system is not an answer to a  cessation  decision
         if it is shown that the refugee has sufficient, lasting  protection
         in other ways or that the fear which gave  rise  to  the  need  for
         protection has in any event been superseded and disappeared'.

22. There is nothing to suggest that the judge failed to apply MA (Somalia)
    and  separately, in relation to Article 3, the judge correctly directed
    himself citing Said [2018] EWCA  Civ  442  which  held,  "There  is  no
    violation of Article 3 by reason only of a person being returned  to  a
    country for which economic reasons cannot provide him with basic living
    standards".  The judge specifically referred to this at paragraph 18 of
    his decision.

23. Albeit that the "mirrored approach" applies, it is for the Secretary of
    State to  show  that  there  has  been  a  fundamental  change  in  the
    conditions prevailing in the given country such  that  this  particular
    appellant  can  now  live  there  without  a   well-founded   fear   of
    persecution.  It was argued by  Ms  Bayati,  and  I  agree,  that  this
    requires both an assessment of the conditions to  which  the  appellant
    will return and a consideration  of  the  personal  characteristics  to
    determine whether he still has a well-founded fear of persecution.   It
    is the case that the appellant's claim is no different from that of his
    previous claim in that he was granted refugee status as being a  member
    of a minority clan but that said the appellant's circumstances (he  has
    had polio since the age of 3 and mobility issues and used crutches ever
    since) were part of the circumstances when the appellant claimed asylum
    were evident at that time.  This the judge noted at paragraph 23 of the
    decision when recording the appellant's case.

24. In relation to the cessation of refugee status, the judge  specifically
    noted that MOJ and Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
    00442 showed that there was no longer a real risk  of  persecution  for
    minority clan members in  Mogadishu.   The  judge  found,  however,  at
    paragraph 48 that the guidance did not state that clan  membership  was
    no longer important in  Somalia.   He  had  noted  MOJ  and  Others  as
    follows:

         "47. (a) Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.
                  not associated with the security  forces;  any  aspect  of
                  government  or  official  administration  of  any  NGO  or
                  international  organisation)  on  returning  to  Mogadishu
                  after a period of  absence  will  face  no  real  risk  of
                  persecution or risk of harm such as to require  protection
                  under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
                  Qualification Directive."

25. The judge noted that the significance of clan membership  in  Mogadishu
    had changed and that MOJ identified that there were no clan militias in
    Mogadishu and no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory
    treatment even for minority clan  members.   The  key  passage  in  the
    decision, however, comes at paragraph 48 where  the  judge  finds  that
    this guidance does  not  state  that  clan   membership  is  no  longer
    important in Somalia and, the judge was obliged, as part of the overall
    and up to date evidence, to consider  the  Country  Policy  Information
    Note on Somalia dated as recently as January 2019, which postdates  MOJ
    and Others, (decided in  2014),  and  which  at  3.1.1,  confirmed  the
    ongoing significance of clan membership even in Mogadishu.

26. It is open to the judge to depart from country  guidance  decisions  on
    very  strong grounds SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 but I am  not
    even persuaded that in this case there was even such a  departure  when
    considering an 'ordinary civilian'. The judge quoted  at  paragraph  59
    from the CPIN specifically with reference to minority clans as follows

         "Members of minority clans often lack vital protection  and  suffer
         pervasive discrimination ... Somali ethnic Bantus, as well as  some
         other minority clans reportedly continue to be highly vulnerable to
         discrimination".

27. It is clear that the element of discrimination on  clan  grounds  could
    still be present and thus could  still,  in  particular  circumstances,
    form part of persecution.  The  judge  correctly  directed  himself  to
    apply the individualised approach required and set out in MA  (Somalia)
    at paragraph 49 when reaching his conclusions  at  paragraph  50.   The
    judge clearly focuses on the point that although it  is  accepted  that
    non-dominant clans are not systematically subjected to violence because
    of their minority status, on the appellant's  particular  circumstances
    he would continue to be at risk of persecution in Mogadishu.  The judge
    states as follows,

         "50. I apply the individualised approach as set out in MA (Somalia)
             (paragraphs 49ff) and  find  that  even  if  members  of  non-
             dominant clans are not "systematically" subjected to  violence
             on account of their minority status,  the  country  background
             material, considered in conjunction with the guidance  in  MOJ
             and  Others  and  the  Appellant's  particular  circumstances,
             demonstrates that the he would  continue  to  be  at  risk  of
             persecution in  Mogadishu  and  that  there  would  not  be  a
             sufficiency of protection, such that  there  has  not  been  a
             durable change in circumstances for him."

    The judge made a specific finding at paragraph 51 that cumulatively the
    appellant's own personal characteristics together with the fact that he
    was from a minority clan, rendered the appellant "disproportionately at
    risk of significant ill-treatment that would amount to persecution."

28. The judge had correctly directed himself to the law  and  proceeded  to
    consider the applicable country guidance and the relevant case law from
    the Court of Appeal, assess the  up-to-date  background  evidence  with
    reference to minority  clans  and  reached  the  conclusion  that  this
    particular individual appellant having  regard  to  his  minority  clan
    together with his own particular circumstances would continue to be  at
    risk and that there would be no durable change in circumstances similar
    to those of which the appellant continued to endure.

29. The judge specifically and expressly addressed whether there  had  been
    durable and non-temporary risk of situations in Somalia in relation  to
    whether the appellant was still at risk of persecution.   There  is  no
    doubt that an individualised approach is still required as  made  clear
    by the Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia).

30. In relation to this ground I find no error as  specifically  stated  at
    paragraph 51 as follows.

31. Ms Cunha accepted that if there had been no error in  relation  to  the
    consideration of persecution that the arguments in relation to  Article
    3 fall away.   Bearing in mind my findings above  I  will  spend   less
    time addressing ground 2 but note that it was clear from  the  findings
    made by the judge that he considered  having  regard  to  all  material
    factors that the appellant was at risk of treatment contrary to Article
    3 and those findings are not simply based on a  general  assessment  of
    conditions in the camp  but  a  consideration  of  conditions  and  the
    individualised  risks  posed  to  this  appellant  which  included  his
    disability.

32. Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material  accepted  by  the  judge,  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

33. I conclude that the judge explained the central tenets of his  thinking
    and adequately explained his reasoning.



Notice of Decision

I find no error of law and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Helen Rimington   Date 5th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

