
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00150/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                     |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                  LORD UIST
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues.  We  make  clear  that  anonymity  was  not
granted to protect the appellant's reputation following his  conviction  for
criminal offences. However, it is appropriate to continue the order.  Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant/respondent:     Mr D. Sellwood instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the respondent/appellant:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    Both parties have been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. For the sake of clarity, we will continue to refer to them as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (Mr A) appealed the Secretary of State's decision  dated
    22 June 2017 to revoke refugee status with reference to  Article  1C(5)
    of the Refugee Convention (cessation), to certify the protection  claim
    with reference to section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002") (refoulement) and to refuse a  human  rights
    claim in the context of deportation proceedings.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds. He began by considering the  certificate
    made under section 72 NIAA  2002  and  noted  that  the  provision  was
    intended to  reflect  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  He
    outlined the relevant legal principles [16-21] and  considered  whether
    the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to  the
    community with reference to the evidence [22]. He  concluded  that  the
    appellant failed to rebut the presumption and that section  72  applied
    [23] in the following terms:

         "22.     In his submissions Mr Sellwood accepted that the appellant
             had been convicted of a serious  crime,  but  whether  it  was
             particularly serious in  all  the  circumstances  was  another
             matter. My analysis of all the facts is that  the  presumption
             has not been rebutted by the  evidence  in  this  appeal.  The
             circumstances of the robbery resulting in the sentence of four
             years was outlined in the sentencing remarks forming  part  of
             the respondent's bundle. The appellant was found,  with  three
             others, to have hit  the  victim  during  which  comparatively
             trivial items  were  stolen.  The  victim  was  not  seriously
             injured.  Notwithstanding  these  facts,  given  the   maximum
             penalty of five years that could have been imposed, I  believe
             that the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
             serious crime. The OASys assessment identified  the  appellant
             as posing a low-risk of  serious  harm  in  the  community  in
             respect of children, known adults and staff, and a medium risk
             to the public. In her clinical psychology report  Dr  Boucher,
             at the request of the appellant's  solicitors,  reported  that
             the  appellant  presented  with  symptoms   of   anxiety   and
             depression and difficulties with PTSD wherein he would benefit
             from individual weekly psychotherapy. Given negative  thoughts
             about being deported to Somalia, including the belief that  it
             would be the end of his life, it was envisaged that  he  would
             experience a deterioration in his psychological well-being and
             mental health. As to the risk  of  re-offending,  it  was  the
             doctor's opinion that the appellant was at  the  time  of  her
             report at a moderate to high risk of future  violence  and  of
             general  non-violent  re-offending  in  the  future.  Previous
             violent offences included the use of instruments (bottle, sand
             bags), sustained violent attacks and acts  of  violence  where
             there were a group of perpetrators. Any  future  violence  had
             the  potential  to  inflict  significant   psychological   and
             physical injuries. His previous victims had  included  members
             of the general public that  he  did  not  know  and  therefore
             future risk scenarios would include a risk of violence to  the
             general public.  So  far  as  'danger  to  the  community'  is
             concerned, it has been established that the danger is real and
             there is a real risk of repetition.

         23.      In all the circumstances s.72(1) of the Act  applies.  The
             consequence is that the appellant is excluded from  protection
             on the basis that Article 33(2) recited above applies to  him.
             As a result, the Convention does not prevent his removal  from
             the UK."

4.    Still under the heading of "Section 72 consideration", the judge  went
    on:

         "24.     However, it remains to determine whether the revocation of
             protection  status  breached  obligations  either  under   the
             Convention  or  based  on  an  entitlement   to   humanitarian
             protection and whether removal would breach obligations  under
             Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

         25.      After lengthy consideration I am of the opinion  that  the
             appellant has given truthful  evidence.  In  broad  terms  his
             immigration history and background have been established on  a
             balance of probabilities. It has  been  established  that  the
             appellant has been living in the UK for over  23  Years  since
             his  arrival  at  the  age  of  seven.  Prompted  by  his  own
             unacceptable  and  criminal  conduct,  his   education   ended
             abruptly at 14. Since then a life of crime has  dominated  his
             lifestyle. Save for one-time random help to his mother  and  a
             cousin, he has never had full-time employment and has no basic
             qualifications  to  apply  for  any  particular  job.  As   to
             Mogadishu, this is indeed a foreign city to  him.  He  has  no
             nuclear or extended family there. Given his lack of  knowledge
             of clan life in Somalia, any prospect  of  engaging  with  his
             clan was very limited in his circumstances. He simply does not
             have  the  profile  and  resources  to  access   opportunities
             produced from the economic boom in Mogadishu. Even if he  were
             to receive some limited financial support from family  in  the
             UK, his relocation in Mogadishu with no real formal  links  to
             the city given that he left there 23 years ago at the  age  of
             seven, there would  be  a  real  risk  of  no  alternative  in
             makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp."

5.    The  judge  then  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  excluded  from
    Humanitarian Protection for the same reasons given relating to  section
    72 [26]. He then went on to consider whether  the  appellant's  removal
    would breach his rights under Article 3  of  the  European  Convention.
    Under the heading "Article 3" he considered general case  law  relating
    to the application of Article 3 [27-28]. He quoted the findings of  the
    Upper Tribunal in MOJ & Others (Somalia) CG [2014] UKUT  00442  earlier
    in the decision [8] and returned to it when he considered  whether  the
    appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill-treatment  if
    returned. At [28(b)] and  [29]  his  findings  on  Article  3  were  as
    follows:

         "28      ...

             (b) The country guidance in MOJ was limited to the  issues  of
                  whether those returning or relocating to  Mogadishu  could
                  succeed  in  claims  for  refugee   status,   humanitarian
                  protection  or  protection   against   refoulement   under
                  Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR, solely on the basis that they
                  were civilians without adequate  protection.  The  present
                  appellant was excluded  from  protection  or  humanitarian
                  protection and  the  refugee  convention  because  of  his
                  serious offending. He could only rely  on  his  Convention
                  rights. Paras 407(h) and 408 of MOJ  were  concerned  with
                  the ability of a  returning  Somali  to  support  himself.
                  While  they  might  have  some  relevance  in  considering
                  whether a removal to Somalia would violate Article 3, they
                  could not  be  a  surrogate  for  an  examination  of  the
                  circumstances to determine whether  such  a  breach  would
                  occur. If a Somali national  brought  himself  within  the
                  rubric of para 408 of MOJ it did not follow  that  he  had
                  established that removal to Somalia would  breach  Article
                  3. Such an approach  would  be  inconsistence  (sic)  with
                  jurisprudence. The position was accurately stated at  para
                  422 of  MOJ,  which  drew  a  proper  distinction  between
                  humanitarian protection and Article 3 and recognised  that
                  the individual circumstances of the person concerned  must
                  be considered. An appeal to Article 3 which suggested that
                  the person concerned would face poverty on removal  should
                  be viewed by reference to  the  test  in  N.  Impoverished
                  conditions  which  were  the  direct  result  of   violent
                  activities might be viewed differently.

         29.      On the sensitive facts in this appeal the appellant  faces
             the real risk in the absence of prospects of employment,  clan
             support and the availability of remittances of any value  that
             he would not be able to establish himself in Mogadishu."

6.    The judge allowed the appeal under Article  3.  He  made  no  findings
    relating to Article 8 of the European Convention.

7.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The judge erred in considering the maximum sentence for the offence
         and not the  individual  circumstances  in  assessing  whether  the
         appellant had been convicted of a 'particularly serious crime'  for
         the purpose of section 72 contrary to the  guidance  in  IH  (s.72:
         'Particularly Serious Crime') Eritrea [2009] UKUAT 00012.

     ii) The judge failed to make any findings relating to Article 8 of  the
         European Convention.

8.    The  respondent  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The finding that he would be at risk on return under Article 3  was
         based on a flawed approach to the country guidance  in  MOJ  and  a
         failure to give adequate reasons.

     ii) The judge failed to consider whether the appellant would be able to
         find employment even if he had no connections in Mogadishu.





Decision and reasons

9.    After having considered the submissions made by both parties  we  have
    concluded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  although  not  as
    rigorous in its analysis as it could have been, and despite weaknesses,
    did not involve the making of an error of law that would have made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

The appellant's first ground - section 72

10.   The judge directed himself to the decision in IH  (Eritrea)  [16]  and
    was obliged to consider the structure of the  statutory  provisions  in
    section 72(2), which gives rise to  a  rebuttable  presumption  that  a
    person has been convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and  to
    constitute a danger to the community if he  is  (a)  convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom of  an  offence;  and  (b)  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years. The index offence that gave rise to
    the decision to deport the appellant was a conviction for  robbery  for
    which he received a sentence of four years' imprisonment.

11.    Neither  the   grounds,   nor   Mr   Sellwood's   oral   submissions,
    particularised how or why the judge's findings might have offended  the
    principles outlined in IH (Eritrea). In fact, more recent  and  weighty
    authority on the point is the Court of Appeal decision in EN (Serbia) v
    SSHD [2009] INLR 459 where the court emphasised that section 72 must be
    read to be compatible with the  relevant  principles  relating  to  the
    application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  This  required
    an opportunity for the person concerned to rebut the  presumption  that
    he had committed a 'particularly serious  crime'  and  that  he  was  a
    'danger to the community'. In this case, the length of  the  conviction
    was itself sufficient to give rise to  the  statutory  presumption  and
    shifted the evidential burden to the appellant to show that he was  not
    convicted of a particularly serious crime or that he was  a  danger  to
    the community.

12.   Mr Sellwood argued  that  the  judge  erred  because,  in  considering
    whether the appellant had been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious
    crime he relied upon the upper limit of the sentence  that  could  have
    been imposed to underpin his finding. When [22] of the decision is read
    as a whole, clearly this is not the case. The judge used the upper five-
    year sentence as a comparator to illustrate why the  sentence  of  four
    years' imprisonment was sufficiently serious on the scale of  offences.
    In any event, we were not referred to  any  evidence  that  would  have
    rebutted the statutory  presumption  that  a  sentence  of  two  years'
    imprisonment is sufficient to  show  that  the  appellant  committed  a
    particularly serious crime. It was open to the judge to  conclude  that
    an offence  of  this  nature,  a  street  robbery  with  violence,  was
    particularly serious given the length of the sentence.

13.   There is no challenge to the judge's  assessment  that  the  appellant
    posed a danger to the community. His findings were well within a  range
    of reasonable responses to the risk assessments, which showed that  the
    appellant was assessed to be a medium risk to the public and that there
    was a "moderate to high risk of future violence  and  of  general  non-
    violent re-offending in the future".

14.   We note that the judge went on, under this heading,  to  say  that  he
    needed to determine whether revocation of  protection  status  breached
    obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  in  relation  to  his
    entitlement to Humanitarian Protection. His subsequent findings at [25]
    did not entail an evaluation of the evidence he set out earlier in  the
    decision, and did not specifically engage with the relevant legal  test
    relating to cessation under Article 1C(5) of  the  Refugee  Convention,
    which would have required some analysis as to whether the appellant was
    still at risk on grounds of his clan membership. Neither  party  sought
    to challenge any failures in relation to the findings that appeared  to
    relate (albeit unclearly) to the issue of cessation.

15.   Having provided  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  section  72
    applied the judge was obliged by operation of statute  to  dismiss  the
    appeal in so far as it related to Refugee Convention grounds.  Even  if
    he made no clear findings relating to cessation, the overall outcome of
    the Refugee Convention appeal would have been the same.

The respondent's ground - Article 3

16.   To maintain a logical structure, we turn to the arguments put  forward
    by the respondent relating to  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    Article 3. If his findings under the heading "Article 3" were viewed in
    isolation, we would have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  they  were
    inadequate. Paragraphs [27-28] outlined general case law  and  made  no
    findings on the facts of the case. Paragraph [29]  amounts  to  nothing
    more than a bare statement that the appellant faced an Article  3  risk
    because he would not be able to establish himself in Mogadishu  without
    any analysis of the evidence and without giving reasons why he came  to
    that conclusion.

17.   The respondent argues that the judge failed to consider  the  findings
    made in MOJ adequately. The Upper Tribunal considered evidence to  show
    that those returning from the West may have  an  advantage  in  seeking
    employment in Mogadishu because they are likely to be  better  educated
    and considered more attractive as employees  [351].  The  fact  that  a
    person has had a long period of  absence  from  the  city  and  had  no
    experience of living there as an adult were not sufficient factors,  in
    themselves,  to  make  the   prospect   of   return   unreasonable   or
    unacceptable. The judge failed to consider whether financial assistance
    from the Facilitated Returns Scheme might be sufficient to support  the
    appellant while he established  himself  in  Mogadishu.  There  was  no
    reason why he could not seek unskilled employment in Mogadishu.

18.   We observe that the grounds, as  drafted,  set  out  submissions  that
    amount to disagreements with the decision rather  than  particularising
    any material errors of law.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Avery's  submission
    focused on the inadequacy of the judge's findings. We  agree  that  the
    findings made under the  heading  "Article  3",  if  taken  alone,  are
    inadequate.  We  have  considered  whether   the   judge's   conclusion
    nevertheless is sustainable if his findings are read as a whole.

19.   It seems clear that the judge had in mind the findings in MOJ  because
    he quoted the full headnote at [8]. The relevant parts of the  headnote
    that the judge appeared to base his findings on are:

         "(vii)   A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.

         ...

         (ix)     If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
             Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family  or
             close relatives in the city to assist him  in  re-establishing
             himself on return, there will need to be a careful  assessment
             of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations   will
             include, but are not limited to:

                . Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                . Length of absence from Mogadishu;

                . Access to financial resources;

                . Prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self-employment;

                . Availability of remittances from abroad;

                . Means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                . Why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables and  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

         ...

         (xi)     It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

         (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
             who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to
             live in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)
             risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On the other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan  with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards."

20.   Mr Sellwood pointed out that, at [13-14] of the  decision,  the  judge
    summarised the appellant's case and the main aspects of the evidence he
    relied upon, which included an expert report by Dr Hammond relating  to
    the conditions the appellant might face if returned to Mogadishu.  This
    indicates that the judge was aware of the evidence before him but there
    is no analysis of the evidence elsewhere in  the  decision.   The  only
    findings that touch on the issue were those made at [25] quoted  above.
    What is said at [25], again, largely consists of bare findings  without
    any real  explanation  as  to  how  and  why  the  judge  came  to  the
    conclusions he did and on  what  evidence.  That  should  be  the  core
    function of a judicial decision-maker.

21.   Nevertheless, we note that  the  respondent  has  not  challenged  the
    factual statements made by the judge regarding the appellant's personal
    circumstances,  which  were  generally  supported  by  evidence.    The
    respondent challenges the conclusions drawn from  those  circumstances.
    The respondent argues that the facts do not bring the appellant  within
    the category of cases that might  fall  below  acceptable  humanitarian
    standards.

22.   The appellant entered the UK with his  family  as  a  young  child  in
    1995. By 2003 he was granted settlement in the UK. At the date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing he was 30 years old and had spent  most  of
    his life in the UK. The appellant left school at 15 years  old  without
    qualifications. Despite having permission to do so, he says that he has
    never worked in the UK. That is not to his credit. Instead, he embarked
    on a life of criminality, but it also means that  he  has  little  work
    experience to point to if  he  attempted  to  look  for  employment  in
    Mogadishu. Mr  Sellwood  pointed  out  that  the  section  of  MOJ  the
    respondent relies on relates to the opportunities for returnees who are
    likely to be better educated. It would not  apply  to  this  appellant.
    Given his length of residence in the UK, and the young age he  arrived,
    we find that it was open to the judge to find that Mogadishu was likely
    to be a "foreign city to him". The appellant's family in  the  UK  were
    consistent in saying that they had no contact with  anyone  in  Somalia
    and would be unable to provide him with financial support. Mr  Sellwood
    accepted that the  judge  did  not  address  the  financial  assistance
    available from the Facilitated Returns Scheme. He argued that it  would
    have made no difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  Any  support
    provided by the scheme was temporary.  The  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant would struggle to find work and  could  not  rely  on  family
    support, in the long term, would have been the  same  with  or  without
    temporary 'stop-gap' funding from the Facilitated Returns Scheme.

23.   Although the judge failed to evaluate the expert  report,  it  is  not
    suggested that Dr Hammond was not qualified to give an expert  opinion.
    She is a Reader at the Department of Development Studies at the  School
    of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) with work experience in the Horn
    of Africa. The judge noted at [4] that the appellant was recognised  as
    a refugee in 2011 because he was a member of the Sheikhal Logobe  clan,
    which Dr Hammond confirms is a minority clan.  Although  minority  clan
    membership is no longer likely to give rise to a real risk  of  serious
    harm, taken alone, the Upper Tribunal in MOJ made clear that  it  might
    be a relevant factor in assessing the conditions a person might face in
    Mogadishu and the availability of support from other clan members:  see
    headnote (vii).

24.   We have outlined some problematic aspects of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, which was long on recitation of  the  law  and  evidence  and
    short on evaluation and detailed reasons  for  some  of  the  findings.
    Despite  those  inadequacies  we  are  satisfied  that  any   criticism
    regarding lack of rigour and reasoning is not sufficiently  serious  to
    be elevated to an error of law.

25.   It seems clear that the judge had in mind the  factors  identified  by
    the Upper Tribunal in MOJ and that his findings at  [25]  were  broadly
    consistent with the country guidance.  The judge could and should  have
    conducted an evaluative assessment of the evidence with  more  detailed
    reasons, but when the decision is read as a whole, the reasons for  his
    conclusion relating to Article 3  become  sufficiently  clear:  see  MK
    (Duty to give reasons) [2013] UKUT 641.

26.   The  respondent  did  not  challenge  the  findings  relating  to  the
    appellant's personal circumstances, only how those circumstances should
    have been assessed in light of  the  country  guidance.  When  properly
    analysed, the respondent's grounds set out why, in his view, the  judge
    should have come to a different  conclusion,  but  do  not  identify  a
    material error of law. The judge's conclusion on Article 3 was within a
    range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

The appellant's second ground - Article 8

27.   It becomes clear that we need say little about the appellant's  second
    ground of appeal. The ground, as pleaded, did not say how  or  why  the
    failure to make findings relating to Article  8  would  have  made  any
    material difference to the decision if the findings on  Article  3  are
    sustainable. The relevant ground of appeal is whether the  decision  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   The  appellant
    succeeded on that ground in relation to Article 3 and  any  failure  to
    consider Article 8 would  have  made  no  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

28.   In any event, the  appellant  would  have  to  show  'very  compelling
    reasons' to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  due  to  the
    length of his sentence. Aside from his length of residence and the fact
    that he has other adult family members  living  in  the  UK  there  was
    little evidence of any compelling circumstances relating to his life in
    the  UK.  The  appellant  has  achieved   very   little   despite   the
    opportunities that life in the UK might have afforded him. The  medical
    evidence was not likely to be sufficiently compelling to  outweigh  the
    strong public interest in deportation in  a  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8. In all likelihood, any decision under Article 8  would  have
    relied on the same factors that were already considered  under  Article
    3.

29.   We concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

The decision shall stand.


Signed      [pic]      Date   08 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

