
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00172/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 21 July 2021                             |On: 18 August 2021           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                     YA
                           (Anonymity Order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a hybrid hearing in which Ms Cunha appeared  remotely,  via
   Microsoft Teams, but  the  hearing  was  otherwise  face-to-face  as  the
   appellant had requested.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 30 January  1996.  He  claims
   to have entered the United Kingdom on 18  August  2007,  aged  11  years,
   together with his mother  (his  father  arrived  two  years  later).  The
   appellant was included in his mother's asylum claim, made  on  20  August
   2007, as her dependant. His mother's application was refused, but she was
   successful in an appeal  against  that  decision  in  October  2008.  Her
   appeal, in which the appellant was a co-appellant,  was  allowed  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal on the basis that she was at risk as a  Shia  in  the
   area in which she was living with her Sunni husband and children and that
   she could not live elsewhere in Iraq with her husband  because  of  their
   mixed marriage. The First-tier Tribunal found that she was accordingly at
   risk as a member of a particular social group and as  a  result  of  that
   decision she was recognised as a refugee  and  granted  leave  to  remain
   until 5 February 2014, with the appellant granted leave in line with her.
   On  9  April  2015  the  family  including  the  appellant  were  granted
   indefinite leave to remain.

3. On 26 August 2016 the appellant was convicted of having a blade/  sharply
   pointed article in public and was sentenced, on the same  day,  to  eight
   weeks' imprisonment. On 5 October 2016 he  was  convicted  of  possession
   with intent to supply class A drug cocaine,  possession  with  intent  to
   supply class A drug heroin and possession with intent to supply  class  A
   drug crack cocaine. He was sentenced to three years' detention in a Young
   Offenders' Institution.

4. On 16 November 2016 a decision  was  made  to  deport  the  appellant  in
   accordance with section 32(5) of the 2007 Act and he was invited to  seek
   to rebut the presumption under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration
   Act 2002 that he had been convicted of a particularly serious  crime  and
   constituted a danger to the community. His parents responded in a  letter
   dated 1 December 2016. They made further representations in a letter of 5
   December 2016 enclosing the appellant's handwritten statement  and  other
   documents.

5. On 19 July 2017 the appellant was notified of the respondent's  intention
   to cease his refugee status under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention
   and paragraph 339A(v) of the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
   circumstances in connection with  which  he  had  been  recognised  as  a
   refugee  had  ceased  to  exist.  The  respondent  considered  that   the
   appellant's circumstances  had  changed  in  that  he  was  no  longer  a
   dependant upon his  mother  but  was  an  adult,  and  that  the  country
   situation had changed and the background information showed that he would
   not be at risk as a Sunni Muslim from the Shia militia or from Daesh.  On
   16 August 2017 the respondent notified the  UNHCR  of  the  intention  to
   revoke the appellant's refugee status.

6. The appellant's  representatives  made  submissions  in  response  on  18
   September 2017, pointing out that the appellant was Shia  and  not  Sunni
   Muslim and that he would be at risk as a  Shia.  It  was  stated  in  the
   submissions that one of the appellant's brothers had  been  killed  in  a
   bomb explosion in Iraq, another brother had been killed  by  Al-Qaeda,  a
   third brother had drowned at sea when escaping Iraq and  his  sister  had
   been kidnapped by Al-Qaeda. The family were still at risk  from  Al-Qaeda
   and the risk would be particularly high in Baghdad which was dominated by
   Sunni Muslims. The appellant had no family to  return  to  in  Iraq.  His
   surviving family members were all in the UK. He had only  limited  Arabic
   and had been educated in the  UK.  It  was  submitted  further  that  the
   appellant suffered from mental health problems  including  psychosis  and
   that he had been hospitalised in the UK as a result.

7. In its response of 5 June 2018 to the respondent's  notice  of  intention
   to cease the  appellant's  refugee  status,  the  UNHCR  noted  that  the
   respondent's decision had been based on country information  relating  to
   the  Sunni  minority  whereas  the  appellant  was  Shia.  Further,   the
   respondent had applied Article 1C(5) incorrectly by considering a  change
   in the appellant's individual circumstances, namely his age, rather  than
   the country situation. The respondent therefore still needed to undertake
   an assessment of the country situation and the  appellant's  fears  as  a
   Shia.

8. On 3 November 2018 the respondent signed a Deportation Order against  the
   appellant and served the Order on him on 5 November 2018, together with a
   decision to refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights  claim.  In  that
   decision the respondent certified that the presumption in  section  72(2)
   of the NIAA 2002 applied to the appellant and that Article 33(2)  of  the
   Refugee Convention applied such that the Convention did not  prevent  his
   removal from the  UK.  The  respondent  also  considered  that  paragraph
   399A(v) of the  immigration  rules  and  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
   Convention applied to the appellant  and  that  his  refugee  status  had
   therefore ceased. The respondent did not consider that the appellant  was
   at risk as a Shia Muslim and considered that he did not  have  a  profile
   which would put him at risk from Daesh. As the Shia were in the  majority
   in Baghdad the appellant would be able to return  there.  The  respondent
   noted that the appellant's mother's appeal had been allowed on the  basis
   that she could not safely live together with her husband who  was  Sunni,
   but that she would otherwise be able to live in Baghdad as a Shia Muslim.
   The respondent considered  that  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  the
   appellant's mental health issues reached the high threshold to  establish
   a breach of Article 3. It was considered that  the  appellant  could  not
   meet the requirements of paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  on  the
   basis of his  private  life  and  that  there  were  no  very  compelling
   circumstances outweighing the public interest  in  his  deportation.  The
   respondent did not accept that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting
   relationship in the UK with his claimed partner, did not accept that  his
   relationship with his parents extended beyond normal emotional  ties  and
   did not  accept  his  account  of  the  kidnapping  of  his  sister.  The
   respondent accordingly found that the appellant could not meet any of the
   exceptions to automatic deportation in section 33.

9. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 8  August  2019
   in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Rothwell. There was medical  evidence
   before the judge stating that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to  give  oral
   evidence and he therefore did not do so.  The  appellants'  parents  gave
   evidence before the judge. Their evidence was that the appellant's father
   had been back to Iraq to visit the graves of his sons, but it was  denied
   that he had grandchildren in Iraq as  had  been  mentioned  in  a  letter
   previously sent to the Home Office requesting the return of his passport.
   The judge dealt firstly with the revocation of  the  appellant's  refugee
   status and concluded that there  were  no  valid  grounds  cited  by  the
   respondent for ceasing to recognise the appellant as a refugee  and  that
   the respondent had misinterpreted Article  1C(5),  as  explained  in  the
   UNHCR letter, by considering his changed circumstances only  in  relation
   to him having become an adult. The judge then addressed  the  section  72
   certificate. She took account of a report from a  clinical  psychologist,
   Dr Wheeler, who considered that the appellant remained a medium risk  and
   was not stable. The judge concluded that the presumption  in  section  72
   had not been rebutted by the appellant. The judge  found,  however,  that
   the appellant was at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3, both  as  a
   Shia Muslim and because of  his  mental  health,  and  further  that  his
   removal would breach Article 8 owing to very significant obstacles to his
   integration in Iraq. She accordingly allowed the appeal on  human  rights
   grounds.

10. Permission to appeal against that decision was sought by the  respondent
   on five grounds: that the judge had misunderstood  the  position  of  the
   SSHD in applying Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention; that the  judge
   had not adequately explained why the appellant's ethnicity would put  him
   at risk; that the  judge  had  failed  to  explain  which  threshold  the
   appellant had met for the purposes of Article 3; that the judge had  used
   Article 8 as a watered down Article 3; and that the judge had  failed  to
   assess the appellant's ability to obtain a replacement CSID card.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  on  8  October
   2019.

12. At a hearing on 27 November 2019, the Honourable Lord  Matthews  sitting
   as an Upper Tribunal Judge, and myself, sitting as a  panel,  found  that
   there were material errors of law in the judge's decision  such  that  it
   had to be set aside and re-decided, on the following basis:

         "19. We do not agree with Ms Fujiwala that the judge, having upheld
         the respondent's  section  72  certificate,  erred  by  considering
         Article 1C(5), as it is clear from the case of Essa that there were
         other  rights  flowing  from  refugee   status   which   were   not
         extinguished by the section  72  certificate.  The  effect  of  the
         section 72 decision was not that the  appellant  was  no  longer  a
         refugee, but that his removal was not prevented on the basis of his
         refugee status, ie he became a "removeable refugee", subject to the
         identification of  an  Article  3  risk.  It  was  therefore  still
         necessary  for  the  judge  to  consider  the  appellant's  ongoing
         eligibility to be recognised  as  a  refugee  and  thus  the  judge
         properly went on to  consider  Article  1C(5).  We  agree  with  Ms
         Fujiwala  that  the  section  72  certificate  should   have   been
         considered first by the judge, but nothing material arises  out  of
         that.

         20.  However we find that the judge erred  in  law  in  her  actual
         consideration of the cessation provisions  in  Article  1C(5).  The
         judge relied on the case of Mosira as undermining the  respondent's
         approach to Article 1C(5). The judge observed that the  basis  upon
         which the respondent found that the appellant's  circumstances  had
         changed was that he was no longer a child and no  longer  dependent
         upon his mother, and she considered that that  had  been  found  in
         Mosira to be an incorrect basis upon which to apply  the  cessation
         provisions. In so doing, and in relying upon Mosira in that regard,
         the judge erred in two  respects.  Firstly,  the  circumstances  in
         Mosira were entirely different  to  those  of  this  appellant  and
         secondly, the respondent did not  apply  the  cessation  provisions
         solely on the basis of the appellant ceasing to be  dependent  upon
         his mother.


         21.  In the case of Mosira, the appellant was admitted to the UK by
         way of family reunion to join  his  mother  who  had  been  granted
         refugee status and that was  the  sole  basis  upon  which  he  was
         granted refugee status. His mother's status had  been  acquired  on
         the grounds of a lack of medical facilities in  Zimbabwe  to  treat
         her  medical  condition.  The  respondent  sought  to   cease   the
         appellant's refugee status on the  basis  of  improvements  in  the
         political situation in Zimbabwe. The  Court  of  Appeal  considered
         that the change in the threat posed by the Zimbabwe authorities had
         no bearing upon the circumstances  in  connection  with  which  the
         appellant had been recognised as a refugee, which  had  been  under
         the 2003 family reunion policy, and that it could not be said  that
         the circumstances giving rise to the grant of  refugee  status  had
         ceased. However in this case  the  appellant  was  granted  refugee
         status as a dependant on his mother's claim to be at risk  in  Iraq
         owing to the family's ethnic  circumstances,  namely  his  parents'
         mixed marriage,  and  therefore  the  country  situation,  and  any
         changes  in  that  situation,  was  entirely  relevant.   That   is
         consistent with the approach in JS (Uganda),  where  the  Court  of
         Appeal observed at [157] that: "The word "circumstances"  is  broad
         and general. It is apposite to cover both  relationship  and  risk.
         The "circumstances" in connection with which JS was recognised as a
         refugee were clearly not simply that JS was  his  mother's  son  or
         that  his   mother   had   been   granted   refugee   status;   the
         "circumstances" necessarily  included,  the  risks  to  which  JS's
         mother was subject  arising  from  her  political  affiliations  in
         Uganda which led to her being recognised a refugee."

         22.  We disagree with Ms Griffiths in her  attempt  to  distinguish
         the appellant's circumstances from those  in  JS  (Uganda)  and  we
         disagree with her submission that  the  respondent  considered  the
         wrong circumstances in the  appellant's  case.  The  appellant  was
         granted refugee status as a dependant on his mother's claim  to  be
         at risk in Iraq as a Shia owing to her marriage  to  a  Sunni  man.
         Those were the circumstances that the respondent  had  to  consider
         for the purposes of Article 1C(5) and those were the  circumstances
         which the respondent did consider, from paragraph 20 of the 19 July
         2017 notification of intention to revoke refugee status (albeit  it
         on the erroneous basis that the appellant  was  Sunni  rather  than
         Shia) and, on the  correct  basis,  from  page  5  of  the  refusal
         decision  of  5  November  2018.  The  respondent   gave   specific
         consideration to the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
         appellant's mother's appeal whereby the Tribunal had found that the
         risk only existed where the family  were  to  be  living  together,
         whereas, as the respondent properly  observed  at  page  9  of  the
         refusal decision,  the  appellant  would  not  be  living  in  such
         circumstances on return to Iraq but would be returning as a  single
         Shia man. It was on that basis  that  the  respondent  went  on  to
         consider the risk to the appellant as a member of the  Shia  faith.
         There was accordingly nothing inconsistent in that approach  to  JS
         (Uganda) or to the 'mirror image' approach as set out in MA and MS.

         23.  The judge was accordingly wrong to find that the  respondent's
         decision to revoke refugee status had been made purely on the basis
         that the appellant had reached the age of majority and on the basis
         that he was no longer a dependant of his mother and she  was  wrong
         to conclude that  the  case  of  Mosira  precluded  the  conclusion
         reached  by  the  respondent.  She   clearly   misinterpreted   the
         respondent's approach to Article 1C(5) and, as a result, failed  to
         consider the relevant issue which was whether the circumstances had
         changed in regard to the original basis for the  grant  of  asylum,
         namely the risk to the appellant and his mother on the basis of his
         parents'  mixed  marriage.  Accordingly  the  judge's  decision  on
         Article 1C(5) cannot stand and must be set aside.

         24.  That would, however, be largely immaterial if  the  judge  had
         properly assessed the current risk on return to Iraq. However we do
         not consider that she did. The judge did not consider  the  ongoing
         risk to the appellant on the basis of his parents'  mixed  marriage
         and in any event that was not the basis of the case as put  in  the
         appellant's submissions of 18 September 2017, which was, rather,  a
         generalised  risk  from  Al-Qaeda  as  a  Shia  Muslim.  The  judge
         considered the appellant's claim in that  respect  and  found,  for
         reasons given in one paragraph at [72] that he would be at risk  on
         that basis. We do not agree with Ms Griffiths that adequate reasons
         were given by the judge for so concluding. The judge  made  limited
         and selective references to  the  CPIN  report  of  2018  and  also
         briefly referred to parts of the expert report of Christopher Bluth
         which were consistent with the CPIN report,  but  did  not  address
         either report in any depth. The expert report was, in the main,  an
         assessment of the security situation in Iraq in general rather than
         a focussed assessment of the appellant's situation.  We  note  that
         the report makes various  references  to  the  Shia  being  in  the
         majority and being  the  main  fighting  force  of  the  government
         (paragraph 5.2.10 to 5.2.12)  which  the  judge  did  not  address.
         Neither did the judge address the point raised by the respondent at
         the hearing before her that it was not  clear  if  the  expert  was
         aware of the appellant's father's return visits to Iraq. We  cannot
         see  how  the  judge's  limited  assessment   of   the   background
         information could possibly lead to a conclusion that all Shias were
         at risk on return to Iraq, which was essentially what she found  at
         [72].

         25.  Likewise we consider there to be  merit  in  the  respondent's
         third ground of appeal. We  agree  with  the  respondent  that  the
         judge's conclusions in relation to Article 3  and  the  appellant's
         mental health fail to demonstrate a proper engagement with all  the
         evidence and with the test in J. Although mention is made  at  [73]
         to J and Y the judge did not go on  to  explain  how  the  relevant
         test, and in particular the particularly high threshold referred to
         in J at [28], had been met. The  judge  focussed  entirely  on  the
         report of Dr Wheeler, who had seen the appellant  on  one  occasion
         for two hours and 15 minutes, but did not appear to have regard  to
         the extensive medical notes setting  out  the  appellant's  medical
         history or to consider the  lack  of  recent  evidence  from  those
         treating him.

         26.  With regard to the judge's findings on Article 8,  we  do  not
         agree with the respondent that the judge simply used Article 8 as a
         "watered down" Article 3, since she considered factors in  addition
         to the appellant's mental health in assessing  whether  there  were
         "very significant obstacles to integration"  for  the  purposes  of
         paragraph 399A of the immigration rules. However, in light  of  the
         fact that we have found errors of law in the  judge's  decision  on
         Article 3, and given that the judge's  findings  on  Article  3  in
         relation to the appellant's mental  health  necessarily  influenced
         her conclusions on Article 8, we consider that the decision has  to
         be set aside and re-made in that respect as well. We note, however,
         in so doing, Ms Fijiwala's indication that the judge's findings  at
         [80] are not challenged in relation to paragraph 399A(a) and (b).

         27.  For all these reasons we conclude that  the  judge's  decision
         cannot stand and must be set aside and re-made  to  the  extent  we
         have stated. We do not agree with the parties that the matter ought
         to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The underlying facts  of
         this case are  essentially  unchallenged,  as  is  the  section  72
         certificate  and  the  findings  at  [80],  and  therefore  it   is
         appropriate for the case to be retained in the Upper Tribunal.






         DECISION

         28.  Accordingly we allow the Secretary of State's  appeal  and  we
         set aside Judge Rothwell's decision in the  appellant's  appeal  to
         the extent stated. The matter will be listed for a resumed  hearing
         at a date to be notified to the parties, for the decision to be re-
         made."

Hearing and Submissions

13. The matter then came before me for  the  decision  to  be  re-made.  The
   delay in that happening was due to the pandemic which resulted in various
   adjournments, and due to the appellant objecting to a remote hearing. The
   matter was eventually listed for a face-to-face hearing, when that became
   possible, and the appellant and his father,  as  well  as  Ms  Griffiths,
   attended in person. However, as Ms Cunha had tested positive  for  Covid-
   19, her attendance was remote, but that did not cause  any  problems  and
   the appeal was able to proceed.

14. Ms Griffiths confirmed that there would be no oral  evidence  since  the
   underlying facts were not in dispute. She was  relying  upon  an  updated
   skeleton argument together  with  a  consolidated  bundle  containing  an
   updated country expert report from Christoph Bluth dated 1 April 2020 and
   an updated clinical psychology addendum  report  from  Dr  Vicky  Wheeler
   dated 16 March 2019,  as  well  as  further  general  background  country
   reports.

15.    Prior to the hearing Ms Fijiwala, who had represented the  respondent
   at the error of law hearing, produced a skeleton argument for the resumed
   hearing, although it was Ms Cunha who was the presenting officer  at  the
   hearing itself. In her skeleton argument, Ms Fijiwala raised a new issue,
   namely that the respondent wished to withdraw  the  concession  that  the
   appellant was a refugee as defined under the Refugee Convention, and that
   there  was  therefore  no  onus  on  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
   circumstances under which the appellant  had  (mistakenly)  been  granted
   refugee status, had ceased to exist. Ms Fijiwala relied on the case of JS
   (Uganda)  in  that  respect,  where  the  same  issue  occurred.  In  the
   alternative  it  was  argued  that  the  circumstances  under  which  the
   appellant had been granted refugee status had ceased to exist as he would
   be returning to Baghdad as a single  man  and  was  therefore  no  longer
   subjected to the risk to his  family  arising  from  his  parents'  mixed
   ethnicity marriage. It was also not accepted that the appellant's  mother
   would be at risk on return to Iraq as  a  Shia  Muslim  if  she  returned
   without her Sunni husband and it was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant
   would be at risk as a Shia Muslim given in particular because Shias  were
   in the majority in Baghdad. Reference was  made  to  the  fact  that  the
   appellant's father had been able to return to Iraq on several  occasions,
   despite being a minority Sunni and that he would be able to obtain a CSID
   for the appellant in Baghdad. It was also submitted  that  the  appellant
   would have access to medical treatment for his mental health concerns and
   that the high threshold in Article 3 was not met on medical grounds,  and
   in addition  that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
   appellant's integration in Iraq for the purposes of paragraph  399A,  nor
   very compelling circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in  his
   deportation.

16. Ms Cunha, at the hearing,  confirmed  that  she  was  not  pursuing  the
   withdrawal of the  concession  as  set  out  in  Ms  Fijiwala's  skeleton
   argument and she accepted that the appellant  had  been  granted  refugee
   status as the member of a family of mixed ethnicity background.  She  did
   not object to the matter of the section 72 presumption  being  re-visited
   as a result of the passage of time,  although  she  maintained  that  the
   appellant was still to be considered a danger to the community.

17. I also confirmed, at Ms Griffiths' request,  that  the  appeal  decision
   would be anonymised  and  that  the  appellant  would  be  treated  as  a
   vulnerable witness, albeit that he was not actively participating in  the
   hearing in any event.

18. Ms Griffiths then made her submissions. She  submitted,  with  reference
   to Dr Wheeler's updated  report,  that  the  appellant  was  someone  who
   acknowledged he needed help and was trying to do what he needed to do and
   that he did not currently present any risk to the public, such  that  the
   threshold for the section 72 certificate  had  not  been  met.  His  last
   conviction was five years ago, he had been off licence for some time  and
   had not been recalled, and he had  now  rebutted  the  presumption  under
   section 72. As for the cessation decision, Ms Griffiths  maintained  that
   the principles in Mosira applied and a child becoming an adult was not  a
   correct basis for ceasing refugee status. The respondent had jumped to  a
   consideration  of  the  appellant's  current  circumstances  as  a   Shia
   returning to Iraq but had failed to consider the relevant  circumstances,
   namely whether his mother could safely return to Iraq as a  person  in  a
   mixed-marriage. Ms Griffiths relied upon Dr Bluth's report where he  gave
   his opinion about the risks to Shias in Iraq. The Shias,  albeit  in  the
   majority, were nevertheless under attack from ISIS. The  appellant  would
   end up as an internally displaced person. Although his father  went  back
   to Iraq intermittently, that was only to visit his sons' graves,  and  it
   could not be said that that amounted to him being  available  to  provide
   support for the appellant. There was no durable change and the  appellant
   would still be at risk on return to Iraq. It was not feasible for him  to
   return as he did not have a CSID card or a  national  identity  card  and
   could not obtain one by proxy or from outside Iraq. There was nowhere  to
   relocate within Iraq  as  he  was  from  Baghdad  and  it  would  not  be
   reasonable to relocate since he had no  family  support,  he  had  mental
   health problems and  he  would  not  be  able  to  find  employment.  The
   appellant was also at risk under  section  15(c)  owing  to  the  general
   humanitarian  situation  but  also  as   a   result   of   his   personal
   characteristics  including  his  level  of  vulnerability,  his  lack  of
   contacts  and  his  trauma-related  mental  health   problems   including
   psychosis.

19. Ms Griffiths submitted that the appellant's mental health concerns  were
   such that his return to Iraq would breach Article 3 and she  relied  upon
   Dr Wheeler's report in that regard. Even if he could access medication in
   Iraq there were concerns as to his ability to comply with his  medication
   requirements. His mental health had started to deteriorate at the time of
   his conviction in  2015/16  and  had  fluctuated  around  that  time.  Ms
   Griffiths relied upon the case of AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for
   the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 in relation to the relevant Article 3
   test and upon the case of  Savran  v.  Denmark  -  57467/15  (Judgment  :
   Article 3 - Prohibition of torture : Fourth Section) [2019] ECHR  651  in
   relation to the question of access to treatment. She submitted that there
   was a risk of suicide or deterioration in the appellant's  mental  health
   if he was to be returned to Iraq and it was for the Secretary of State to
   dispel concerns about access to treatment which she had not done. In  any
   event the appellant succeeded on Article 8 grounds as he had  spent  more
   than half his life in the UK, he was socially and  culturally  integrated
   in the UK and there were very significant obstacles to his integration in
   Iraq or  alternatively  very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
   public interest in his deportation.

20. Ms Cunha submitted that the appellant continued to pose a  risk  to  the
   community. Although he had not committed  further  offences,  he  had  an
   incentive not to do so because of  the  threat  of  deportation.  He  had
   continued to  demonstrate  violent  behaviour  and  an  unwillingness  to
   cooperate and there was no evidence to mitigate the case of him  being  a
   danger. There was no evidence to show that he had turned his life around.
   The section 72 certificate therefore remained.  As  for  cessation  under
   Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention, Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  Ms
   Griffiths was wrong in her reliance upon Mosira as that case was specific
   on its facts. The relevant  case  was  JS  (Uganda).  The  appellant  had
   derived his refugee status from his mother's claim and had  been  granted
   refugee status, not under the family reunion provisions, but on the basis
   of an imputed risk as a child of a mixed household. Ms Cunha relied  upon
   the 'mirror-image' approach in MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ 994  and  the
   cases of Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  MM  (Zimbabwe)
   [2017] EWCA Civ 797, Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  JS
   (Uganda) [2019] EWCA Civ  1670 and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department v KN (DRC) [2019] EWCA Civ 1665 in relation to the  test  for
   cessation. She submitted that Dr Bluth's report failed to provide  direct
   evidence from people on the ground and failed to provide  proper  reasons
   why the appellant, returning to a majority Shia area, would be at risk as
   a Shia. She relied upon the country guidance in SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article
   15(c); identity documents) CG  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  400  as  showing  that
   Baghdad was now secure for Shias and that ISIL no longer posed  a  threat
   there. The appellant would be returning to Iraq as a Shia and  no  longer
   in a perceived relationship as previously. His  father,  a  member  of  a
   minority ethnic group, had not had problems when returning to  Iraq,  and
   therefore the appellant would be able to return.  He  would  be  able  to
   obtain a replacement CSID and would be at no risk in  Baghdad.  As  such,
   his refugee status had to be ceased.

21. As for the appellant's Article 3 claim, Ms Cunha  submitted  that  there
   was no evidence in the form of medical records  confirming  Dr  Wheeler's
   reference  to  the  appellant  having  been   diagnosed   with   paranoid
   schizophrenia. The medical records referred only to  him  suffering  from
   psychosis since 2013. Ms Cunha relied on the cases of AXB (Art 3  health:
   obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT  397,  as  well  as  the  long-
   standing cases of J v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]
   EWCA Civ 629 and Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
   Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in relation to the  risk  of  suicide  and
   cases involving mental health concerns, and the more recent  case  of  AM
   (Zimbabwe) and submitted that the relevant threshold  was  not  met.  The
   medication the appellant needed was available  in  Baghdad,  he  had  not
   demonstrated suicidal ideation and he would  be  able  to  stabilise  his
   health on return to Iraq with  the  help  of  family  members  who  could
   support him. Ms Cunha accepted that Article 8 was where the Secretary  of
   State's case was at its weakest,  but  she  submitted  nevertheless  that
   there were no very significant obstacles to integration in  Iraq  and  no
   very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  public   interest   in
   deportation.

22. In reply,  Ms  Griffiths  reiterated  the  points  made  previously  and
   submitted that the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  show  that  the
   appellant could access relevant treatment and medication in Iraq.

Discussion and Findings

23. The starting point in this case is the current status of the section  72
   certificate, the findings of Judge Rothwell upholding the certificate  at
   the time of the appeal before her having been preserved. I find myself in
   agreement with Ms Cunha that there is insufficient evidence before me  to
   show that the situation is materially different from  that  before  Judge
   Rothwell. I note that Ms Griffiths' skeleton argument, at [8], refers  to
   the appellant having been arrested in May  2021  in  connection  with  an
   alleged burglary, but no  charges  having  been  brought,  and  there  is
   therefore no evidence of further offending. Nevertheless,  the  appellant
   has been very much aware of his liability to deportation in the meantime,
   serving as a significant incentive to refrain from offending, as Ms Cunha
   submitted.

24. At the time of the hearing before Judge Rothwell the appellant had  been
   assessed as being a medium risk and that level of risk was  confirmed  by
   Dr Wheeler in her report at that time,  in  June  2019  (at  [18(i)].  At
   [18(g)] Dr Wheeler said that "I would  suggest  that  at  times  of  poor
   mental health, in particular periods including the presence of  psychotic
   symptoms, he poses a greater risk of reoffending and harm than when he is
   stable and not experiencing  problematic  symptoms."  Dr  Wheeler's  more
   recent report, dated 16 March 2020,  refers  to  the  appellant's  mental
   health having deteriorated since she last assessed him  and,  at  [2.22],
   she mentioned that his medical records referred to him becoming  agitated
   and "a bit threatening" during discussions in regard  to  his  access  to
   mental health services. At [2.43] she referred  to  him  having  achieved
   very little since she last saw him and at [2.50] to [2.56] she  addressed
   his offending behaviour and the risk of re-offending,  noting  at  [2.55]
   his "propensity to become agitated and potentially  aggressive".  In  the
   same paragraph Dr Wheeler stated that she considered the appellant to  be
   at low risk of committing further drug related  offences  but  at  medium
   risk of potentially aggressive behaviour and at [2.62]  she  stated  that
   her views remained the same as previously in relation to reoffending risk
   and recommendations for rehabilitation.

25. In the light of Dr Wheeler's observations, and in  the  absence  of  any
   evidence to the contrary, it seems to me that there remains a strong case
   for concluding that  the  presumption  under  section  72  has  not  been
   rebutted by the appellant and that he remains a risk to the community.

26. Moving on to the issue of cessation  of  refugee  status,  I  reject  Ms
   Griffiths' attempt to re-argue the relevance of Mosira and I maintain the
   conclusions I reached at [20] to [23] of my error of law decision.  Those
   conclusions are consistent with the decision in KN (DRC), where the Court
   of Appeal, in distinguishing the applicant in  their  case  from  Mosira,
   said at [35]:

    "... the circumstances in which Mr Mosira was  granted  refugee  status
    did not include any history or fear of persecution of either his mother
    or himself. Thus, as stated by Sales LJ at paragraph 49 of his judgment
    in Mosira, any change in  the  threat  posed  by  the  authorities  in
    Zimbabwe had no bearing on the circumstances in connection  with  which
    he  was  recognised  as  a  refugee.  The  decision   of   this   court
    in Mosira does not apply to all dependents of refugees, but rather is
    confined to cases where the basis for granting the  refugee  status  to
    the parent and/or the child was not covered by the Refugee  Convention.
    I therefore disagree with the Upper Tribunal's analysis of  this  issue
    at paragraph 23 of its judgment on which its decision in this case  was
    based."

27. In this case, it is clear that  the  basis  for  the  grant  of  refugee
   status was  covered  by  the  Refugee  Convention.  It  was  not,  as  Ms
   Griffiths' persists in arguing, solely the fact of the appellant being  a
   dependant of his mother. The appellant had been granted refugee status in
   line with his mother following their successful appeal before the  First-
   tier Tribunal where it was found that there was a risk on  the  basis  of
   being a member of a mixed marriage household.

28. Neither is it the case, as Ms Griffiths' argued, that the only  relevant
   question the respondent was required to consider,  for  the  purposes  of
   cessation, was whether the appellant's mother could now safely return  to
   Iraq. The correct question was the one considered by  the  respondent  in
   the refusal decision, as I said in my error  of  law  decision  at  [22],
   namely whether the appellant would still be at risk  as  a  member  of  a
   mixed faith household. The answer the  respondent  reached  was  that  he
   would not, as he would be returning to Iraq as a single Shia  man  living
   independently of his parents.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that
   appellant would be at risk as  the  son  of  mixed  parentage  living  an
   independent life in Iraq, just  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found,  in
   allowing his mother's appeal, at ([66(2)], that she would not be at  risk
   if she were living apart from her husband.

29. Applying the 'mirror-image' approach,  I  consider  next  whether  there
   remains any other basis for finding that the appellant would be  at  risk
   on return to Iraq. It is claimed by the appellant that  he  would  be  at
   risk as a Shia.

30. As an  aside,  I  would  mention  that  whilst  the  appellant,  in  his
   representations  of  18  September  2017  responding  to  the  notice  of
   intention to cease his  refugee status and in his statement before  Judge
   Rothwell, criticised the Secretary of State for erroneously referring  to
   him as Sunni, it was in fact his mother's  own  evidence  at  her  appeal
   hearing that her children were Sunni. Her evidence, as recorded  at  [12]
   on pages 7 and 8 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision (pages S61 and S62
   of the respondent's  appeal  bundle)  was  that  her  children  were  all
   considered to be Sunni because children followed their father's side. Yet
   the representations of 18 September 2017 stated that  the  children  were
   Shia because they followed  the  mother's  religion.  That  contradiction
   raises questions as to very basis upon which the appellant claims  to  be
   at risk in Iraq. However, that is not a matter I can take  into  account,
   or that I have taken into account, as it was not in  issue  before  Judge
   Rothwell and the appellant's  more  recent  application  and  appeal  had
   always  proceeded  on  the  undisputed  basis  that  he  was  Shia.   The
   contradiction was never raised before me and I therefore proceed  on  the
   basis that the appellant is a Shia Muslim and fears  return  to  Iraq  as
   such.

31. Reliance is placed on Professor Bluth's reports in  asserting  that  the
   appellant would be at risk as a Shia. I have considered both of Professor
   Bluth's reports and have noted his more recent  report  of  violent  Shia
   militias provoking countermeasures from the Iraqi authorities  (paragraph
   5.2.1) and ISIS fighters still operating close to Baghdad. However, as Ms
   Cunha submitted, the reports are largely based upon  a  consideration  of
   other sources, the majority of which pre-date  the  country  guidance  in
   SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  CG  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
   400. Whilst Professor Bluth opines, at paragraph  5.2.17  of  his  recent
   report, that the situation has changed since SMO, I do not  consider  his
   report to provide a proper basis for undermining  that  guidance  or  for
   concluding that the level of violence has reached the threshold to enable
   the appellant to qualify for humanitarian protection under Article 15(c),
   either on the basis of the general situation or on  the  'sliding  scale'
   taking account of his personal characteristics. I do  not  consider  that
   Professor Bluth's reports, or the  background  material  in  general,  go
   anywhere near making out a case for concluding that all Shias are at risk
   in Baghdad. It is clear that the Shias form the majority in  Baghdad  and
   there is no basis for concluding that the appellant would be at  risk  as
   part of that majority ethnic group.

32. As for the question of the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID card  or
   national identity card to enable him to return to Iraq, that  was  not  a
   matter upon which Ms Griffiths made any detailed submissions.  I  do  not
   consider any merit in a suggestion that there would  be  difficulties  in
   that respect, in any event, as the appellant's father has managed to make
   regular trips to Iraq and would no doubt be able to assist the  appellant
   in securing the relevant  documentation.  There  is  nothing  in  SMO  to
   suggest that the appellant would be unable to obtain a  replacement  CSID
   or identity card, particularly as he would be returning to Baghdad.

33. For all of these reasons I conclude that the  respondent's  decision  to
   cease the appellant's refugee status was properly made on the basis  that
   the circumstances in connection with which he was recognised as a refugee
   have ceased to exist and that he could  now  return  to  Baghdad  without
   being at risk of persecution. For the reasons given above in relation  to
   section  72  of  the  2002  Act  the  appellant  is  also  excluded  from
   humanitarian protection under  paragraph  339D,  but  in  any  event  the
   evidence produced does  not  show  that  he  has  made  out  a  case  for
   entitlement to humanitarian protection. The  same  reasoning  applies  to
   Article 3 in relation to the risk on return to Iraq.

34. Turning to the medical issues under Article 3,  the  relevant  test  has
   now become that in Paposhvili v. Belgium - 41738/10 [2016] ECHR 1113   as
   endorsed in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2020] UKSC 17, namely "a real risk of  the  applicant's  exposure  to  a
   serious, rapid and  irreversible  decline  in  his  health  resulting  in
   intense suffering". Ms Griffiths also relies on the  case  of  Savran  v.
   Denmark - 57467/15 (Judgment : Article  3  -  Prohibition  of  torture  :
   Fourth Section) [2019] ECHR 651, in relation to mental health. I have  to
   agree with Ms Cunha that, whilst there is  a  recent,  detailed  clinical
   psychologist report from Dr Wheeler in addition to the report  previously
   submitted from the same clinician,  the  medical  evidence  is  otherwise
   somewhat outdated and limited, with the appellant's general medical notes
   and records ending in 2017. It appears from  the  substantial  amount  of
   medical notes produced that there were particular concerns in 2013  about
   the appellant's mental health, which deteriorated  as  a  result  of  two
   incidents when he was assaulted by a gang of youths and he  was  admitted
   to hospital and remained in the mental health unit for a period of  time.
   He  was  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  psychosis  at  that   time.   He
   subsequently engaged with the mental health services in prison  following
   his offending in  2016.  The  earlier  reports  in  2014,  prior  to  his
   imprisonment, made mention of his poor engagement with the mental  health
   services and lack of compliance with his medication (see for example page
   232). Reports from 2015 refer to him being in a stable mental state (page
   426) but then subsequent reports in 2017 refer to  him  relapsing,  at  a
   time when he was in prison (page 431) and to  him  declining  psychiatric
   support at some stage. There are no medical reports extending beyond  the
   appellant's release from  prison,  which  is  not  particularly  helpful.
   Accordingly the only current medical evidence is that of Dr Wheeler.

35. Dr Wheeler assessed the appellant on two occasions. The  first  occasion
   was on 17 June 2019 when she saw him for about two hours but  was  unable
   to complete the assessment as he left part-way through  the  appointment.
   Dr Wheeler observed at that time that the appellant was not in  the  care
   of a community mental health team. She found it  difficult  to  elicit  a
   coherent response from him but understood  that  his  mental  health  had
   deteriorated as a result of his inability  to  find  employment  and  his
   financial problems, as well as the threat of deportation  (page  13).  Dr
   Wheeler noted that the appellant had attempted self-harm at the height of
   his mental health deterioration in 2013 but was not currently  describing
   any suicidal intent. At page 18 she  considered  that  he  would  require
   support from medical and legal professionals and family  and  friends  to
   manage a return to Iraq and that his medication needed review by his  GP.
   At [13(d)],  [13(e)]  and  [21]  Dr  Wheeler  recommended  mental  health
   intervention to support recovery. On the  second  occasion,  in  February
   2020, Dr Wheeler spoke to the appellant for two hours,  but  again  could
   not complete the assessment  because  he  could  not  focus  and  provide
   competent answers. She referred to a diagnosis of paranoid  schizophrenia
   made during a mental health assessment in October 2019 although it is not
   entirely clear if such a diagnosis had actually been made as she went  on
   to refer to the mental health assessment revealing that he was presenting
   with symptoms "suggestive of" paranoid schizophrenia.  It  also  appears,
   from [2.22], that whilst there was such presentation in October 2019, the
   appellant was not currently accessing mental  health  services,  and  was
   just in receipt of medication from  his  GP.  Dr  Wheeler  anticipated  a
   deterioration of the appellant's mental health if he were to  be  removed
   to Iraq  and at [2.21] stated that it was likely that his sense  of  fear
   and uncertainty would result in an increase  in  mental  health  symptoms
   which would lead to  an  increased  risk  of  suicide  or  self-injurious
   behaviour. Dr Wheeler refers at [2.27]  and  [2.28]  to  the  appellant's
   mental health having deteriorated and to the impending threat of  removal
   exacerbating his symptoms. At [2.34] she recommended that he  engaged  in
   therapeutic intervention.

36. What the reports reveal is that Dr Wheeler made various  recommendations
   for the appellant to have therapeutic intervention, yet there is  nothing
   aside from her reports to explain any progress or to confirm  if  any  of
   her suggestions had been taken up. Indeed, both reports referred  to  the
   appellant not having any current engagement with mental  health  services
   but  simply  being  compliant   with   his   anti-psychotic   medication,
   olanzapine. There are no medical records clarifying matters  further  and
   neither is there any suggestion that the appellant  would  be  unable  to
   access his required medication in Iraq or  that  mental  health  services
   would not be available to him in Baghdad. Although  Professor  Bluth,  in
   his recent report, refers at section 5.3 to mental health  care  in  Iraq
   being limited, he relies again on sources dating back several years.  His
   reference to the death of a man deported from the USA is limited  in  its
   detail and cannot simply be extrapolated to the appellant. There is  more
   recent information in the Home Office Country Policy and Information Note
   Iraq: Medical and Healthcare  Provision  version  2.0  January  2021,  at
   section 13 on Mental Health, as referred to by Mr Cunha,  which  provides
   information about relevant medical services being available, both private
   and public, and confirms the availability  of  the  medication  currently
   prescribed to the appellant.

37. Furthermore, Dr Wheeler's references to the risk  of  suicide  or  self-
   harm are not based upon any recent suicidal inclinations and indeed it is
   clear from [2.35] of her recent report that she did not have  a  complete
   picture of the appellant's circumstances. I therefore agree with Ms Cunha
   that Dr Wheeler's recent report has its limitations and I do not consider
   that it provides a sufficient  basis  to  conclude  that  the  Article  3
   threshold has been met by the appellant., either in relation to the  risk
   of suicide in line with the relevant test in J and Y or  in  relation  to
   his mental health concerns more generally.

38. Where Dr Wheeler's report is useful, however, is as confirmation of  the
   appellant's inability to cope with the  demands  of  daily  life  without
   support from friends and family, and his difficulty progressing  in  life
   owing to his mental health concerns, all of which are relevant matters in
   the overall assessment of the question of "very significant obstacles  to
   integration" for the purposes of paragraph 399A of the immigration rules,
   albeit not in themselves sufficient to meet the Article 3  threshold.  It
   is already accepted that the appellant has spent more than half his  life
   lawfully in the UK and that he is socially and culturally  integrated  in
   the UK. Ms Cunha confirmed that that was the case and that any attempt by
   Ms Fijiwala in her skeleton argument to distance herself  from  that  was
   not being pursued. Ms Cunha also accepted that Article 8  was  where  the
   Secretary of State's argument was at its weakest.

39. The appellant came to the UK as  a  boy  of  11  years  of  age,  having
   experienced the death of one brother and then learned of  the  subsequent
   death of his two other brothers. There is no realistic suggestion by  the
   Secretary of State that he has family members remaining in Iraq and it is
   said that, whilst his father returns to Iraq on occasions,  that  was  to
   visit his sons' gravestones and not to visit family. I  accept  that  the
   appellant has no close family members remaining  in  Iraq  and  he  would
   therefore be returning to a country which he left as a child and where he
   has never lived independently, where  he  has  no  accommodation  and  no
   support  network  and  where  there  are  serious  security  concerns  as
   confirmed by Professor Bluth, albeit not sufficient to meet  the  Article
   15(c) threshold. Whilst the appellant has not demonstrated that he  would
   have no access to medication and medical facilities,  his  mental  health
   condition is nevertheless a significant contributory factor in  assessing
   the obstacles to integration in Iraq, even  if  the  high  threshold  for
   making out an Article 3 claim is not met, given the difficulties he would
   have in supporting himself and providing a life  for  himself.  Professor
   Bluth's report provides some assistance in that regard, and  I  refer  to
   the last few sentences of paragraph 5.2.17 and the beginning  of  5.2.18,
   and likewise Dr Wheeler's reports are particularly  relevant,  as  stated
   above, in regard to the possible deterioration of his mental  health,  at
   least in the short-term. All of those  circumstances  taken  cumulatively
   lead me to conclude that there would be very significant obstacles to the
   appellant's integration  in  Iraq.  I  consider  that  the  appellant  is
   accordingly able to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399A  of  the
   immigration rules as an exception to deportation and that his removal  to
   Iraq would be disproportionate and in breach of Article 8. It is on  that
   limited basis,  therefore,  that  I  find  that  the  appellant's  appeal
   succeeds.

DECISION

40. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law  and  the
   decision was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3 human
   rights grounds, but allowing it on Article 8 grounds.

41. The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

   Anonymity


   The anonymity  order  previously  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
   maintained.








Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 29 July
2021
