
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
RP/00129/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th October 2017                  |       On 19th October 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     daa
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown instructed by Compass Immigration Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge O R Williams
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated following a hearing on
    5th June 2017.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a female Somalian citizen born 1st January  1982.   She
    appealed to the FtT against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated
    14th September 2016 to revoke her refugee status.

 4. The Secretary of State revoked the refugee  status  with  reference  to
    paragraph 339AB of the Immigration Rules which is set out below;

         339AB    This paragraph applies where the  Secretary  of  State  is
                satisfied that the person's misrepresentation or omission of
                facts including the use of false  documents,  were  decisive
                for the grant of refugee status.

 5. The Secretary of State noted that the claimant had been interviewed  in
    connection with her asylum application on 15th July 2010.   She  stated
    that she was single and had  never  been  married  and  was  not  in  a
    relationship.  She confirmed she had no children.  She stated that  she
    had never been back to Somalia since she fled.

 6. The Respondent discovered that the above answers were not correct  when
    the claimant's husband was encountered at Manchester  Airport  on  29th
    September 2013 attempting to illegally obtain entry into the  UK.   The
    Respondent discovered that the claimant and her husband had married  in
    2008 and he and the claimant had twins born  6th  February  2012.   The
    claimant had given birth to a son in February 2009 and her husband  was
    the father.  The claimant and her husband had  another  son  born  15th
    February 2015.  The claimant subsequently admitted that  she  had  been
    able to return to Somalia in 2007.

 7. The Respondent's view was that if the claimant had  been  truthful  and
    disclosed when interviewed that she was married and at  that  time  had
    one son with her husband, she  would  not  have  been  granted  refugee
    status, as she had been granted asylum and indefinite leave  to  remain
    as an adult dependant of her mother.

 8. The claimant appealed to the FtT.  Her appeal was allowed.  This caused
    the Secretary of State to  apply  for  permission  to  appeal  and  the
    grounds are summarised below.

 9. The only issue before the FtT was revocation of  refugee  status.   The
    claimant's indefinite leave to remain had not  been  revoked.   It  was
    contended that the claimant  had  knowingly  used  deception  when  she
    applied for asylum when she  failed  to  disclose  that  she  had  been
    married and had a child.  It was contended that  refugee  status  would
    not have been granted if it had been known that she  had  been  married
    and had a child.  It was contended that the FtT had  erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appeal.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird in the following terms;

         "2.   The  Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  this
             decision on the grounds that the judge made an arguable  error
             of law in finding that although misrepresentation was employed
             by the  Appellant  in  seeking  refugee  status,  it  made  no
             difference having regard to the Gateway  Protection  Programme
             Policy (paragraph 74-75).  It is alleged that  had  the  truth
             been known then the Appellant  would  not  have  been  granted
             refugee status.

         3.   The judge considered this issue from paragraphs 67 to 76.   It
             is arguable that whilst  accepting  that  the  Appellant  used
             misrepresentation in obtaining her refugee status, he fails to
             explain why the Respondent's decision to revoke refugee status
             was not in accordance with the law".

11. Following the grant of permission directions  were  issued  that  there
    should be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT
    decision contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. I asked Mr McVeety to clarify what error of law the  FtT  was  said  to
    have committed.  The grounds upon which permission to appeal  had  been
    granted, disclosed disagreement with the decision, but I was unclear as
    to exactly how it was contended the FtT had erred in law.   Mr  McVeety
    advised that he could add nothing to the grounds upon which  permission
    to appeal had been granted.

13. Mr Brown submitted that the grounds disclose  no  error  of  law.   The
    judge had considered paragraph 339AB of the Immigration Rules, and  had
    given reasons for the conclusion reached.  I was asked to find that the
    FtT had not erred in law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. As I announced at the hearing, I find the FtT did not materially err in
    law.  The FtT considered the evidence placed before it.  Findings  were
    made and sustainable reasons for those findings given.   It  cannot  be
    said that the findings of the FtT are perverse or irrational, and in my
    view sustainable and adequate reasons for  the  conclusions  have  been
    given.

15. The FtT at paragraph 73 found that the claimant had given a  series  of
    misleading responses in that she had claimed that she  had  never  been
    married, that she was single, she had not travelled  back  to  Somalia,
    and that she had no children.

16. The FtT then had to decide whether the misrepresentation  was  decisive
    in the grant of refugee status.

17. The FtT considered not only  the  answers  given  by  the  claimant  in
    interview,  in  connection  with  the  Gateway   Protection   Programme
    application, but also considered the Gateway Protection Programme which
    was published on 11th January 2010 and contains eleven paragraphs.

18. The FtT specifically considered paragraph 6 of the  Gateway  Protection
    Programme  which  relates  to  dependants,  and  was   satisfied   that
    notwithstanding the  incorrect  answers  given  by  the  claimant,  the
    Gateway Protection Programme would still have been met.

19. The FtT gave reasons for reaching that conclusion, and they are set out
    at paragraphs 75 and 76.  I will not set out those paragraphs here, but
    conclude that I find the reasons given by the  FtT  adequately  explain
    why the FtT did not find the misrepresentations to be decisive  in  the
    grant of refugee status.

20. I therefore conclude the grounds submitted by the  Secretary  of  State
    disclose that the claimant was not truthful when interviewed, and  they
    disclose a strong disagreement with the conclusion reached by the  FtT.
    However, the grounds do not disclose  a  material  error  of  law,  the
    Secretary of State has not shown that the FtT failed  to  consider  any
    material matter, or applied incorrect legal principles, or gave  weight
    to immaterial matters.  The FtT gave reasons for the decision  reached,
    and as I find no material error of law, the decision of the FtT  stands
    and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The FtT decision does not disclose a material error of law and  is  not  set
aside.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction pursuant  to
rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of her family.  This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         16th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable.  There is no fee award.



Signed                              Date         16th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


