
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00035/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 16 March 2020                     |        On 15 April 2020             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               g m (Zimbabwe)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Pardon Tapfumanayi, a legal representative with P
                    T Law and Associates
For the respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of G M who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to revoke his refugee status on cessation grounds.  The appellant is  a
    citizen of Zimbabwe.

Background

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom by air on 11 October 2002,  to
    join his wife, also a Zimbabwean citizen, who had been recognised as  a
    refugee, because she was a teacher.  The wife's recognition was by  the
    Secretary of State:  she  did  not  have  to  appeal  through  the  IAC
    Tribunals. The couple had two daughters together, born while they  were
    both in Zimbabwe.

 3. The appellant made an application for asylum  on  arrival,  citing  MDC
    membership and activity.  The respondent refused the appellant  refugee
    recognition on 3 December 2002 but granted  him  exceptional  leave  to
    remain in line with his wife's refugee status, until 5 December 2006.

 4. At a hearing on 29 April 2003, Adjudicator Dubicka  recorded  that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer had decided to withdraw her  2  December
    2002 notice of decision to grant the appellant only  exceptional  leave
    to remain.  The Judge's decision says this:

         "1.  This was an  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  on  asylum
         grounds, against  a  decision  by  the  respondent  to  grant  only
         exceptional leave to remain instead of recognising the appellant to
         be a refugee.  Having read the bundle, it came as no surprise  that
         Mr Russell for the respondent said he intended to withdraw  removal
         directions, and amended this  to  [withdrawal  of]  the  notice  of
         decision,  when  it  was  pointed  out  there  were   [no   removal
         directions].  I explained to the appellant that this meant  that  a
         decision was outstanding and I expressed the hope that the one made
         would be consistent with that made in the case of  the  appellant's
         wife.  She, without needing to appeal, was recognised as a  refugee
         and her account accepted.  When  the  husband  described  the  same
         events, his account was rejected, which in some respects conflicted
         with the view of the same facts put forward by the wife.  This made
         the decision in this appeal incomprehensible,  and  unsurprisingly,
         it could not stand.

         2.   The decision having been withdrawn, the  appeal  is  withdrawn
         and in those circumstances, there is no appeal to determine.   This
         is only on the basis that the  respondent  seeks  to  make  another
         decision.

         This determination serves as a notice in accordance with Rule 42 of
         the Immigration and Asylum Appeals [Procedure] Rules 2002."

 5. On 6 August  2003,  having  heard  nothing  from  the  respondent,  the
    appellant wrote to the Home Office as follows:

         "I have enclosed my appeal  [decision  number  provided]  heard  at
         Immigration Appellate Authority at Sheldon Court, Birmingham, on 29
         April  2003,  where  the  Home  Office  representative,  Mr  Gareth
         Russell, informed us that they (Home Office)  had  withdrawn  their
         decision to grant me  exceptional  leave  to  remain.   He  said  a
         decision consistent to my wife was to be made in six weeks, but  up
         to now, I have not heard from the Home Office.  I expected that you
         have a huge workload of cases, but I have now waited for more  than
         four months, without hearing from you.  May you please speed up  my
         application.

         Lastly, to find work without a passport is difficult,  so  may  you
         please send me my passport as it is my only form of identity.

         Thank you for your cooperation."

    On 27 October 2003,  the  appellant  was  granted  refugee  status  and
    indefinite leave to remain.  The respondent did not say on what  basis:
    whether it was because he was the husband of  his  wife,  a  Zimbabwean
    teacher, or on  the  basis  of  his  own  claimed  MDC  activities  and
    membership.

 6. The appellant received three convictions for driving  related  offences
    between 26 February 2004 and 17 June 2005.

 7. The appellant's marriage failed, and his wife began a new relationship,
    taking their two daughters with her to her new home.

 8. On 23 April 2005, the appellant followed his ex-wife to her home, which
    he entered by force.  He stabbed her repeatedly and cut her throat,  in
    front of their two daughters and two friends of the daughters: the four
    young girls who witnessed the murder were aged between 7 and  11  years
    old.

 9. On 6 December 2005, when the appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom
    just over 3 years, he was sentenced to life  imprisonment  for  murder,
    with a minimum term of 15 years.  His parole  hearing  is  on  1  April
    2020.

10. On 19 July 2017, the appellant was served with a decision to deport him
    to Zimbabwe as a foreign criminal, pursuant to section 32(5) of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The appellant  made  written  representations  under
    section 33 in respect of the maintenance of his refugee status.

11. By a letter dated 6 October 2017, the respondent observed that:

         "By way of background it is noted you were granted  refugee  status
         due to protection concerns relating to your political opinion.   It
         was claimed that you were a low-level member of  the  Movement  for
         Democratic Change (MDC) political party."

12. Mr Bramble informed me that having reviewed the appellant's file,  this
    decision was taken before the respondent's computer system  began,  and
    that beyond what is set out above, the respondent  no  longer  has  any
    record of the reason why refugee status was granted to  the  appellant.



13. On 19 March 2019, the respondent revoked the appellant's refugee status
    and refused his  human  rights  claim.   She  did  so  because  of  the
    seriousness of his offence, noting that the OASys report found that  he
    continued to present a high risk to his daughters  and  to  any  future
    intimate partners. He had continued to try to  contact  his  daughters,
    despite being prohibited from so doing.

14. The respondent revoked the appellant's refugee status by  reference  to
    Articles 1C(5) and 1C(6) of the Refugee Convention the circumstances in
    connection with which  he was recognised as a  refugee  had  ceased  to
    exist.   So far as relevant, Article 1C of the Refugee Convention is as
    follows:

         "C. This Convention shall cease to  apply  to  any  person  falling
         under the terms of section A if: ...(5) He can no  longer,  because
         the circumstances in connection with which he has  been  recognized
         as a refugee have ceased to exist,  continue  to  refuse  to  avail
         himself of the protection of the country of his nationality;

         Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a  refugee  falling
         under section  A  (1)  of  this  article  who  is  able  to  invoke
         compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing
         to avail himself of the protection of the country of nationality;

         (6) Being a person who  has  no  nationality  he  is,  because  the
         circumstances in connection with which he has been recognized as  a
         refugee have ceased to exist, able to return to the country of  his
         former habitual residence;

         Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a  refugee  falling
         under section  A  (1)  of  this  article  who  is  able  to  invoke
         compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing
         to return to the country of his former habitual residence."

    It is plain that Article 1C(6) is  not  relevant:  this  appellant  has
    Zimbabwean nationality.

15. The respondent considered the  appellant's  claimed  political  profile
    with the MDC in reaching that part of her decision, deciding  that  the
    exceptions to deportation did not apply to this appellant.   There  was
    no private and family life in  the  United  Kingdom,  either  with  his
    deceased wife or their surviving  daughters.  The  respondent  did  not
    consider that there were any significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
    reintegration in Zimbabwe.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. On 6 November 2019, First-tier  Judge  Andrew  heard  this  appeal  and
    dismissed it.  She made no anonymity direction, but the Upper  Tribunal
    has done so, as children are involved in this appeal.

17. The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal in evidence that since going
    to prison in 2005, he had not been politically active at  all  for  the
    MDC.

18. The First-tier Judge relied on the  case  of  CM  (country  guidance  -
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC)  which   confirmed  the
    guidance given in EM and others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  98
    (IAC), save for a limited change to the guidance  arising  out  of  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38.

19. The First-tier Judge took account of  the  respondent's  Zimbabwe  CPIN
    dated February 2019 and held at [43] that simply being a member  of  an
    opposition group or  a  civil  society  organisation  of  human  rights
    defender would not place a returning failed asylum seeker  at  risk  of
    persecution.  The Judge found that the appellant  could  return  safely
    either to his mother's house outside  Harare  or  his  former  area  of
    residence in Bulawayo.  The humanitarian protection and Article 2 and 3
    ECHR claim fell with the international protection claim.

20. In relation to the lack of rehabilitation facilities in  Zimbabwe,  the
    First-tier Judge relied on SE (Zimbabwe)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  256  which
    held that there  was  no  requirement  to  consider  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation for non-European  Union  citizens,  even  where,  as  in
    Zimbabwe, the prospects of rehabilitation were worse in  Zimbabwe  than
    in the European Union, and that the Tribunal in SE had been entitled to
    exclude that factor from its consideration.

21.  In  relation  to  Article  8  ECHR,  the  Judge  considered  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).   At  the  hearing,  the  appellant's  representative   had
    accepted that the Article 8 ECHR claim would stand  or  fall  with  the
    international protection and Article 2 or 3 claims. Section 117B(6) did
    not apply as there were no qualifying children.

22. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) applied to the  appellant,  but  section  117C(3)  meant  that
    unless  the  appellant  could  bring  himself  within  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2, the public interest  required  his  deportation.   On  the
    facts of this appeal, neither was applicable.  Section 117C(6) required
    the appellant to show very compelling circumstances over and above  the
    Exceptions, but the First-tier Judge was  satisfied  that  he  had  not
    discharged that burden.

23. The appeal was dismissed, and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

24. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  Judge  should
    have obliged the respondent to clarify the precise basis on  which  the
    appellant was  granted  refugee  status.  The  burden  of  establishing
    durable change arguably fell on the respondent, but  materiality  would
    have to be considered in the light of JS (Uganda) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1670.

25. The First-tier Judge had arguably conducted the factual analysis at the
    heart of the decision in a vacuum, and therefore  the  weight  ascribed
    to, for example, the factors set out in the UNHCR letter were  arguably
    tainted by that factual error.

26. Permission was granted on all grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

27. There was no Rule 24 Reply on behalf of the respondent.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. For the respondent, Mr Bramble reminded me that  the  appellant's  wife
    was granted asylum on application, without  the  need  for  an  appeal,
    because she was a Zimbabwean teacher.  He contended that the First-tier
    Judge had not erred in reaching her conclusion:  Mr Bramble  relied  on
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v JS (Uganda) [2019] EWCA Civ 1670 (JS  (Uganda))  at  [71]-
    [74] and [154]-[158] in the judgment of Lord Justice Haddon-Cave,  with
    whom Lord Justice Newey  agreed,  and  [188]-[192]  in  the  concurring
    judgment of Lord Justice Underhill.

30. For the appellant, Mr Tapfumeneyi applied for an adjournment to require
    the respondent to provide details of the basis on which  the  appellant
    was granted refugee status.  That application was refused.  Mr  Bramble
    had already indicated that there is  no  information  available  beyond
    that  given  above.    Mr  Tapfumeneyi  contended  that  although   the
    appellant had applied for refugee status as his  wife's  dependant,  he
    had received it in his own right on MDC grounds.

31. The First-tier Tribunal had been furnished with up-to-date  information
    regarding the situation for  MDC  activists  and  members  in  Zimbabwe
    today, which was to be found in his bundle.  The Tribunal had  evidence
    on which it could and should  have  departed  from  the  CM  (Zimbabwe)
    country guidance.

32. In addition, the First-tier Judge had misdirected himself  in  fact  at
    [43] in considering the risk to a returning failed asylum seeker.  This
    appellant was a successful asylum seeker and that was a material  error
    of fact which fatally infected the  Judge's  decision.   The  appellant
    relied on the report of the UN Special  Rapporteur  on  the  rights  to
    freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, Mr Clement Nyaletsossi
    Voule on his visit to Zimbabwe in  September  2019,  dealing  with  the
    democratic transition in Zimbabwe following the  removal  of  President
    Robert Mugabe on 21  November  2017.   Mr  Tapfumeneyi  relied  on  the
    entirety of that report and in particular, the testimonies  of  victims
    and the record of violence against anti-government protesters.

33. Mr Tapfumeneyi also relied on the lack of rehabilitation available  for
    prisoners and former prisoners in Zimbabwe.  In the United Kingdom, the
    appellant was due for consideration for parole on 1 April 2020, and had
    thus far been a model prisoner.

34. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

35. There are two possible analyses of the respondent's  grant  of  refugee
    status to this appellant.  If it was granted to him in  line  with  his
    wife's refugee status based on her former profession as  a  teacher  in
    Zimbabwe, as the appellant's letter of 6 August 2003 asserted, then  JS
    (Uganda) applies.  The narrow view, that his refugee status ended  when
    his wife died, was not approved in JS (Uganda).  The  correct  analysis
    is set out at [188]-[192] in the judgment of Underhill LJ:

         "188.    The starting-point is that  JS  was  not  granted  refugee
         status in his  own  right  -  that  is,  because  of  any  risk  of
         persecution to which he personally was subject.  He  was  admitted,
         under the Family Reunion Policy, because his mother had  previously
         been admitted as a refugee. That is  clear  from  the  unchallenged
         findings of the FTT set out by Haddon-Cave LJ at para. 24.

         189. Admission on that basis did  not  mean  that  JS  was  himself
         entitled to any rights under the Convention.  The  Convention  only
         confers rights on persons who themselves satisfy the definition  in
         article 1A (2). ...

         190. I should like to observe, at the  risk  of  spelling  out  the
         obvious, that this issue only arises in cases  where  the  risk  of
         persecution which leads to the grant of protection to the "primary"
         refugee does not also extend to his or  her  family  members:  very
         often of course  it  will,  either  because  they  share  the  same
         characteristic as gives rise to the risk or because the  persecutor
         will extend his persecution of, say, a political activist to his or
         her family members irrespective of their own conduct or opinions. I
         do not wish to be understood as saying that there may not  be  very
         strong reasons for the admission of family members even where  they
         personally are not at risk: I say only that those  reasons  do  not
         derive from the Convention itself.

         191. Mr Husain argues that, even if  JS  was not  entitled  to  any
         rights under the Convention, the basis on  which  he  was  admitted
         entitled him as a matter of domestic law to be treated as if he had
         Convention rights, so that he was entitled to the substance of  the
         protections under articles 32 and 33. ... I wish to  say,  however,
         that I am not convinced that the statement in  the  Family  Reunion
         Policy that beneficiaries of it would be admitted "as refugees" can
         reasonably be read as entitling them to the full protections of the
         Convention in circumstances where some at least of  its  provisions
         are not easy to apply to persons who are not themselves at risk - a
         point made by Sales LJ in relation to  article  1C  (5)  itself  at
         para. 46 of his judgment in Mosira.

         192. Assuming in  JS's  favour that he was entitled as a matter  of
         domestic law to be treated as if he were a  Convention  refugee,  I
         believe that the Secretary of State was entitled  to  "cease"  that
         protection under article 1C (5) on  the  basis  that,  as  the  FTT
         found, the circumstances in Uganda that had led to his mother being
         granted refugee status no longer apply. Those seem to me to be  the
         relevant circumstances in a case where,  as  we  are  assuming  for
         present purposes,  a  person  has  acquired  refugee  status  on  a
         derivative basis, because they are the circumstances which  led  to
         protection being granted to the person from  whom  his  own  status
         derives. As I understand it, this  is  substantially  the  same  as
         Haddon-Cave LJ's reasoning at paras. 157-158. I agree  that  Mosira
         does not compel a different conclusion, for the  reasons  which  he
         gives at paras. 142-152. (I am not myself sure that MM  (Zimbabwe),
         to which he refers at paras. 159-164, advances the argument because
         the issue there was different.)"

    The appellant's wife was granted refugee status  as  a  teacher.   That
    risk was personal to her and in my judgment, following  her  death  the
    appellant cannot rely on it.

36. If, as asserted in the respondent's letter of 6 October 2017, the grant
    of refugee status was personal to the appellant and was  based  on  his
    low-level membership of the MDC,  then  it  is  necessary  to  consider
    whether the First-tier Judge erred in  declining  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance in CM (Zimbabwe).  The updated country guidance in  CM
    (Zimbabwe) so far as relevant  to  MDC  members  and  activists  is  as
    follows:

         "(1) As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

         (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in  the  case
         of a person without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).

         (3)  The situation is not uniform across the relevant  rural  areas
         and there may be reasons why a particular individual,  although  at
         first sight appearing to fall within the category described in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

         (4)  In general, a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.

         (5)  A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile."

37. The First-tier Judge took the appellant's account at its  highest  (see
    [36]), noting that the appellant was last suspected on his own  account
    of low-level MDC activities in 2002, before leaving Zimbabwe.   He  has
    not been active in support of the MDC since then.

38. At [43]-[44] in the First-tier Judge's decision, he said this:

         "43. The view of the Courts appears to be that the guidelines in CM
         remain and simply being an opposition member or member of  a  civil
         society organisation or human rights defender  would  not  place  a
         returning failed asylum seeker at risk of persecution.

         44.  It is against this  background  that  I  have  considered  the
         appellant's claim.   I  am  unable  to  find,  as  the  appellant's
         representative has asked me to, that the country  information  that
         has been produced  in  the  appellant's  bundle  is  sufficient  to
         overturn the guidelines in CM."

39. The documents in the appellant's bundle mentioned at [44] included  the
    UN Special Rapporteur's report dates from September  2019.   I  am  not
    prepared to find on that basis that the report was not  considered.   I
    have read the report myself and it is clear that there were  repressive
    measures in 2018 against persons who demonstrated on  various  grounds,
    including  anti-Government  protests.   It  also   records   that   the
    government of Zimbabwe cooperated fully with the Special Rapporteur and
    was seeking to take measures to prevent a repetition of  those  events.
    I do not consider, on that basis, that the Special Rapporteur's  report
    contains material on which the First-tier Judge  should  have  departed
    from the country guidance in CM (Zimbabwe).

40. The First-tier Judge did not err in finding that there was no real risk
    of persecution for this appellant if  he  were  to  be  returned.   The
    appellant's low-level MDC activities are now 18 years ago and it is not
    asserted that he undertook any pro-MDC activities in the United Kingdom
    before his incarceration, nor while he has been in prison.

41. The appellant's mother and brother remain in Zimbabwe  (albeit  perhaps
    intermittently).  The Judge took into account the appellant's  economic
    concerns and the tertiary qualifications he had obtained in the  United
    Kingdom, which would enable him to get a better job on return.

42. For all of the above reasons, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Judge
    dealt properly with all of the evidence before  him  and  gave  proper,
    intelligible and adequate reasons for the conclusions reached,  and  in
    particular,  for  not  departing  from  the  country  guidance  in   CM
    (Zimbabwe).

43. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge is upheld.



DECISION

44. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law. I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall
    stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date: 16 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
