
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
RP/00039/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 August 2017                         |  On 24 November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     ES
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, instructed by Bushra Ali Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, ES, is a female citizen  of  Pakistan.   By  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 May 2017, I found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.   My  reasons
    for so finding were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, E S, was born in 1986 and is a  female  citizen
         of Pakistan.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Mensah) against the decisions of the respondent of 1 and  11  March
         2016 to revoke her refugee status and to refuse her  further  leave
         to remain.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on
         28 October 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The domestic circumstances of this appellant  have  a  complex
         history.  The appeal  turned,  in  part,  upon  the  state  of  the
         relationship between the appellant and her partner  which  had,  in
         the past, involved allegations of domestic violence.

         3.   Part of the challenge to Judge Mensah's decision also concerns
         the fairness of the hearing before her and the proper discharge  of
         the burden of proof in an appeal which, as regards  the  revocation
         decision, was correctly identified by Judge Mensah as resting  upon
         the Secretary of State [26].  I do not find  that  that  ground  of
         appeal has been established.  The grounds of appeal at  [6]  assert
         that the appellant had not been given a full  opportunity  to  meet
         the whole of the case against  her.   Having  adopted  her  witness
         statement, the grounds note that  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  chose  not  to   cross-examine   the
         appellant nor did the First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah ask her  any
         questions.  The appellant complains that the judge went on to  make
         adverse findings against her without giving her the opportunity  to
         provide explanations.  The  appellant  put  her  case  in  evidence
         before the judge and, notwithstanding the  absence  of  any  cross-
         examination, the judge was charged with  making  findings  on  that
         evidence.  The judge was required  to  make  findings  of  fact  in
         relation to the appellant's relationship with her partner and  this
         she duly did.  Other than complaining that the  appellant  was  not
         given a chance to give explanations, the appellant  has  not  shown
         that any of the findings of fact made by Judge Mensah did not arise
         directly from the evidence which she had before her.  The appellant
         does not say, for example, the judgment has  made  any  finding  of
         fact in relation to a matter which was not addressed at all in  the
         appellant's  evidence.   The  fact  that  the  appellant  may  make
         assertions in her evidence does not mean that the judge is  obliged
         to accept those assertions as fact. Analysis of the appellant's  by
         the judge is still required; that there may  have  been  no  cross-
         examination is immaterial.  If the appellant wanted to give a  more
         detailed account of her relationship with her partner and  possibly
         to address apparent contradictions in her evidence,  then  she  had
         every opportunity to do so.

         4.   I find, therefore, that the findings of fact  as  regards  the
         appellant's relationship with her partner and children  are  sound.
         In particular, I find that the following findings shall  remain  in
         any event:

         48.  In all the circumstances I do not accept there  has  been  any
         domestic violence  since  social  services  involvement  with  this
         family at the end of 2012, beginning of  2013.   I  find  that  the
         appellant and [H] have been in a subsisting relationship  for  over
         eight years which suffered a period of separation in 2012/13 due to
         domestic violence but which resolved itself after  social  services
         involvement.  I am entirely satisfied on balance that in  fact  the
         appellant has sought to assert the end of  the  relationship  in  a
         false attempt to circumvent  revocation  [of  her  refugee  status]
         after H's appeal was refused.  They  may  have  spent  time  living
         separately  but  the  sexual  relationship  and  the  marriage  has
         continued and  many  couples  do  not  live  together  but  have  a
         subsisting marriage.  They chose  to  do  so  for  a  multitude  of
         reasons including convenience, economic and personal.  Any  one  of
         those reasons could apply here but I am clear  it  is  not  because
         their marriage is over.

         5.   I find that the judge's finding at  [53]  is  also  sustained.
         Here, the judge found that the appellant and H are in a  subsisting
         relationship and have been since 2008 and  that  H  is  capable  of
         working in Pakistan should the family live together and to  provide
         for the family financially.

         6.   The remainder of Judge Mensah's decision is more  problematic.
         The judge assessed the best interests of the children  involved  in
         this case and looked at the report of Dr Newth [49].  She did  not,
         however, address the observation of Dr Newth  at  page  17  of  his
         report that if H lived with the family there was a high  risk  that
         violence would recommence.  The judge would not,  of  course,  have
         been bound to accept the opinion of  the  expert  witness  but  she
         should at the very least have addressed it.  I  consider  that  she
         should have addressed this part of the report  notwithstanding  her
         general findings (see above)  that  the  relationship  between  the
         appellant and H has now been re-established.

         7.   In  addition,  I  am  concerned  that  Judge  Mensah  has  not
         sufficiently addressed  the  question  of  the  revocation  of  the
         appellant's refugee status, more particularly,  the  revocation  of
         her status under the Qualification Directive.  As the judge  noted,
         the parties agree that revocation of the status is  sought  by  the
         Secretary of State under paragraph 339A(v) of HC 395 (as  amended).
         Mr  Karnik,  for  the   appellant,   submits   that   the   changed
         circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (v) concerned  those  of
         the country to which it is intended to return the appellant  rather
         than her own personal circumstances.  Correctly,  he  submits  that
         Judge Mensah did not deal with that aspect  of  the  revocation  at
         all.  Judge Mensah's failure to do so is an error of law but  I  am
         not persuaded, from the submissions which I have  so  far  received
         from Mr Karnik, that I should remake the  decision  and  allow  the
         appeal.  I wish to  hear  further  submissions  on  this  point  by
         reference to relevant case law (see, for example, Dang  (refugee  -
         query revocation Article 30)  [2013]  UKUT  00043).   However,  the
         resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me will  be  conducted
         on the basis that the findings of Judge Mensah at [48]  and  (as  I
         have indicated above) [53] shall stand.  The factual  matrix  shall
         not, therefore, be re-addressed in the Upper  Tribunal.   I  shall,
         however,  be  prepared  to  hear  further   submissions   and   (if
         appropriate) evidence in respect  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         children given the failure of Judge Mensah properly to address that
         issue in her decision.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 28 October 2016 is set aside. The judge's findings  of  fact  as
         regards the relationship between the appellant and her partner  (in
         particular in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  at  [48])  shall
         stand. The judge's conclusions in respect of (i) the revocation  of
         the appellant's refugee status and (ii) the best interests  of  the
         children shall not stand and the decision shall  be  remade  at  or
         following a resumed hearing of the Upper Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Clive Lane) at Bradford on a date to be fixed.

 2. The findings of fact in this appeal are settled (see my  error  of  law
    decision at [4-5]).  The basis of the revocation decision taken by  the
    Secretary of State and dated 1 March 2016 was as follows:

         In your particular case, you  were  granted  asylum  at  appeal  on
         21/10/2009 on the basis that as a single female with a young  child
         that she would be at risk of persecution [sic] where you return  to
         Pakistan.  It was determined that internal relocation would not  be
         an option and would be unduly harsh given  that  you  had  a  young
         child.  Furthermore, on submission of  your  settlement  protection
         application it was noted that you resumed  your  relationship  with
         your husband, Mr AH and therefore the circumstances of  which  your
         application for asylum was granted had ceased to exist  namely  you
         were no longer considered to be a lone single female.

 3. Mr Karnik, who appeared for the appellant, has helpfully summarised the
    law in his skeleton argument.  Article 1C  of  the  Refugee  Convention
    provides refugee status may be lost if 'the circumstances in connection
    which he has been recognised as a refugee have  ceased  to  exist,  [he
    cannot] continue to refuse to avail himself of the  protection  of  the
    country of his nationality.'

 4. There is surprisingly little  domestic  law  concerning  the  cessation
    provisions.  The House of Lords in  R  (Hoxha)  v  Special  Adjudicator
    [2005] 1 WLR 1063 at [65] held that 'the reason for applying a 'strict'
    and 'restrictive' approach to  the  cessation  clauses  ...  is  surely
    plain.  Once an asylum application has  been  formally  determined  and
    refugee status officially granted with all the benefits both under  the
    Convention and under national law  which  that  carries  with  it,  the
    refugee has the assurance of a secure future in the host country and  a
    legitimate expectation that he will not henceforth be stripped of  this
    save for demonstrably good and sufficient reason'.

 5. Whilst I acknowledge Mr Karnik's submission that, in the vast  majority
    of cases, it is likely that "the circumstances in connection which [the
    refugee] has been recognised as a refugee have ceased  to  exist"  must
    refer to circumstances existing in  the  country  of  nationality,  the
    Convention  does  not  actually  say  that  in   terms;   any   correct
    construction of Article 1C (5) must admit the possibility of  a  change
    in the circumstances of the refugee himself or herself; in  any  event,
    such a possibility is not excluded in  terms  by  the  wording  of  the
    Article.  Having said that, the most obvious example  of  a  subjective
    "change in circumstances" relates to a refugee's age.  If the Secretary
    of State decides to grant refugee status to an  asylum  seeker  who  is
    under the age of 18 years for reasons connected to his or her minority,
    she does not seek to revoke it simply because the  refugee  becomes  an
    adult.  The rationale for refraining from revoking  refugee  status  in
    such circumstances is as indicated by Lord Brown in Hoxha (see  above).
    Mr Karnik relies on further support (albeit not of a  judicial  nature)
    in the UNHCR Handbook.  At [135], the Handbook provides:

         135. "Circumstances" refer to fundamental changes in  the  country,
         which  can  be  assumed  to  remove  the  basis  of  the  fear   of
         persecution. A mere - possibly transitory -  change  in  the  facts
         surrounding the individual refugee's fear, which  does  not  entail
         such major changes of circumstances, is not sufficient to make this
         clause applicable. A refugee's status should not  in  principle  be
         subject to frequent  review  to  the  detriment  of  his  sense  of
         security, which international protection is intended to provide.

    It is clear that the authors of the Handbook have in mind circumstances
    changing in a refugee's country  of  nationality  rather  than  in  the
    circumstances of the refugee himself:

         112. Once a person's status as a refugee has been determined, it is
         maintained unless he comes within the terms of one of the cessation
         clauses.15  This  strict  approach  towards  the  determination  of
         refugee status results from the need to provide refugees  with  the
         assurance that their status will not be subject to constant  review
         in the light of temporary changes - not of a fundamental  character
         - in the situation prevailing in their country of origin.

 6.  Mr  Karnik  relies  also  upon  an  established  textbook   authority,
    Hathaway's The Law of Refugee Status.  At [6.1.4 - 2nd edition]  it  is
    stated that "a refugee whose claim has yet to  be  determined  is  less
    likely to have  become  so  established  in  the  asylum  country  that
    unacceptable  hardship  would  follow  from  dismissing  her  claim  by
    reference to the usual well-founded fear standard.  But once the asylum
    country has recognised her claim and the refugee has  begun  to  remake
    her  life,  real  caution  is  required  before  ordering   a   'second
    uprooting'".  The authors of Hathaway's were also of the view that "the
    drafters [of the Refugee Convention] focus on reversion to democracy as
    a rationale for these clauses [of cessation of status] and makes  clear
    that there was no intention to organise cessation for  purely  personal
    reasons - for example, because an individual recognised  as  a  refugee
    due to risks faced while a child has since become an adult".

 7. Mr Karnik submitted first that both judicial and  academic  authorities
    indicate that the cessation clause should only  be  applied  where  the
    change of circumstances occurred in the country of  nationality  and/or
    return and not in the refugee's personal circumstances  and,  secondly,
    notwithstanding the findings of Judge Mensah (which I  have  preserved)
    the appellant's husband AH had  been  found  to  have  acted  violently
    towards the family in the past and to have been an unreliable  witness.
    Judge Mensah had found that there had been no domestic violence in this
    case since the end of 2012.  She found that AH and  the  appellant  had
    been in a subsisting relationship for over eight years  although  there
    had been periods of separation as a result of domestic violence in 2012
    but these had "resolved".  The judge accepted  that  the  couple  spent
    time "living separately" but a sexual relationship had  continued;  she
    observed that "many couples do not live together but have a  subsisting
    marriage".  Mr Karnik submitted that the revocation of  the  status  of
    the appellant was not reasonable and her return to Pakistan  unsafe  if
    predicated on the assumption that  she  would  return  there  and  live
    together with AH and her child.

 8. I agree  with  Mr  Karnik's  submissions.   First,  I  acknowledge  the
    judicial authorities which indicate that revocation of  refugee  status
    is not to be undertaken lightly not only  because  of  the  possibility
    that a refugee returning to his or her country of  nationality  may  be
    exposed to real risk but also because, having once been granted refugee
    status, it is harsh in itself to expect a refugee in a new host country
    to rebuild a life for him or  herself  under  the  constant  threat  of
    removal to the original country of nationality.  In the present appeal,
    the appellant was granted refugee status following appeal on the  basis
    that she was a lone female with a child and that she would be  at  real
    risk in Pakistan upon return.  The possibility always existed that  the
    appellant would form a relationship but not necessarily with  a  former
    partner.  Indeed, there must be many women from Pakistan who have  been
    granted refugee status for exactly the same reasons as  this  appellant
    who have now formed  new  relationships  and  have  married  but  whose
    refugee status has not been challenged by the Secretary of  State.   It
    appears that the present appellant only came to the  attention  of  the
    respondent because of proceedings relating to AH's immigration  status.
    I find therefore that, whilst I do not accept that  Article  1C(5)  may
    only ever refer to circumstances in the country of  return,  I  am  not
    satisfied that there is a "demonstrably good and sufficient reason"  in
    this case to strip the appellant of her refugee status.

 9. Even if I  am  wrong  in  what  I  have  said  above  and  the  ongoing
    relationship  which  the  appellant  has  with  AH  does  constitute  a
    sufficient reason for stripping her of her refugee  status,  I  am  not
    satisfied that, on the facts, the  "circumstances  in  connection  with
    which" this appellant has been recognised as a refugee have "ceased  to
    exist".  That cessation has not occurred because I find as a fact  that
    it is not likely that AH would accompany the appellant and her child to
    live in Pakistan.  I am aware of the preserved findings of Judge Mensah
    but I find that, in the light  of  the  previous  history  of  domestic
    violence, the behaviour of AH towards women as a means  of  maintaining
    his immigration status in the United Kingdom and his  unreliability  as
    identified by previous judicial decision makers I find as a  fact  that
    he would not accompany the appellant and the child to Pakistan  as  the
    Secretary of State assumes that he  would.   I  reach  that  conclusion
    notwithstanding Judge Mensah's observation that, although the couple do
    not live together permanently, they  are  still  engaged  in  a  sexual
    relationship.  A  strict  application  of  Article  1C(5)  must  surely
    require that the circumstances, whether subjective or objective in  the
    country of return,  are  sufficiently  certain  and  settled  that  the
    returning former refugee would not be at real risk.  I  find  that  the
    likely future conduct of  AH  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  obviate  or
    diminish that risk.

10. For the reasons I have  given,  I  find  that  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision should be allowed.



Notice of Decision

11. The appellant's appeal against the decisions of 1 and 11 March 2016 (to
    revoke her refugee status and to refuse her  further  leave  to  remain
    respectively) are allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 2 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane













