
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: RP/00161/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|conference on 17 December 2020 (V)   |On 27 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE FORDHAM
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. We make clear that  anonymity  is  not  granted  to  protect  the
appellant's reputation following  his  convictions  for  criminal  offences.
Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  original
appellant (KT) is granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms A. Childs, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity we shall refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (KT) entered the UK on 07 July 1996 with his mother  and
    siblings when he was only a month old. His father was recognised  as  a
    refugee and the family was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain  in  line
    with his father on 11 October 1998.

3.    On 28 May 2013, when  he  was  16  years  old,  he  was  convicted  of
    possessing a knife in a public place, given a six month referral order,
    and was ordered to pay �40 in costs. On 24 April 2017, when he  was  20
    years old, he was convicted of a more serious offence of conspiracy  to
    possess a Class A  controlled  drug  with  intent  to  supply  and  was
    sentenced to four years and six months imprisonment.

4.    On 30 October 2017 the respondent (SSHD) notified the  appellant  that
    she was intending to 'exclude' him from the protection of  the  Refugee
    Convention under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002'). He was invited to rebut  the  presumption  that
    the crime was particularly serious and that he constituted a danger  to
    the  community.  The  appellant  sent  written  representations  on  28
    November 2017.

5.    On 21  March  2018  the  respondent  notified  the  appellant  of  her
    intention to 'revoke' refugee status although this is not a case  where
    refugee  status  was  'granted'  under  the   Qualification   Directive
    (2004/83/EC) and there is no principle of revocation under the  Refugee
    Convention. A notification of intention to  cease  refugee  status  was
    sent to UNHCR on 12 April 2018. UNHCR responded in a  letter  dated  07
    July 2018. UNHCR noted that  the  review  of  the  appellant's  refugee
    status appeared to be triggered by his criminal  conviction  but  urged
    the respondent  not  to  introduce  substantive  modifications  to  the
    cessation clauses by considering factors  that  were  not  relevant  to
    cessation. Article 1C of the Refugee Convention establishes the reasons
    why the Convention may cease  to  apply  to  a  person.  Article  33(2)
    contained an exception to the fundamental principle of  non-refoulement
    in certain defined circumstances. UNHCR  outlined  background  evidence
    relating to the situation in  Cabinda,  which  post-dated  the  country
    guidance decision in MB (Cabinda risk) Angola CG [2014] UKUT 00434.  It
    concluded that the current country information  indicated  that  people
    with actual or imputed political opinion in support of  FLEC  may  face
    ill-treatment in Angola and that a  more  thorough  assessment  of  the
    appellant's  perceived  links  to  FLEC  might  been  required.   UNHCR
    encouraged the respondent to consider whether  the  appellant's  family
    background might come to the attention of the Angolan authorities as  a
    result of normal security checks of an involuntary returnee.

6.    The respondent signed a deportation order on 07 October 2018  pursuant
    to section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  ('UKBA  2007').  In  a
    decision dated 08  October  2018  the  respondent  certified  that  the
    appellant was presumed to have been convicted of a particularly serious
    crime and constituted a danger to the  community  for  the  purpose  of
    section 72(2) NIAA  2002.  It  was  asserted,  inaccurately,  that  the
    consequence of section 72 is that "they do not qualify for a  grant  of
    asylum under Immigration Rule 334 on the basis that  Article  33(2)  of
    the Geneva Convention applies to him". The  respondent  concluded  that
    the appellant would not be at real risk of serious harm if returned  to
    Angola  or  in  the  alternative  that  he  should  be  excluded   from
    Humanitarian  Protection  because  he  constituted  a  danger  to   the
    community. The respondent made a  decision  to  revoke  refugee  status
    albeit this was an  inaccurate  description  of  what  was  in  fact  a
    decision that refugee status had ceased. The respondent  noted  UNHCR's
    view  that  the  country  situation  in  Angola  did  not  justify  the
    application of Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention. In light of the
    findings  made  in  MB  (Angola)  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return for reasons  of  his  Cabindan
    ethnicity or for reasons of imputed political opinion.  The  respondent
    went on to consider whether removal would be unlawful under  section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998 but concluded that  there  were  no  'very
    compelling  circumstances'  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

7.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker  ('the  judge')  allowed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 26 August 2020.  She  set  out  the
    background to the case, including the appellant's immigration  history,
    summarised the reasons given in the decision letter, and  outlined  the
    appellant's   criminal   history   and   the   evidence   relating   to
    rehabilitation  [2-39].  She  summarised  the  evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses at the hearing [40-64], the expert  country  report  [65-70],
    the psychiatric report [71-76], the  letter  from  UNHCR  [77-79],  and
    outlined  some  of  the  information  from  the  background   material,
    including the relevant country guidance case of MB (Angola) [80-83].

8.    The judge moved  on  to  make  her  findings  with  reference  to  the
    relevant legal framework. She began, as required  by  the  statute,  by
    considering the section 72 certificate. She evaluated the  evidence  in
    detail and gave sustainable reasons for concluding that  the  appellant
    had failed to rebut the  presumption  that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
    community  [84-103].  There  is  no  cross-appeal  to  challenge  those
    findings.

9.    At [104]  the  judge  directed  herself  appropriately  regarding  the
    effect of the decision to uphold the certificate. She made  clear  that
    section 72 is said to reflect Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention.
    Section 72(10)(b) states that if the Tribunal is in agreement that  the
    presumption applies it must dismiss the appeal  in  so  far  as  it  is
    brought on Refugee Convention and Humanitarian Protection grounds.  The
    judge was correct to conclude that the appellant  could  only  rely  on
    Article 3.
10.   Consistent with the decision in Essa (Revocation of protection status
    appeals) [2018] UKUT 244, the judge went on to make  findings  on  the
    issue of cessation [105-121].  She  referred  to  the  relevant  legal
    framework. At [106] she used the wording of Article 1C of the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 11 of the Qualification  Directive.  The  judge
    clearly understood that the burden of proof was on the  respondent  to
    show that there had been a significant  and  non-temporary  change  in
    circumstances such that the appellant could  no  longer,  because  the
    circumstances in connection with which he has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail  himself  of
    the protection of his country of nationality [120].
11.   It is worth outlining the judge's findings relating to  cessation  in
    detail because they form the central plank of this appeal. Given  that
    the burden  of  proof  was  on  the  respondent  the  judge  began  by
    considering the reasons given in the decision  letter  [107-111].  She
    noted that the respondent relied on  MB  (Angola)  and  asserted  that
    there had been a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances
    such that there was no longer a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    he would be at risk of persecution for reasons  of  imputed  political
    opinion  because  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  he  was
    politically active and he would not be perceived as an  active  member
    of FLEC. The judge made the following findings:

           "112. Notwithstanding the date of the country guidance  case  of
                 2014 some six year (sic) plus, the respondent  has  failed
                 to produce any further evidence to support the  conclusion
                 that the situation as described by the Upper  Tribunal  in
                 2014  still   persists.   Further,   notwithstanding   the
                 observations by UNHCR to revisit the decision on the basis
                 that  the  respondent  had  failed  to   give   sufficient
                 consideration to the fact that the appellant  had  entered
                 as a  dependant  of  his  father  who  had  been  actively
                 involved  in  FLEC,  there  had  been  no  review  of  the
                 decision.


           113.  Background material was submitted by the appellant. In the
                 BTI report of 2018 it recorded that the past two years had
                 been marked  by  a  profound  economic  crisis  which  had
                 affected all areas of social and political life in Angola,
                 triggered by a sharp drop on oil  prices  in  later  2014.
                 There are almost no institutionalised social  safety  nets
                 in Angola and no public health coverage.


           114.  The January 2015 CIG on treatment of persons from  Cabinda
                 province had been archived in November  2019  but  it  had
                 said that failed asylum seekers on return would  not  face
                 interrogation  or  ill  treatment  unless  a  person   was
                 returning using travel documents  other  than  a  national
                 passport which will be the case for the appellant.  Whilst
                 it was accepted that a person could be interrogated  there
                 was no evidence of ill-treatment. Another report at 2.4  4
                 (sic) stated that a person in these circumstances would be
                 detained for days.


           115.  The Human Rights Watch report of 2019  reported  that  pro
                 independence Cabindan protesters had been arrested.


           116.  The US State report of August  2018  on  human  rights  in
                 Angola stated that prison conditions were harsh  and  life
                 threatening due to overcrowding,  lack  of  medical  care,
                 corruption and violence. The authorities held  short  term
                 detainees with serving long  term  sentences  for  violent
                 crimes and malnourishment was widespread which was  echoed
                 in the Human Rights Watch report of 2018.


           117.  Whilst the  Home  Office  has  stated  that  it  does  not
                 apportion any weight to an  individual's  conviction  when
                 considering whether cessation  is  appropriate  -  [7]  of
                 letter of 21 March 2018 - it is  clear,  as  suggested  by
                 UNHCR, that this  does  remain  a  trigger  for  cessation
                 noting in particular there had been no  intent  to  revoke
                 the refugee status of any of the appellant's family.


           118.  In any event  on  the  evidence  that  is  before  me  the
                 respondent has clearly failed to consider the position  of
                 the appellant on return to Luanda as the son of  a  person
                 who has been campaigning for FLEC.  The  country  guidance
                 case provides there are normal security procedures at  the
                 airport and that investigations would  be  made  into  the
                 identity of the returnee. There is  the  possibility  that
                 the appellant will  be  identified  by  reference  to  his
                 father how has been found to be a FLEC  supporter.  It  is
                 highly likely that the authorities will require  the  name
                 of his parents. As the appellant is returning from  London
                 suspicion may well arise at it is unlikely that  he  would
                 be returning on a national passport  and  more  likely  on
                 travel documents. He has  never  been  to  Angola  and  he
                 claims that he does not speak Portuguese. He would have no
                 address to give to any immigration officer and would  have
                 no obvious means of support. In these circumstances it  is
                 likely that there would be further  investigation  of  him
                 and when the  authorities  discovered  that  he  had  been
                 deported for drug offences, if the question  is  asked  he
                 cannot  be  expected  to  lie,  it  is  likely  that   the
                 interrogation would be more thorough.


           119.   In  these  circumstances  detention  is  likely  and  the
                 background  material  shows  that  prison  conditions  are
                 severe. That risk as not  been  fully  considered  by  the
                 respondent but it is an important component in the overall
                 risk to the appellant on return. It remains  however  that
                 the risk emanating from his  father  has  not  been  fully
                 quantified.


           120.  In all the circumstances there has to be  a  doubt  as  to
                 whether the respondent has discharged the burden of  proof
                 in showing that there are significant and enduring changes
                 to warrant a revocation of refugee protection.


           121.  However in the light of the finding as to the  section  72
                 certificate the appellant cannot have  any  benefit  under
                 the Refugee Convention."
12.   The judge went on to make findings relating to risk  on  return  with
      reference to Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.
      She reminded herself that it is an absolute right and made clear that
      the burden of proof was on the appellant to show that  removal  would
      breach Article 3  [122].  She  considered  the  appellant's  personal
      circumstances in addition to some of the background evidence she  had
      already considered when assessing the background situation in Angola.
      For similar reasons, she concluded that the  appellant  would  be  at
      risk of more intense questioning on  return  to  Angola  whereby  his
      father's background as an active FLEC member was likely  to  come  to
      light. She took into account the  background  evidence  which  showed
      that pro-independence Cabindans were  still  arrested  and  concluded
      that "the issue remains live". For these reasons she found that there
      was a real risk of detention and that the background evidence  showed
      that the conditions in detention would breach Article 3 [126-128].
13.   The judge then turned to consider Article 8  with  reference  to  the
      relevant  legal  framework  under  section  117C(3)  NIAA  2002.  She
      conducted  a  structured  analysis  consistent  with   the   guidance
      suggested by the Court of Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]
      WLR(D) 371 whereby she considered to what extent the appellant  might
      meet any of the exceptions to deportation  as  part  of  her  overall
      consideration of whether there were 'very  compelling  circumstances'
      which outweighed the public interest in  deportation.  She  made  the
      following findings relating to Exception 1 (private life):

           "138. I find that the appellant has been  lawfully  resident  in
                 the UK for all of is life, with the exception of the first
                 4 weeks. On the issue of social and cultural integration I
                 note his  offending  history,  noting  that  he  has  been
                 convicted twice. I note that  he  is  suspected  of  being
                 involved in a gang. He has been educated  in  the  UK  and
                 knows of no other country. Social and cultural integration
                 in urban Britain in the 21st century  has  by  its  nature
                 very different components to those from the last  century.
                 There was little evidence before me and in  any  event  no
                 evidence  that  he  was  not   socially   and   culturally
                 integrated. A criminal history by itself is not sufficient
                 to find that the appellant is not so integrated.


           139.  I find however that the fact  that  removal  would  breach
                 Article 3 means that there are very significant  obstacles
                 to his integration in Angola. He is and would be viewed as
                 an outsider. He would have a fear that the authorities may
                 discover that he is the son of a former FLEC supporter and
                 would be fearful of the treatment which may follow. He has
                 no skills and the only work available would be  likely  to
                 be in the informal sector. His knowledge of Portuguese  is
                 limited and his anxiety condition would deteriorate. He is
                 unlikely to be able to assimilate to  life  there  and  is
                 unlikely to be able to support himself. The  appellant  is
                 at risk of becoming destitute.
           .....
           141.  In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
                 to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                 public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                 compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                 in  Exceptions  1  and  2.  I  remind  myself   that   the
                 circumstances must be  over  and  above  the  findings  in
                 respect of Exception 1 and 2. These replicate  the  issues
                 with regard to Article 8 and  I  factor  in  the  findings
                 about with reference to Article 3. I find given all of the
                 evidence that there are very compelling circumstances over
                 and above Exceptions 1 and  2  for  the  reasons  set  out
                 herein."


14.   The Secretary of State's original grounds were  poorly  particularised
    but have been  formulated  into  the  following  three  points  in  the
    subsequent skeleton argument.

       i) The judge failed to follow relevant country guidance and erred in
          concluding that there was  likely  to  be  a  continued  risk  on
          return.

      ii) The judge erred in finding that the  appellant  had  no  cultural
          links to Angola when his parents are Angolan and he is likely  to
          have had 'exposure to his culture and heritage'.

     iii) The judge erred in concluding that there  were  'very  compelling
          circumstances'   that   outweighed   the   public   interest   in
          deportation. It was open to the Secretary of State to  find  that
          his offending history indicated that  he  was  not  socially  and
          culturally integrated in the UK. In the  skeleton  argument,  but
          not pleaded in the  original  grounds,  the  Secretary  of  State
          places reliance on the decision in Binbuga v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ
          551.

15.   A face to face hearing was not held because  it  was  not  practicable
    due to public health measures put in place to  control  the  spread  of
    Covid-19. The appeal was heard by way of a remote hearing by Skype  for
    Business with the parties' consent. The  parties  confirmed  that  they
    were content that there was no prejudice in proceeding in this way. All
    issues could be determined in a remote hearing. The submissions made by
    the parties are a matter of record.

Decision and reasons

16.   In view of the fact that the judge's findings relating to Exception  1
    under section 117C(4) and section 117C(6) NIAA 2002 relied  heavily  on
    her earlier findings relating to risk on return  under  Article  3,  it
    seems clear to us that the second and third grounds rely on the success
    of the first. This was the focus of Mr Melvin's submissions.

17.    The  Secretary  of  State's  case  relies  primarily  on  a   correct
    interpretation of the country guidance in MB (Angola).

18.   The decision letter cited the country guidance as the sole reason  for
    concluding that the circumstances surrounding recognition as a  refugee
    no longer existed and/or that there was no Article 3 risk. At  [52]  of
    the decision the Secretary of State concluded that in  the  absence  of
    "high profile  opposition  activity  to  the  Angolan  regime"  it  was
    unlikely that the appellant would be perceived as "an active member  of
    the upper echelons of any political organization working to destabilise
    the unitary Angolan state."

19.   The grounds of appeal simply  quote  the  headnote  from  the  country
    guidance then assert that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for
    following the guidance. The grounds go on to assert that  "the  caselaw
    appears clear" that only  personal  involvement  in  FLEC  would  raise
    suspicion. Even  if  the  authorities  became  aware  of  his  father's
    involvement in FLEC, there was no indication that he  continued  to  be
    involved in FLEC or that he was ever  "high  profile  or  of  a  senior
    position". In light of the  Upper  Tribunal's  finding  that  FLEC  now
    appeared  to  be  a  spent  force,  and  Cabindan  ethnicity  alone  is
    insufficient to attract risk, it was not open to the judge to find that
    the appellant would be at risk by association with his father.

20.   The Secretary of State's skeleton argument asserted that the  body  of
    up to date evidence before the judge was not sufficient to depart  from
    the country guidance. It was  argued  that  there  was  nothing  in  MB
    (Angola) to support the finding that the appellant would be at risk  on
    the basis of his father's "significantly stale" activities.  There  was
    scant evidence to suggest that he might  be  at  risk  because  of  his
    criminal convictions.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Melvin  argued  that  the
    appellant did not fit within any of the risk categories  identified  by
    the Upper Tribunal in MB (Angola). The country guidance only identified
    a risk to those who are politically active. He  acknowledged  that  the
    more recent evidence contained in the Human Rights Watch report  talked
    about demonstrators being attacked and ill-treated, but submitted  that
    there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  would   be
    politically active.
21.   The headnote of MB (Angola) outlined the following country guidance.

           "1.   FP (Return - Cabinda - Non-Luandan) Angola CG [2003] UKIAT
                 00204 no longer provides an accurate assessment of  country
                 conditions.  It ceases to be country guidance.


           2.    There is significant  evidence  of  human  rights  abuses,
                 including within Cabinda and affecting Cabindans,  problems
                 of  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,   ill-treatment   in
                 detention, poor prison conditions, restrictions on  freedom
                 of  expression,  government  action  against  protest   and
                 limitations  in  the  legal  system  and   security   laws.
                 However, these problems do not render all  those  returning
                 to Angola or Cabinda to be at risk of serious harm, whether
                 or not they are Cabindans.


           3.     Unless  there  exists  a  situation  in  which  there  is
                 generalised violence or armed conflict at a very high level
                 (which is not the case here) in order to establish  a  real
                 risk of harm, an  individual  has  to  establish  that,  by
                 reason of circumstances as they relate to him, there  is  a
                 reasonable likelihood he will come into  contact  with  the
                 authorities in a way that will result in his detention.


           4.    The Angolan authorities do not  equate  being  a  Cabindan
                 with being a member of or supporter of the  Front  for  the
                 Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC).


           5.    The  evidence  fails  to  establish  that  FLEC  currently
                 operates at a level such as to represent a real  threat  to
                 the Angolan authorities although  they  are  keen  to  take
                 measures to ensure that  there  is  no  resurgence  of  its
                 activities. Nor  does  the  evidence  establish  that  FLEC
                 reflects  the  views  and  aspirations  of  a  majority  of
                 Cabindans, notwithstanding the fact that the Cabindan sense
                 of social identity remains very strong and separation  from
                 Angola remains an aspiration shared by many.   The  Angolan
                 authorities readily understand the distinction between FLEC
                 membership or support and Cabindan self-assertion.


           6.    There is clear  evidence  of  normal  security  checks  at
                 airports,  including  Luanda  airport  on  arrival.   Those
                 checks are likely  to  be  thorough  and  directed  towards
                 establishing  the  identity  of  the  person  entering  the
                 country.


           7.    There are no obstacles in a  returnee  to  Luanda  airport
                 making an onward journey to Cabinda. The finding in FP that
                 travel to Cabinda from Luanda is excluded  as  a  practical
                 possibility is no longer correct.


           8.    Language is a distinctive  method  of  identification  but
                 identification as a Cabindan is not sufficient to establish
                 a real risk.


           9.    A person of Cabindan origin returning to Angola  will  not
                 in general be at real risk of ill-treatment  by  reason  of
                 his or her Cabindan origin.  Such a  person  is  reasonably
                 likely to be detained (with the accompanying risk  of  ill-
                 treatment) only if he  or  she  has  a  history  of  active
                 involvement with FLEC (or one of its factions, such as FLEC-
                 PM  or  FLEC-FAC).   Excluded  from  those  at   risk   are
                 individuals formerly  associated  with  the  pro-government
                 FLEC-Renewal (FLEC-Renovada) or Antonio Bembe.


           10.   A person's Cabindan origin will not, in general,  preclude
                 him from living or working in Luanda or some other part  of
                 Angola."

22.   The Secretary of State submits that MB (Angola) found that  there  was
    only a risk to active FLEC  members,  and  according  to  the  decision
    letter, this was elevated to "high profile" activity.
23.   Having considered the decision in MB (Angola) in  detail  we  conclude
    that the country guidance does not have the meaning  the  Secretary  of
    State appears to contend. We make the following observations.

24.   First,  the account of the appellant in  MB  (Angola)  was  not  found
    credible. The focus of the country guidance  was  to  consider  whether
    return to Angola as a Cabindan failed asylum seeker would give rise  to
    risk on grounds of attributed political opinion as well as  considering
    the risk to FLEC members and supporters.

25.   Second, the country guidance did not state  that  there  was  such  an
    improvement in the situation that there was no risk to those associated
    with FLEC. On the contrary, the Upper Tribunal made  clear  that  there
    was significant evidence of human rights abuses  in  Angola,  including
    within Cabinda. However, the Upper Tribunal found that  those  problems
    were insufficient to show that a person returning to Angola would be at
    risk solely  because  of  the  general  country  situation.  The  Upper
    Tribunal made clear that the evidence fell far short  of  showing  that
    all Cabindans were at risk, but  emphasised  that  each  case  must  be
    considered on the  facts.  In  order  to  establish  a  real  risk  "an
    individual has to establish that, by reason of  circumstances  as  they
    relate to him, there is a  reasonable  likelihood  he  will  come  into
    contact with  the  authorities  in  a  way  that  will  result  in  his
    detention. This is sometimes referred to as arising by reason  of  'his
    profile'" [109-110].

26.   Third, nothing in  the  ninth  point  in  the  headnote  supports  the
    Secretary of State's assertion that only high profile or senior members
    of FLEC would be at risk. The guidance states that those with a history
    of active involvement with FLEC were at risk but did  not  specify  the
    level of activity. The Tribunal distinguished those who  were  "members
    and supporters" or "associated with FLEC" (which could  include  family
    members) and "Cabindan self-assertion" [112].

27.   Fourth, nothing  in  the  country  guidance  departs  from  the  trite
    principle of refugee law that a risk might arise because of  attributed
    political opinion. What matters is the perception  of  the  persecutor.
    The Upper Tribunal made repeated reference to evidence, which  included
    potential risk arising from suspected activity for FLEC and touched  on
    the issue in its findings [53][73][88][127][138].

28.    Fifth,  although  the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that Cabindans returning to Angola  would
    be suspected of FLEC activities, it found that the evidence showed that
    there would be tight security checks at the airport [87]. It quoted the
    country guidance decision in FP (Return - Cabinda - Non-Luandan) Angola
    CG [2003] UKIAT 00204 in which  the  previous  Tribunal  found  that  a
    person would be questioned with a view to establishing  their  identity
    and "whether they were of interest to the authorities for political  or
    criminal reasons" [86]. The Tribunal  in  MB  (Angola)  considered  the
    evidence relating to risk at the airport and noted that UNHCR  reported
    no cases of ill-treatment, but another source reported  some  cases  of
    failed asylum seekers being ill-treated by state intelligence  officers
    [88]. At [115] the Tribunal concluded that checks  would  not  lead  to
    arrest and detention "unless there is a specific reason for attention."

29.   Sixth, we note that what is said at [113] of MB (Angola)  muddies  the
    waters slightly in that it appears to question a previous finding in FP
    (Angola)  and  draws  back  from  the  suggestion  that   the   Angolan
    authorities may know of individuals, or their family members,  who  are
    FLEC members. However, we note that this finding is  not  explained  in
    detail and was not included in the main country guidance.

30.   Having conducted this analysis we conclude that there  is  nothing  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  that  depart  from  the  country
    guidance. The judge  was  obliged  to  conduct  an  assessment  of  the
    appellant's individual profile. It is  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    father was an active member of FLEC who was detained and  subjected  to
    past persecution. We note that his father  said  that  he  is  still  a
    member of FLEC although his statement does not outline  what  level  of
    activity this might involve. The judge's  finding  that  the  appellant
    would be subject to tight security checks on return to the airport  was
    consistent with the country guidance. The country guidance  made  clear
    that some cases might give rise to specific reason for  attention.  The
    judge gave sustainable reasons to explain why the  appellant's  profile
    might attract more detailed questioning. The fact that he did not speak
    Portuguese, was Cabindan, had never lived in  Angola,  had  no  current
    links with Angola, and was likely to be identified as a person who  was
    being forcibly returned on a travel document, were all factors that the
    judge was entitled to take into account.

31.   Even taking into account the comments at [113] of MB (Angola)  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that it was  at  least  likely  that  the
    authorities may have a record of  his  father's  detention  as  a  FLEC
    activist. There is likely to be a distinction between  the  authorities
    keeping general records of suspected FLEC members  and  supporters  and
    records of formal detentions. The Tribunal  in  MB  (Angola)  found  no
    evidence of the former but it  can  reasonably  be  inferred  that  the
    authorities are likely to keep records of the latter. Although  it  did
    not form a significant part of her reasoning, it was also open  to  the
    judge to take into account the appellant's criminal profile given  that
    it was a factor quoted at [86] of MB (Angola) and also formed  part  of
    the evidence given by the country expert, which the judge summarised at
    [66].

32.   As we have already observed, the country guidance  did  not  focus  on
    family members of FLEC members and supporters.  However,  it  is  trite
    that family  members  might,  by  association,  also  be  suspected  of
    political activity. It was open to the judge to consider the opinion of
    the country expert,  who  considered  that  people  who  were  actively
    involved in FLEC were at risk and that  the  threat  was  "enlarged  to
    family members". The judge took into account the fact that the  country
    guidance was six years old and was obliged to look at the  most  up  to
    date evidence at the date of the hearing. Far from  seeking  to  depart
    from the country guidance she  took  it  into  account  and  considered
    whether there was any evidence to show that there  was  no  longer  any
    risk to real or perceived FLEC activists. Given  the  current  evidence
    continues to show that active FLEC members  and  supporters  are  still
    likely to attract the adverse attention of the Angolan authorities,  it
    was open to the judge to conclude that, even if the appellant  was  not
    politically active himself, he might be perceived to be an active  FLEC
    member  by  association  with  his  father  when  faced  with  detailed
    questioning at an airport 'pinch point' and that  this  was  likely  to
    give rise to a real risk of detention and ill-treatment.

33.   It is understandable that the Secretary of State  disagrees  with  the
    decision but we conclude that the judge's findings were consistent with
    the country guidance and were within a range of reasonable responses to
    the up to date evidence  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.  The  judge's
    findings that (i) the respondent had failed to show that there has been
    a significant and non-temporary change in circumstances such  that  the
    circumstances in connection with which he was recognised as  a  refugee
    have ceased to exist; and (ii) that the appellant had shown that  there
    were substantial grounds for believing that he would be at real risk of
    Article 3 ill-treatment on return did not involve the making of  errors
    of law. It follows that her findings relating to  Article  8  are  also
    sustainable given that they relied primarily on those relating to  risk
    on return.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   M. Canavan          Date   13 January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
