
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00044/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR MUSA NESHAT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Solomon of Counsel instructed by MKM Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1.  The  respondent  (hereafter  "the  claimant")  is  a   national   of
       Afghanistan. On 24 April 2008 he had been granted refugee  status  in
       the UK with Leave to Remain to April 2013.  On  24  April  2014)  the
       claimant was convicted of sexual assault on a female and sentenced in
       June the same year to  2  years'  imprisonment.  On  8  July  2014  a
       deportation order was made against the claimant as a foreign criminal
       and on 14 July a letter detailing reasons was sent  confirming  that:
       (i) on 12 August 2014 he had been informed of the  intention  of  the
       appellant (hereafter "the Secretary of State or SSHD") to exclude him
       from international protection on s. 72 grounds under s.72(6)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and he  was  invited  to
       rebut the presumption that the crime for which he was  convicted  was
       particularly serious and that his continued presence in the UK  would
       constitute a danger to the community. It was noted that  he  did  not
       respond to this letter; (ii) on 22 December the SSHD notified him  of
       her intention to cease his refugee status  and  UNHCR  was  informed;
       (iii) on 29 April 2014, having considered the claimant's and  UNHCR's
       response, the SSHD decided that the  claimant's  refugee  status  had
       ceased. The essential reason for the cessation was that the SSHD  had
       considered whether the claimant was still at risk of ill treatment at
       the hands of Mohammed Qasim Fahim on account of his membership of the
       well known Nishat family but had concluded this  was  no  longer  the
       case. On pages 5-6 of the decision letter it was noted that  the  COI
       Service had made enquiries with the British Embassy in Kabul  in  May
       2010 following another COI request abut the Nishat family,  "but  the
       Embassy did not recognise the Nishat family  name.  The  COI  Service
       also  checked  the  Afghan  Bios  website   which   currently   lists
       approximately 2500 high profile characters in Afghan society. ... The
       Nishat family name did not appear on this database".

    2. The claimant's appeal came before First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
       who on 2 November 2015 allowed his appeal. At [14]-[19] the judge set
       out the applicable law on cessation and said at [18] that in order to
       qualify for international protection the claimant  had  to  meet  the
       requirement  of  the  Protection  Regulations  (Cm  6918)   and   the
       Immigration Rules implementing the Qualification Directive.  At  [19]
       she added:

           "Further, it was accepted at the commencement of the hearing  by
           the [SSHD's] representative that if I  were  to  find  that  the
           [claimant's] refugee status should not be ceased then that would
           be the end of the matter as if the4  [claimant]  was  a  refugee
           then he could not be deported from the UK. "

    3. At [25] the  judge  noted  that  she  had  before  her  a  number  of
       unreported  determinations  which  refer  to  the  claimant's  family
       members - "he refers to them as cousins but for the most  part  I  am
       satisfied that this is a loose use of  the  word  cousin".  In  these
       determinations the individuals concerned had been found to be at risk
       of persecution by virtue of being members of the  Nishat  family  and
       connected with the Communist Party.

    4. At [36] the judge noted the COIS evidence relied on by the SSHD dated
       11 July 2012. The judge noted that this evidence:

           "... suggests that the Nishat family is not known in Afghanistan
           as having been involved  with  Communism  or  the  family  being
           persecuted. This report has taken no note of any of the evidence
           of Dr Giustozzi referred to in  several  of  the  Determinations
           that I have before me. I bear in mind that  Dr  Giustozzi  is  a
           recognised expert in the situation in Afghanistan and  for  this
           reason I prefer his evidence  to  that  contained  in  the  COIS
           report".

    5. At [39] she concluded that she was:

           "... unable to be satisfied that the [SSHD] has shown that there
           is a change of circumstances in Afghanistan of a significant and
           non-temporary nature and the circumstances which  justified  the
           [claimant's] fear of persecution on the basis of  which  refugee
           status was granted no longer exists. Indeed the  Respondent  has
           adduced no evidence to show that members of  the  Neshat  family
           are no longer at risk in Afghanistan".

    6. At [40] the judge added that as she had allowed the  appeal  on  this
       ground "and in view of the fact that the Appellant  is  a  refugee  I
       have not gone on  to  consider  any  appeal  against  deportation  as
       the[claimant] comes within one of the automatic exceptions".

    7. The SSHD's grounds of appeal submitted that the judge  had  erred  in
       law in (i) failing to make any findings on the s.72 certificate or to
       give any consideration to human rights grounds; (ii) failing to  make
       any findings as to whether the claimant was related  to  the  persons
       named in a number of unreported determinations said  to  concern  the
       claimant's cousins; and in (iii) failing to give adequate reasons for
       attaching  significant  weight  to  the  evidence  of  Dr   Giustozzi
       contained within the unreported determinations.

    8. I am grateful to the parties for their submissions.

    9. Notwithstanding that I find no merit in ground (ii), I am in no doubt
       that the First tier Tribunal judge materially erred in law.

   10. As regards ground (i), it is clear as  a  matter  of  law  that  when
       dealing with a case in which the SSHD has issued a s.72 certificate a
       judge is bound by s.72(10)(a) to "... begin substantive  deliberation
       of the appeal by considering this certificate," By s.72(10(b)  he  or
       she must, "if in agreement that presumptions under  subsections  (2),
       (3) or (4) apply (having  given  the  appellant  an  opportunity  for
       rebuttal)  ... dismiss the appeal in so  far  as  it  relies  on  the
       ground specified in subsection 9(a)."

   11. It is manifest that the judge failed to perform  the  statutory  duty
       imposed on her by s.72(10). Mr Solomon submits that this failure  was
       not material because the Presenting  Office  had  conceded  that  the
       certificate did not apply. Not only is there nothing in the  decision
       letters and correspondence from the SSHD saying that,  but  there  is
       nothing recorded in the determination to show that; nor  (Mr  Solomon
       concedes) is there any mention even in  the  note  held  by  him  (or
       anyone else) of the hearing that records such a  concession.  Insofar
       as Mr  Solomon  sought  to  submit  that  the  judge's  determination
       indicates that it was nevertheless "implicit" that the SSHD no longer
       relied on the certificate, I find nothing to  demonstrate  that  this
       was the case. In the absence of any  clear  indication  by  the  SSHD
       expressed at the hearing that the certificate was  no  longer  relied
       on, it would be wholly wrong to try and infer that such an indication
       was given.

   12. Mr Solomon submits that even if I were to decide (as I have) that the
       judge erred in law in failing to first consider the certificate, this
       did not amount to a material error because the reasons she  gave  for
       allowing the appeal on the basis that the claimant had not ceased  to
       be a refugee were unimpeachable.

   13. I am not persuaded by this submission. Leaving aside the plain  error
       in [39] where it is stated that "the [SHD] has adduced no evidence to
       show that members of the Nishat family  are  no  longer  at  risk  in
       Afghanistan" , the judge's reasons set out at [36] for rejecting  the
       COIS evidence to this effect relied on by the SSHD  disclose a flawed
       reliance on excerpts of a report  by  Dr  Giustozzi  which  had  been
       before tribunal judges dealing with the cases of individuals who  had
       been found to be at real risk of persecution on account of membership
       of the Nishat family. As Mr Solomon acknowledged,  Judge  Andrew  did
       not have Dr Giustozzi's full report before her; she relied solely  on
       the  excerpts  cited  in  the  unreported  determinations.  She   was
       therefore unable to say whether or not that report addressed the COIS
       evidence or, if it did not,  why  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  should  be
       "preferred". A judge is not entitled to attach weight  to  an  expert
       report unless satisfied  that  it  has  addressed  evidence  for  and
       against the conclusions it reaches as to risk on return.

   14. Given that Judge Andrew made no  findings  on  whether  the  claimant
       (even if subject to cessation) was entitled to succeed on  Article  3
       or Article 8 ECHR grounds, Mr Solomon cannot pray in  aid  a  set  of
       alternative findings that were capable of standing alone irrespective
       of flaws in treatment of the certificate and/or the cessation issue.

   15. I noted earlier that I considered that the judge had materially erred
       in law notwithstanding the lack of merit in ground  (ii).  My  reason
       for finding no merit in this ground is that it is sufficiently  clear
       that the judge found as a fact that the individuals involved  in  the
       unreported  determinations  identified  were  members  of  the   same
       extended  family  and  the  respondent's  grounds  do  not  in  terms
       challenge any of the judge's findings of fact on this issue.

   16. For the above reasons I conclude that the judge materially  erred  in
       law and that her decision must be set aside.

   17. I sought submissions from the parties as  to  what  course  I  should
       adopt were I to conclude that the judge had materially erred in  law.
       Mr Solomon submitted that I should remit the case to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. He also  submitted  that  I  should  preserve  the  judge's
       findings of fact. I am persuaded that this would be a  suitable  case
       to remit, but not that there is any basis for preserving any  of  the
       judge's findings of fact.  Those  findings  were  predicated  on  the
       judge's positive assessment of the quality  and  reliability  of  the
       report by Dr Giustozzi and such  assessment  has  been  found  to  be
       flawed.

  Directions

   18. I would direct, however, that:

       as soon as practicable the First tier Tribunal hold a Case Management
       Review hearing;

           (a)    in time for this hearing  the  SSHD  is  to  produce  the
           aforementioned report of Dr Giustozzi (which should be available
           from  the  files  relating  to  the  unreported   determinations
           identified by Judge Andrew);

           (b)    in time for the hearing the SSHD  clarifies  whether  she
           disputes that the claimant is a member of the Nishat family; and

           (c)    in time for the hearing, the SSHD clarifies  whether  she
           no longer accepts that members of the Nishat family face a  real
           risk of persecution in Afghanistan.

  Both parties are at liberty to adduce further evidence in accordance with
  further tribunal directions.

  It will be necessary for the First tier Tribunal to  consider  first  the
  issue  of  the  certificate.  In  that  connection,  it  is  a   relevant
  consideration that the claimant did not respond when first informed  that
  a certificate was under consideration; however, under  the  terms  of  s.
  72(10)(b), the claimant must be afforded the opportunity of rebuttal.

        a) For the above reasons:

        b) The First tier Tribunal materially erred in law and its decision
           is set aside.

        c) The case is remitted to be  heard  by  a  First  tier  Tribunal,
           excluding Judge Andrew.




                               Signed
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


