
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: RP/00015/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC by a remote hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 25 August 2021                     |On the 07 October 2021           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     A Z
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adebayo, solicitor advocate instructed on behalf
                    of the appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer (hereinafter referred to as
         the "FtTJ") who allowed the appeal of AZ against  the  decision  of
         the respondent made on 7 February 2020 in a decision promulgated on
         4 March 2021.

      2. Whilst this is the appeal brought on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
         State, for sake of convenience I intend to refer to the parties  as
         they were before the FtT.

      3. The FtT did make an anonymity order and no grounds have been raised
         by the Secretary of State for the order  to  be  discharged  during
         these proceedings. I therefore continue the anonymity direction set
         out at the end of this decision.

      4. The background is set out in the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  the
         evidence in the bundle. The appellant claimed to be an undocumented
         male Kuwaiti Bidoon and on 1 May 2013 the  respondent  granted  him
         refugee status.

      5. As a result of information that became available to the respondent,
         on 7 July 2020 the respondent issued to the appellant a  notice  of
         cancellation of refugee status based on evidence the respondent had
         obtained  that  the  appellant  applied  for  a  Visa  to  the  USA
         authorities on 4 March 2013 using a passport validly issued  on  16
         March 2011 and in his interview confirmed the details of the holder
         as an Iraqi born in 1961 and providing a family history of life  in
         Iraq. The Visa was later revoked after it transpired  that  he  had
         applied for asylum in the UK. The respondent thus asserted that his
         refugee status was obtained by deception and that he was  an  Iraqi
         national. The full details leading to that decision are set out  in
         the respondent's decision of 7 July 2020.

      6. The FtTJ recorded the appellant's account that he accepted that  he
         had used passport fraudulently it not being his  but  that  it  was
         obtained to him by an agent who had instructed him to lie about the
         details that he had  given  in  his  interview  with  the  American
         authorities.

      7. The appellant came before the FtT and in a decision promulgated  on
         4 March 2021 FtTJ Saffer allowed  his  appeal.  Having  heard  oral
         evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  brother  and  another  family
         relative and having considered the documentary  evidence  provided,
         the FtTJ reached the conclusion that the appellant  was  a  Kuwaiti
         Bidoon and was not an Iraqi citizen for the reasons that he set out
         in paragraphs [18-[24].

      8. Permission to appeal was issued and on 6 May  2021  permission  was
         granted by FtTJ Scott Baker.

      9. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing.

     10. Subsequently, the appeal  was  listed  for  a  remote  hearing  via
         Microsoft teams. The Tribunal listed the  hearing  to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     11. The hearing took place on 25 August 2021,  by  means  of  Microsoft
         teams which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a  remote  hearing.  I  was  present  at  Court.  The
         advocates attended remotely via video as did the  appellant.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

     12. Mr Kotas relied upon the grounds which he  amplified  in  his  oral
         submissions.  He submitted that the FtTJ erred in law by failing to
         engage  with  the  respondent's  case   and   highlighted   certain
         paragraphs of the decision letter. In particular paragraph 25 where
         the evidence from the Kuwaiti Community Association was  considered
         and where it was  stated  that  no  investigation  notes  had  been
         enclosed. Whilst Mr Kotas  referred  to  the  review  decision  (as
         stated in the grounds) he did not provide a copy of the full review
         decision and stated that he did not seek to do so. He  referred  to
         paragraph 28 of the decision letter which  confirmed  that  the  US
         visa was cancelled because he the appellant made a claim for asylum
         and that was not consistent with the appellant's  account  that  it
         was rejected due to the passport being fraudulent.

     13. Mr Kotas referred to the written grounds and that the FtTJ erred by
         not considering paragraph 5.3 of the Land Info report and  that  it
         was difficult to bribe officials. He did however  accept  that  the
         report did not discount  that  fraud  might  not  be  possible  but
         nonetheless he submitted it was a point which weighed  against  the
         appellant.

     14. Other points made by Mr Kotas were that the passport was issued  in
         2011 but the Visa was applied for 2 years later. Whilst  he  stated
         he could not speculate as to the reasons, there was a delay set out
         at paragraph 38 of the decision letter. Furthermore  the  appellant
         did not tell  the  Secretary  of  State  that  he  had  used  those
         documents.

     15. Mr Kotas therefore submitted that the judge failed to  engage  with
         the evidence and as a result the decision reached was unsound.

     16. Mr Adebayo on behalf of the appellant had not provided  a  Rule  24
         response but made the following oral submissions. He submitted that
         the respondent had failed to provide the evidence  referred  to  in
         the decision letter which had given rise to the decision. There  is
         no copy of the Iraqi passport, there was no correspondence from the
         American authorities nor from the  Iraqi  authorities.  Whilst  the
         grounds assert that the judge did  not  engage  with  the  decision
         letter, he submitted that the decision letter set out a  number  of
         assertions  which  had  not  been  supported  by  any   documentary
         evidence.  Furthermore,  the  UNHCR  had  set  out  a   number   of
         investigations  that  should  have   been   undertaken   in   their
         correspondence to the respondent but the respondent had  failed  to
         carry out those investigations and thus there had been  a  lack  of
         proper scrutiny of the evidence  and  were  "bare  assertions".  In
         particular there was no correspondence from the US  authorities  as
         to why the visa was cancelled when or  in  what  circumstances.  He
         made the point that they wrote to the appellant  in  2018  but  the
         decision was not reached until 2020 but no evidence had been sought
         within that intervening period save for a witness statement from Mr
         Johnson at G1.

     17. Dealing with the points  raised,  Mr  Adebayo  submitted  that  the
         evidence of the Kuwaiti Association report confirmed that they  had
         spoken to the appellant and set out why they reached the conclusion
         he was an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait. He submitted  that  that
         was not the central point relied upon by the judge and he based his
         decision on other evidence as well  as  this  which  he  took  into
         account. He submitted that the weight attached to it was  a  matter
         for the judge and it was open to him to confirm  that  he  accepted
         that report and thus there was no error of law in that respect.

     18. As to the background evidence, relating to the prevalence of forged
         documentation in Iraq, the judge did refer to the issue of  genuine
         passports being manipulated and that was consistent with  paragraph
         5.1 of the background material. He pointed to the UNHCR report  and
         letter  in  the  appellant's  bundle  which  also   confirmed   the
         prevalence of false Iraqi passport in Iraq.

     19. Mr Adebayo referred  to  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
         brother who also had given oral evidence before  the  tribunal  and
         had previously been accepted as an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon. His
         evidence was not challenged by the respondent and therefore it  was
         open to the judge to accept  his  evidence  as  stated  within  his
         decision. Mr Adebayo submitted that the surname given on the  Iraqi
         authorities documents of  A...  B...  were  inconsistent  with  the
         appellant's surname and that of his brother and therefore the judge
         properly considered the evidence. Whilst he may not  have  set  out
         all the points, it had  not  been  demonstrated  that  the  overall
         decision was one not open to him and that he had made an  error  of
         law. He submitted that the submissions made by the respondent  were
         a disagreement with the  decision  that  did  not  demonstrate  the
         making of an error of law.

     20. Mr Kotas by way of reply submitted that the  witness  evidence  was
         not dispositive of  the  appellant's  nationality  and  had  to  be
         weighed with the other evidence. Whilst submissions had  been  made
         about the nonproduction of evidence, it did not appear that it  was
         disputed that the evidence was in existence and in any  event  they
         were not findings made by the judge or reflected  in  his  decision
         and therefore could not be taken into account now.

     21. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserve my decision which  I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     22. I bear in mind the following well-established principles as to  the
         approach of the Court of Appeal when considering a  decision  of  a
         specialist tribunal such as the UT or in this case, the FtT;

           (1) First, the UT is an expert tribunal and an  appellate  court
           should not rush to find a misdirection an error  of  law  merely
           because it might have reached  a  different  conclusion  on  the
           facts or expressed themselves differently (per Lady Hale in AH
           (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL
           49 at [30]).

           (2) Second, the court should not be astute to characterise as an
           error of law what, in truth, is no more than a disagreement with
           the UT's assessment of the facts (per Lord Dyson in MA (Somalia)
           v SSHD [2010] UKSC 49 at [45]).

           (3) Third, where a relevant point is not expressly mentioned  by
           the tribunal, the court should be slow to infer that it has  not
           been taken into account (per Lord  Dyson  in MA  (Somalia) at
           [45]).

           (4) Fourth, experienced judges in this specialised tribunal  are
           to be taken to be aware of the relevant authorities  and  to  be
           seeking  to  apply  them  without  needing  to  refer  to   them
           specifically, unless it is clear from their language  that  they
           have failed to do  so  (per Popplewell  J  in AA  (Nigeria)  v
           SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at [34]).

           (5) Fifth, judicial  restraint  should  be  exercised  when  the
           reasons that  a  tribunal  gives  for  its  decision  are  being
           examined and the appellate court should not assume  too  readily
           that the tribunal misdirected itself just because not every step
           in its reasoning is fully set out in it  (per Lord  Hope  in R
           (Jones) v First Tier Tribunal and Criminal Injuries Compensation
           Authority [2013] UKSC 19 [2013] 2 All ER 625.

     23. The grounds advanced on behalf of the respondent  assert  that  the
         FtTJ failed to engage with the points argued by the respondent  and
         that by undertaking a brief consideration of the evidence the  FtTJ
         failed to give adequate reasons for his decision.

     24. I have given careful consideration to the grounds of challenge  and
         the submissions made on behalf of the respondent and have  done  so
         in the light of the decision of the FtTJ and the  evidence.  Whilst
         the respondent seeks to mount a criticism of the FtTJ for  what  is
         described as an "extremely brief consideration of the evidence" the
         FtTJ was plainly aware of the reasons for  issuing  the  notice  of
         cancellation of his refugee status  as  set  out  in  the  decision
         letter of 7 July 2020. In his decision the FtTJ set out  a  summary
         of the relevant issues that he had to decide at paragraphs [3 - 10]
         and at paragraph [9] identified  the  key  issue  relating  to  the
         appellant's "claimed nationality" and that his focus  was  on  this
         issue (also see paragraph[8]).

     25. The evidence relevant to this issue related to the appellant having
         applied for a Visa at the US embassy in Baghdad  on  4  March  2013
         under a different name, date  of  birth  and  nationality  using  a
         passport validly issued on 16 March 2011 with an expiry date of  13
         March 2019 (an Iraqi passport). The case advanced on behalf of  the
         respondent was that the appellant used deception to gain asylum  in
         the UK based on his  claimed  status  as  an  undocumented  Kuwaiti
         Bidoon and that  to  the  contrary  the  evidence  described  above
         demonstrated that he was a national of Iraq.

     26. Thus the central part of the  respondent's  case  related  to  that
         evidence. The respondent had  requested  an  explanation  from  the
         appellant relating to that evidence which he had provided  via  his
         legal representatives and which is recorded in the decision  letter
         between paragraphs [21] and [24] and summarised by the FtTJ in  his
         decision. In essence, the appellant's account  was  that  an  agent
         facilitated his escape from Kuwait and the agent was  the  one  who
         had obtained the  Iraqi  passport  for  the  appellant  by  bribing
         corrupt Iraqi officials. He therefore applied for a  visa  and  was
         taken to the embassy where  he  was  fingerprinted.  The  Visa  was
         refused and he was told by the agent that it was refused because it
         was discovered that the passport was a forgery.

     27. The decision letter also set out that the appellant denied that the
         passport was genuinely issued to him and that he was  not  entitled
         to it and that "using an Iraqi passport that he was not entitled to
         and obtained fraudulently does not make him an  Iraqi  national  at
         all". The appellant's solicitors requested  a  copy  of  the  Iraqi
         passport to be provided by the  Secretary  of  State.  I  pause  to
         observe at this stage that the Iraqi passport or copy of  the  same
         had not been provided to the appellant or to the  tribunal  by  the
         respondent nor has there been any evidence from the  Iraqi  Embassy
         beyond that recited in the decision letter at paragraphs 30 and 38.
         The failure to  provide  the  core  evidence  relied  upon  in  the
         respondent's decision was a point  raised  by  Mr  Adebayo  in  his
         submissions both before the FtT  and  this  tribunal.  Consequently
         neither the appellant's legal representatives or the tribunal  have
         been  given  the  opportunity  to  consider  the   primary   source
         documents.

     28. In addressing the key issue of nationality the FtTJ considered  the
         evidence "in the round" not only based on the respondent's evidence
         but  the  evidence  submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf   which
         consisted of the appellant's explanation of  events,  the  evidence
         that was provided at the time of his arrival in 2013 to support his
         application for refugee status as an undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon,
         the  evidence  of  family  members  who  had   been   accepted   as
         undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon's by the respondent, evidence from  the
         Kuwaiti  Community  Association  and  also  what  was  known  about
         undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoons from the  country  guidance  decisions
         and the background evidence concerning  the  prevalence  of  forged
         documents including passports.

     29. As to the appellant's explanation concerning the application of the
         Visa and the passport the FtTJ considered his account in the  light
         of the evidence that I have summarised above and taken together and
         viewed "in the round". Firstly at [20] the FtTJ set his explanation
         against what was known in the background evidence of  the  apparent
         ease to obtain or manipulate "A"  series  passports  in  Iraq  (the
         relevant passport being identified as an "A" series passport).

     30. The Secretary of State's submissions make 2 points. Firstly  whilst
         it was open to the judge to consider the background evidence as the
         prevalence of fraudulent documentation, it is wholly unclear as  to
         what basis the judge has "no reason to  doubt"  the  appellant  and
         secondly, the respondent cites  paragraph  5.3  of  the  Land  Info
         report (dated 2014) on the basis that the report highlights that it
         will be difficult to bribe employees in the issuance of  passports,
         and  thus  the  FtTJ  did  not  properly  consider  the  background
         evidence.

     31. I accept the submission made by Mr Adebayo that the  FtTJ  did  not
         err in his consideration of the background evidence.  At  paragraph
         [18] the FtTJ referred to the land  Info  report  which  he  stated
         "notes the ease with which the A series of Iraq  passports  can  be
         manipulated, a high percentage of Iraqi documents are found  to  be
         false or counterfeit and the  Iraqi  government  is  notorious  for
         widespread corruption." In my view that summary was consistent with
         the material in the Land Info report 2014 when the report  is  read
         as a  whole.  The  report  sets  out  at  paragraph  5.1  that  the
         manipulation and falsification of passports  occur  stating  "Iraqi
         passports are relatively easy to manipulate. The  Norwegian  police
         have discovered many false Iraqi passports in the G series and  the
         A series". The report  refers  to  being  able  to  change  the  ID
         information on an already existing passport and also  that  genuine
         passports have contained false ID  information.  At  paragraph  5.2
         reference is made to the high prevalence of Iraqi  documents  found
         to be false or counterfeit which was a point  relied  upon  by  the
         FtTJ, and further refers to the passport issuing  body  in  Baghdad
         only checking for authenticity of passports and not by reference to
         the registration details on which the breeder documents  are  based
         and that errors are not corrected and that there is  a  possibility
         that there may be incorrect ID  information  in  the  A  series  of
         passports. This is also referred to in the Refworld evidence in the
         appellant's bundle at  B  78  which  concludes  that  this  process
         "allows a percentage of  genuine  passports  to  contain  false  ID
         information".

     32. Whilst the respondent highlights paragraph 5.3  of  the  Land  Info
         report which refers to "corruption" to support  the  view  that  it
         will be difficult to bribe employees and the  issue  of  passports,
         that submission fails to take account of the earlier paragraphs  of
         the report at paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2 which I have set out above and
         which the FtTJ plainly took account of. Furthermore, paragraph  5.3
         does state that the existence of bribery of the  employees  at  the
         passport office cannot be ruled out  based  on  the  occurrence  of
         false ID information in  genuine passports and the lack  of  checks
         against  population  registries  and   therefore   undermines   the
         submission  made  in  the  grounds.  Consequently  I   accept   the
         submission made on behalf of the appellant that there is  no  error
         of law in the FtTJ's assessment of the background  evidence  as  to
         the prevalence of fraudulent documentation and that he was entitled
         to place weight and reliance upon  that  evidence  in  his  overall
         assessment.

     33. Whilst Mr Kotas makes the point that this is  a  genuine  passport,
         that does not preclude the passport having false details  contained
         in it as set out in the background evidence.

     34. As to the point raised that it was wholly unclear on what basis the
         FtTJ stated he had "no reason to doubt  the  appellant"  that  also
         fails to take into account the decision of the FtTJ when read as  a
         whole. At [18] the FtTJ  set  out  his  pr�cis  of  the  background
         evidence  concerning  the  prevalence   of   the   use   of   false
         documentation including passports in Iraq  which  he  found  to  be
         consistent with background evidence in the  Land  Info  report.  At
         [20] he reached the finding that based on the evidence between 2011
         - 2013 (the relevant period of time) that it was easy to obtain and
         manipulate "A" series passports to which a person was not  entitled
         to. By using the words "no reason to doubt" the FtTJ at [20] was in
         reality setting out why he accepted the appellant's explanation  as
         provided in his evidence. Firstly, the judge placed weight  on  his
         consistent account and explanation both to the respondent but  also
         during the hearing before  the  tribunal  and  secondly,  that  his
         account of how documents were obtained  and  the  one  he  was  not
         entitled to was supported by the background evidence summarised and
         cited at [18].

     35. Whilst Mr Kotas relies upon the grounds and submits that the  judge
         did not take into account the point raised by the  respondent  that
         the passport was issued in 2011 and the Visa was not applied for in
         2013 and that the Visa was cancelled due to him having applied  for
         asylum rather than the passport being a  forgery,  the  explanation
         given by the appellant was that the documents were  ones  that  had
         been procured and obtained by the agent. That being the case, those
         2 points were answered by the judge at [20] when the judge accepted
         the appellant's account given his consistency both in  the  earlier
         evidence and during cross examination at the hearing  that  he  was
         unaware of the agent's actions.

     36. The FtTJ went on to  consider  the  other  evidence  available  and
         relevant to the issues that he had to decide which related  to  the
         evidence  which  supported  the  appellant's  claim  of  being   an
         undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon  rather  than  an  Iraqi  citizen.  At
         paragraph [21] the FtTJ took into account  the  evidence  from  the
         appellant's brother. The FtTJ recorded that the DNA evidence he had
         seen demonstrated that the appellant was the full brother  of  AMA.
         It is common ground that he had been recognised as a refugee  based
         on his status as an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon having entered  the
         UK in 2018 and having been granted  status  on  5  March  2020.  At
         paragraph  40  of  the  bundle  there  is  a  document  giving  his
         nationality as Kuwaiti.

     37. In the  interview  undertaken  with  the  appellant  following  his
         arrival in 2013 he referred to his brother at question 28 as having
         been arrested in Kuwait having been demonstrating on behalf of  the
         Bidoons and that had not seen him since that date (see questions 20
         and 28). The appellant's evidence given in 2013 was that he  had  a
         brother who was protesting about  his  status  as  an  undocumented
         Bidoon and that was consistent with the later grant of  status  for
         his brother.

     38. Mr Kotas on behalf of the respondent  submits  the  fact  that  his
         brother was recognised as an undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon  was  not
         dispositive on the issue of nationality. I  would  agree.  However,
         the FtTJ was reasonably entitled to take into account that  at  the
         hearing the respondent chose not to question either  the  appellant
         or his brother about life in Kuwait or in the alternative  life  in
         Iraq. The FtTJ expressly stated  that  in  his  assessment  of  the
         evidence. The FtTJ was therefore entitled to place weight upon  the
         fact that the appellant when interviewed by the respondent in  2013
         was found by the respondent to know  sufficient  information  about
         life in Kuwait  and  as  an  undocumented  Bidoon  to  satisfy  the
         authorities that he was an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  himself.
         This was set out in the interview at questions 3 to 14 and  in  the
         appellant's statement at paragraph 18 that he would not have  known
         answers to these  questions  if  he  was  an  Iraqi  national.  The
         skeleton argument submitted before the FtTJ expressly  relied  upon
         this point at paragraph 4 and that the knowledge displayed  in  his
         interview was consistent with his  claim  to  have  been  born  and
         raised in Kuwait and the questions were identified at  paragraph  4
         (a) were consistent with objective evidence on Kuwait. The  answers
         given to some questions were not in the public domain and could not
         have been learned by an Iraqi national and that only an  individual
         who had lived in Kuwait would know those facts.

     39. Against that background it was reasonably open to the FtTJ to place
         weight on the answers given in his interview  and  for  the  reason
         given by the judge that  the  appellant  had  no  idea  about  what
         questions he would be asked and that the appellant  had  given  the
         correct information. Thus the judge was entitled  to  place  weight
         upon  this  evidence  and  particularly  in  the   light   of   the
         respondent's failure to challenge the appellant and  his  brother's
         knowledge of life in Kuwait or as undocumented Bidoons.

     40. The FtTJ also accepted the evidence of a 2nd witness who had  given
         oral evidence before the tribunal, NE. His  evidence  was  that  he
         came from the same village in  Kuwait  as  the  appellant  and  had
         visited him at his home. The respondent does not seek  to  identify
         any credibility issues arising from his evidence or challenge  that
         evidence and in the circumstances the judge was entitled  to  place
         reliance and weight upon it.

     41. The last piece of evidence related to that provided by the  Kuwaiti
         Community Association. They provided  evidence  dated  27  November
         2018 set out in the appellant's bundle  at  B24-32.  They  describe
         themselves as a  "non-profit  humanitarian  organisation  that  has
         existed since December 2001 to represent  to  meet  the  particular
         needs of the Kuwaiti Bidoon community in the  United  Kingdom"  and
         that the "cultural and  geographical  knowledge  of  KCA  helps  to
         confirm the identity of asylum applicants and confirm valid  claims
         to Kuwaiti Bidoon Status  and  to  exclude  cases,  which  are  not
         genuine, and that they operate  with  an  "extensive  and  detailed
         knowledge of  the  history  of  Kuwaiti  Bidoons.."   They  make  a
         distinction between those who have documents and those who  do  not
         and in the latter category 2  witnesses  from  the  Kuwaiti  Bidoon
         community are asked to provide witness statements and also a  short
         interview is conducted with the person and it is on  the  basis  of
         those responses and declaration of the witnesses  that  they  would
         confirm someone's origins if  they  are  satisfied  that  they  are
         Bidoons from Kuwait. They state  "we  do  not  issue  a  letter  of
         support to clients  that  we  do  not  believe  a  genuine  Kuwaiti
         Bidoons".

     42. When undertaking their  verification  process,  Mr  Kotas  properly
         highlights that the claimed  process that was undertaken in  Kuwait
         itself and which verified the appellant's status that he was  known
         as a Bidoon in Kuwait and had been living there, was not  evidenced
         by the investigators report. However that does not  mean  that  the
         FtTJ was not entitled to place some weight on the evidence provided
         by the Association. As Mr Adebayo submitted there were other  parts
         of the report that the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to  accept  and  place
         reliance and weight upon. In particular the  Association  undertook
         an interview with the appellant and asked him questions  concerning
         his home area in Kuwait. They are set out  in  the  interview  they
         conducted at B27. The respondent does not dispute that the  answers
         given were correct and as the FtTJ  found  the  appellant  provided
         correct answers to those questions without knowing  what  questions
         he was going to be asked. The conclusion reached by the Association
         is that the answers given were  consistent  with  someone  who  had
         lived in Kuwait and identified a particular  area  of  Kuwait.  The
         question of weight to be attached to the report was  a  matter  for
         the FtTJ and it has not been demonstrated by  the  respondent  that
         the judge was not entitled to place some weight  on  that  evidence
         when reaching his overall assessment.

     43. A further point that was placed on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
         balance  was  that  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his   Kuwaiti
         nationality derived through  his  father  (which  was  set  out  at
         paragraph [12] of the FtTJ's  decision)  was  consistent  with  the
         country guidance decision at paragraph [18] of the FtTJ's decision.

     44. The FtTJ did not accept all the evidence provided by the  appellant
         and at [23] he stated that he placed no weight upon the 8 witnesses
         who provide witness statements but had not signed them or  attended
         at the hearing. The judge also accepted the respondent's case  that
         the appellant had submitted a passport to the US  authorities  that
         he was not entitled to and that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
         damaged in that respect. However the judge went on  to  state  "...
         But not to the extent that it outweighs the rest  of  the  evidence
         that he is indeed a Kuwaiti Bidoon with the details  of  ZA,  as  I
         accept his evidence that he was guided by the agent .. ". This  was
         a conclusion that was reasonably open to the FtTJ to  reach  having
         considered the salient parts of the evidence and giving appropriate
         weight to the evidence submitted by the parties.

     45. Whilst the reasons were briefly stated and were succinct and to the
         point, the judge had the advantage of hearing the evidence  of  the
         appellant and his brother and for that evidence to be  the  subject
         (or not) of cross examination and having done so, was  entitled  to
         reach the conclusion that notwithstanding the appellant's  conduct,
         the other evidence when considered cumulatively and "in the  round"
         was of sufficient weight to outweigh the respondent's case that the
         appellant was an Iraqi national.

     46. For those reasons, the  decision  reached  by  the  FtTJ  does  not
         disclose the making of an error on a point of law and therefore the
         decision shall stand.




Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtTJ shall
    stand.




    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  him  or  his  family
    members. This direction applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
    respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated: 26 August 2021






         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision
         must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days if
         the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.

