
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00099/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 1 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     na
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Adebayo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing  on  21  September
    2018 which resulted in my finding that the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")
    erred in law in its decision on the  appellant's  appeal,  such  as  to
    require its decision to be set aside.  The hearing before me is for the
    re-making of the decision.

 2. The decision promulgated after the hearing before me  on  21  September
    2018 is attached as an annex to this decision.  It is headed  "Decision
    and Directions" and I shall refer to it otherwise as the error  of  law
    decision.  It  is  convenient  at  this  point  to  quote  the  opening
    paragraphs of the error of law decision which explains  the  background
    to the appeal as follows:

         "1.  The appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon from  Kuwait
             although the respondent contends that  he  is  from  Iraq  and
             whose identity is other than that he has given.

         2.   He came to the UK in July 2011  and  claimed  asylum  the  day
             after his  arrival.  He  was  granted  refugee  status  as  an
             undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait  on  20  September  2011  with
             leave to remain  granted  until  19  September  2016.  He  was
             subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR").

         3.   However, on 20 July 2017 a decision was  made  to  revoke  his
             refugee status pursuant to paragraph 339AB of the  Immigration
             Rules and to revoke his ILR  pursuant  to  s.76(2)(a)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")
             (wrongly referred to as s. 76(2)(A) of the  Immigration  Rules
             in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  and  the  respondent's
             decisions).

         4.   The appellant appealed against those decisions and his  appeal
             came before First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Clarke  ("the  FtJ")
             on 19 April 2018 which resulted in the appeal being  dismissed
             on all grounds.  Permission to appeal in relation to the FtJ's
             decision [having been granted], the appeal came before me.

         5.   The further background to the appeal is that  on  29  November
             2012 the appellant's spouse and six children made applications
             for entry clearance for family reunion via  Amman  in  Jordan,
             which   applications   the   appellant    sponsored.     Those
             applications were refused  on  27  February  2013.  The  FtJ's
             decision records that the appeals against those decisions were
             allowed but the applications were refused again on 6 July 2017
             on the basis that the appellants (in  relation  to  the  entry
             clearance applications) were Iraqi nationals and  not  Kuwaiti
             Bidoons as was claimed.

         6.   The respondent's decision, which is the subject matter of this
             appellant's appeal, refers to the respondent being in  receipt
             of evidence to the effect that the appellant is not a  Kuwaiti
             Bidoon but an Iraqi national."

 3. In relation to certain evidence which  the  respondent  contended,  and
    still contends, should not be disclosed to the appellant,  I  concluded
    that the FtT erred in its consideration of an  application  made  under
    s.108 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002
    Act").   Anticipating  that  at  the  re-making  of  the  decision  the
    respondent  would  similarly  seek  to  withhold  disclosure  of   that
    evidence, I said the  following  and  gave  the  following  directions,
    amongst others:

         "42. The following directions are made to which the parties are  to
             have careful regard.

                                 DIRECTIONS

             (a)  No later than 7 days before the next date of hearing  the
                  respondent is to notify the Tribunal and the appellant, in
                  writing,  as  to  whether  it  is  proposed  to  make   an
                  application under s.108 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
                  and Asylum Act 2002 and setting out the legal and  factual
                  basis upon which the application is to be made.

             (b)  The respondent is to note that in default  of  compliance
                  with direction (a)  above,  the  Tribunal  may  very  well
                  decide to refuse to consider any s.108 application."

    S.108/rule 14 application

 4. On the day of the hearing for the  re-making  of  the  decision  I  was
    provided with a written application on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to
    withhold disclosure of the same evidence which was in issue before  the
    FtT.  The application is dated 17 January 2019.   Mr  Adebayo  accepted
    that it had been e-mailed to him,  or  his  practice,  on  the  evening
    before the hearing.

 5. The application accepts that it was not  made  in  compliance  with  my
    directions, that is to say that it should have been provided  no  later
    than seven days before the hearing.  The explanation for non-compliance
    with that direction was that the Presenting Officer did not comply with
    the direction "due to being in preparation for  maternity  leave".   It
    then  states  that  due  to  "internal  procedure  and  allocation   of
    resources" the Presenting Officer attending  the  resumed  hearing  was
    unable to address the failed compliance until 17 January.

 6. The application continues on the basis that the  s.108  application  is
    renewed, as follows.  Firstly, that the documents relied on are central
    to discharging the respondent's burden of proof to the effect that  the
    appellant made a material misrepresentation when applying for asylum as
    an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.  Secondly, that  the  misrepresentation
    represents a forgery intended to mislead the respondent into  providing
    him with asylum.  Thirdly, that the disclosure of the  documents  would
    be contrary to the public interest "because they would expose a  member
    of  the  public  who  in  good  faith  provided  the  evidence"  (sic).
    Fourthly,  that  disclosure  would  also  prejudice  the   respondent's
    position in relation to future matters to  be  investigated.   Fifthly,
    that it was in the public interest to investigate such matters to avoid
    fraudulent applications.

 7. The application continues that in the alternative an order  was  sought
    prohibiting disclosure of the specified documents pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules ("the Rules") 2008.

 8. Ms Cunha reiterated the explanation for the lateness of the application
    but her position was that in fact the s.108 application was  no  longer
    pursued, it being accepted that on the basis of what I said in my error
    of law decision the respondent was  not  entitled  to  rely  on  s.108.
    Thus, the application was put on the basis of rule 14 only.

 9. Initially, Ms Cunha said that the application  related  to  a  document
    examination report, and to the other evidence which was  considered  by
    the FtT.  However, as I pointed out, the  document  examination  report
    was already  disclosed  in  the  respondent's  bundle,  and  indeed  is
    referred  to  in  the  FtT's  decision.   In  those  circumstances  the
    application was confined to the other material, namely that  which  was
    considered by the FtT.

10. As is clear from my directions that  I  issued  following  the  initial
    hearing, the respondent was on notice that  in  default  of  compliance
    with the direction as to notification of  the  application  within  the
    specified time limit I may very well decide to refuse to  consider  any
    application for non-disclosure.  My reference in  those  directions  to
    s.108 reflects the fact that that was how the argument  was  previously
    framed  but  the  directions   plainly   covered   any   non-disclosure
    application in relation to the same material.

11. I decided to refuse to entertain the non-disclosure application for the
    following reasons.  Firstly, my directions were not  complied  with  in
    terms of the timeliness of notification of the application, both to the
    Tribunal and to the appellant's representatives.  Secondly, I  was  not
    satisfied that the explanation for non-compliance  was  a  satisfactory
    one.  I considered that it  was  a  matter  of  great  significance  to
    withhold disclosure of evidence from one party to the  proceedings  and
    thus the timely notification of such an application was very important.
     Fourthly, contrary to my directions, the basis of the application  was
    not properly explained in the written application put before me on  the
    day of the hearing.  I was not satisfied that  the  legal  and  factual
    basis for the application was  properly  set  out.   For  example,  the
    application sought to resurrect  the  s.108  application  which  I  had
    already ruled in the error of law decision was  misconceived,  for  the
    reasons I explained.

12. In addition, the basis upon which it was sought to invoke rule  14  was
    not properly delineated, for example no consideration appeared to  have
    been given to whether  the  information  should  be  disclosed  to  the
    appellant's representative, as distinct from it being disclosed to  the
    appellant. Furthermore, rule  14(2)(a)  requires  the  Tribunal  to  be
    satisfied that disclosure would be likely to cause the person concerned
    or some other person serious harm.  Although Ms Cunha suggested that it
    was implicit that serious harm would be caused in this case, that again
    was not a matter that was addressed in the written application in terms
    of its application of rule 14. Lastly, I was not satisfied that in  all
    the circumstances it was in the interests of justice to  entertain  the
    application.

    The oral evidence

13. In examination-in-chief the appellant adopted his  witness  statements.
    He said that he was not an Iraqi national and the Iraqi ID card (K6  of
    the respondent's bundle and page 7 of the appellant's bundle) does  not
    bear his photograph.  He identified photographs showing him in front of
    the Iraqi Embassy in London (where he says in his witness statement  he
    went on 16 April 2018 in order to be interviewed).

14. In cross-examination he said that that was the first time that he  went
    to the Iraqi Embassy.  As to whether he had ever been to Iraq, he  said
    that he went on a visit in 2004, to visit the Holy  Shrines.   He  went
    via Jordan and then to Iraq.  As to how he secured entry  to  Iraq,  he
    had a passport from London.  He agreed  that  he  had  used  a  British
    passport to enter Iraq.  However,  eventually  it  was  established  by
    agreement between the parties  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a
    British passport and is not a British citizen.  The appellant clarified
    that he went in 2014 rather than 2004.  The  document  he  used  was  a
    travel document.

15. He knows that it was 2014 that he visited Iraq  because  he  remembers.
    In 2017 he applied for a travel document  to  go  to  Greece.   He  had
    applied for indefinite leave to remain at that time  and  for  what  he
    described as a different kind of travel document.

16. His family went to Jordan on false Iraqi passports.  He was  not  aware
    of it at that time but his wife was in touch with an agent who arranged
    it.

17. The appellant accepted that the documents with which his wife and other
    family members applied  for  entry  clearance  were  false.   They  had
    informed the British Embassy in Amman who had confirmed that they  were
    false.  His family left Kuwait and then went to  Syria.   However,  the
    war in Syria meant that the embassy was closed.  They then returned  to
    Iraq and then to Jordan.

18. Asked why his family did  not  obtain  a  false  Kuwaiti  or  Jordanian
    passport to enter Jordan, he said that it was not  possible  to  obtain
    false Kuwaiti or Jordanian passports.  However,  there  are  plenty  of
    false Iraqi passports available.  He rejected the suggestion  that  the
    Iraqi passports that his family had were genuine; they were false.

19. He came to the UK  directly  from  Kuwait,  with  a  non-Kuwaiti  false
    passport.  It was a European passport which the agent provided  but  he
    does not know which country it related to.  That was not the same agent
    who helped his wife.  His Kuwaiti friend, Turkey  Al  Hazza,  paid  the
    agent as he did not have money to pay.  The same  Kuwaiti  friend  paid
    the agent on behalf of his wife.

20. There was no re-examination.  In answer to my questions  he  said  that
    the ID card had been shown to him by his lawyer.  The  photograph  does
    not look like him.  He could not see very clearly in any event  because
    his vision is not good.

21. One of the appellant's sons,  whom  I  shall  identify  as  AONA,  gave
    evidence through an interpreter who said that the language was  Arabic,
    Kuwaiti dialect. He adopted his witness  statement  in  examination-in-
    chief.  He too rejected the suggestion that the appellant is from Iraq,
    stating that he had nothing to do with Iraq, was born in Kuwait and  is
    a Kuwaiti citizen without formal ID.

22. In cross-examination he said that he came to the  UK  on  7  July  2015
    through France to  Dover.   He  had  never  visited  Iraq  and  has  no
    connection with Iraq.  As to the appellant, he had never heard that  he
    had visited Iraq.

23. As to whether the appellant had ever left  the  UK  since  arriving  in
    2011, he had not.  He had applied for asylum in the UK.   Nor  has  he,
    the witness, travelled out of the UK.  He is still studying English.

24. When he came to the UK via France he did not use any passport.  He came
    on a lorry and police arrested him.  He  had  no  documents  with  him.
    They used smugglers who have their own ways.   He  was  young  at  that
    time.  They obtained photographs from them and  used  false  passports.
    Because they were young they did not carry passports.  They do not have
    any type of documents.  They are called Bidoons  from  Kuwait.   As  to
    whether it would have been easier to obtain a  false  Kuwaiti  passport
    with which to travel, he does not know.  It depends  on  the  smuggler.
    It may be that it was impossible to get a Kuwaiti passport.

25. Shown the ID card which purports to have a photograph of the  appellant
    on it, the witness said that the photograph was not clear.  It was  not
    his father, the appellant.

26. Referred to a translation of that same identity card, he said  that  he
    recognised the name [ONO], stating  that  that  is  his  father's  name
    (although then giving the appellant's last name as it  appears  on  the
    Tribunal's documents).  Asked about another name on the translation  of
    the ID card, [NH], he did not know the name.  As to the name [MG], that
    is his mother.  He has not seen the person named as [SM].  He then said
    that his father had married more than once and in answer to a  question
    from me said that [SM] is his father's wife.

27. Further cross-examined he said that he did not know his  father's  date
    of birth but he is about 70 years of age.

28. In re-examination he said that since coming to the UK  his  father  had
    gone to Greece to visit his, the witness's, mother but  his  mother  is
    now in the UK.

29. I then asked him why he had earlier said that the appellant  had  never
    travelled out of the UK. He said that he thought  he  was  being  asked
    whether he had left the UK to apply for asylum in another country.

30. A witness whom I shall identify as KONA also gave evidence through  the
    interpreter who again  said  that  the  language  was  Arabic,  Kuwaiti
    dialect. The witness adopted his witness statements in  examination-in-
    chief.

31. I raised with the witness a question in relation to the spelling of his
    surname regarding whether there is or is not an 'A' at the end  of  the
    last name. The matter having been explored,  no  issue  was  raised  in
    respect of it on behalf of the respondent and it appears to me that the
    difference in spelling between documents is likely to be  a  matter  of
    transliteration.

32. The witness confirmed that the appellant is his father.  He denied that
    the appellant is an Iraqi, saying that he is a  non-documented  Bidoon,
    like he is, from Kuwait.

33. Asked about names on the translation of the ID card, he  said  that  he
    did not know who [ONO] was.  As to  another  name  (under  the  section
    "Spouse's Name") he said that that is  his  father's  wife,  [MG],  his
    mother.  The other name under that section, [SM], he initially said was
    his mother but she had died.  The court interpreter indicated that  the
    appellant had said that the name was [SHM], spelt slightly differently.
     The witness then clarified that [MG] was his father's  wife,  although
    they call her mother.  He  and  his  brother,  the  witness  AONA,  had
    different mothers.

34. In cross-examination he said that he had come to  the  UK  from  Kuwait
    through France.  The first step was from Kuwait to Turkey using a false
    passport.  He did not know the nationality on the passport  because  he
    is illiterate.

35. The next witness, whom I shall identify as ASA, also gave  evidence  in
    Arabic in the Kuwaiti dialect.  He adopted  his  witness  statement  in
    examination-in-chief.  He said that the appellant is from  Kuwait.   As
    to the Home Office saying that he is from Iraq, he was living with them
    in Kuwait and is a Bidoon like they are.  He did  not  mean  that  they
    were living in the same house, just that he was living in Kuwait.

36. In cross-examination he said that he was living in Sulibiyah and he had
    known him since 2010.  He then said that he had known him  since  2008.
    He does not know when the appellant came to the UK.

37. As to how he knows the appellant, he is a friend of his son, KONA,  who
    had just given evidence.  He had visited the family and knew them  very
    well.  KONA's mother is called [S].  KONA told him that she was dead.

38. His mother married again and he was told that her name is [M].

39. He does not recognise the photograph of the person on the ID card.   He
    did not think that it looked like the appellant.

    Submissions

40. Ms Cunha relied on the respondent's decision dated 20  July  2017.   It
    was submitted that the appellant had used misrepresentations to suggest
    that he was an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.  The  document  examination
    report indicated that the  Iraqi  passports  used  by  the  appellant's
    family with applications for entry clearance were genuine.

41. The evidence given at the hearing was inconsistent.  The appellant  had
    said that he went to Iraq in 2014 but  other  family  members  did  not
    support that part of his evidence and the appellant did not say that he
    went to Greece.

42. Ms Cunha referred at this point to what was said to be a lost  property
    report indicating that the appellant had reported his  travel  document
    lost.  However, that report was not relied on because it  was  accepted
    that it had not been disclosed to the appellant's  representatives  and
    had not  formed  part  of  the  respondent's  case  hitherto.   It  was
    nevertheless maintained  that  there  was  inconsistency  in  terms  of
    whether the appellant travelled to  Iraq  or  Greece,  and  when.   The
    appellant's  evidence  on  this  was  inconsistent  it  was  submitted.
    Furthermore, it was not clear how he was able to travel in 2014  if  he
    was not granted refugee status until 2011 and could  not  apply  for  a
    travel document until five years later.

43. It was further questioned as to why  the  family  would  procure  false
    Iraqi passports when they intended to go to  Syria  or  Turkey,  rather
    than Kuwaiti or Jordanian passports.

44. As regards the letter from the Kuwaiti Community  Association,  no  one
    from that organisation attended and  the  letter  should  therefore  be
    afforded little weight.

45. In relation to the ID  card,  although  the  appellant  says  that  the
    photograph on it is not of him, it does have his  spouse's  details  on
    it, although it was accepted on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    photograph is unclear and that  a  colour  copy  had  been  asked  for.
    Nevertheless, the translation has key facts which are true.

46. In his submissions Mr Adebayo accepted that I  ought  to  consider  the
    issue of cancellation of refugee status with reference to  the  UNHCR's
    Note on the Cancellation of Refugee Status of  22  November  2004.   He
    relied on his skeleton argument put before the FtT.

47. So far as the ID card is concerned, it is not known how the  respondent
    obtained it.  In any event, even the respondent's decision letter dated
    20 July 2017 states on page 6 that that  ID  card  is  insufficient  to
    establish his true identity and thus discharge the respondent's  burden
    of proof.

48. In relation to the letter from the Ministry of Foreign  Affairs  relied
    on by the respondent, only the translation has been provided  and  even
    that is not signed.  The original has not been produced and nor was  it
    provided at the hearing before  the  FtT  or  subsequently.   Where  it
    states that it confirms "the credibility of the ID  card",  it  is  not
    clear what that means.

49. So far as the document examination report is concerned,  it  refers  to
    the date of the check as being  29  December  2014  although  for  some
    reason the report was not written until 16 November 2015.  Furthermore,
    it is not clear how the respondent was able  to  examine  any  original
    passports since the appellant's family members never provided  them  to
    the respondent.

50. In any event, the evidence is that Iraqi passports are easy  to  forge.
    I was referred to background material in  that  respect.   Likewise  in
    relation to false Iraqi ID cards.  The evidence is that an ID  card  is
    needed to obtain a passport.

51. When I enquired as to whether it was now being said on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that he accepted that the ID card was his, but it was  false,
    and used in order to obtain the false Iraqi passports for  his  family,
    it was then submitted that his case was that it was not his  photograph
    on the ID card but if  it  was  it  was  used  to  obtain  false  Iraqi
    passports.  The further submission was to the effect that another false
    ID card could have been used to  obtain  the  passports,  not  the  one
    relied on by the respondent.

52. In terms of whether  the  document  examination  report  does  in  fact
    demonstrate that the Iraqi passports were  (somehow)  obtained  by  the
    respondent, Mr Adebayo submitted that it was not clear  how  they  were
    obtained.

53. I was referred to answers given by the  appellant  in  his  asylum  and
    screening interviews which, it was suggested, indicated that he was  an
    undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon, and which answers prompted the  respondent
    to grant him refugee status.

54. Similarly, the letter from the Kuwait Community Association was  relied
    on, and the fact that two of the appellant's sons were accepted,  after
    appeals, as being undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoons.   Likewise,  ASA  was
    found to be credible in his appeal.  The  decision  in  Devaseelan  was
    also relied on in this context.

    Assessment and Conclusions

55. S.76(2)(a) of the 2002 Act provides that the  Secretary  of  State  may
    revoke a person's indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom if the leave was obtained by deception.

56. The relevant Immigration Rules as they  applied  at  the  date  of  the
    decision in question provide as follows:

         "Revocation or refusal to renew a grant of refugee status


         338A. A person's grant of refugee status under paragraph 334 shall
         be revoked or not renewed if any of paragraphs 339A to 339AB apply.
         A person's grant of refugee status under paragraph 334 may be
         revoked or not renewed if paragraph 339AC applies.

         ...

         Misrepresentation


         339AB. This paragraph applies where the Secretary of State is
         satisfied that the person's misrepresentation or omission of facts,
         including the use of false documents, were decisive for the grant
         of refugee status."

57. In the UNHCR letter dated 20 June 2016, in response to the respondent's
    letter indicating  an  intention  to  cancel  the  appellant's  refugee
    status, there is reference to the UNHCR's Note on the  Cancellation  of
    Refugee Status dated 22 November 2004.  At [20]  of  that  document  it
    states the following:

         "Where fraud is considered as the ground for cancellation,  States'
         legislation and jurisprudence consistently require the presence  of
         all three of the following elements:

         (a)  objectively incorrect statements by the applicant;

         (b)  causality between these  statements  and  the  refugee  status
             determination; and

         (c)  intention to mislead by the applicant."

58. It is clear, and not disputed on behalf of  the  respondent,  that  the
    burden of proof rests upon the respondent to establish  the  basis  for
    the cancellation of refugee status.

59. There are two letters of decision from the respondent, the first  dated
    20 July 2017 is headed "Revocation of Refugee Status".  That gives  the
    detailed reasons for the decision to revoke the appellant's  indefinite
    leave to remain ("ILR") and his refugee status.  The decision dated  24
    July 2017 is headed "Notice of the Immigration Decision".  That  refers
    to the revocation of ILR and refugee status but goes on  to  deal  with
    human rights in terms of article 8, private and family life.

60. In submissions before me on behalf of the appellant  it  was  initially
    suggested that the passports of the appellant's  family  members  could
    not have been examined  because  no  passports  were  provided  to  the
    respondent.  This submission evolved into the suggestion  that  it  was
    not clear how any such passports came into the respondent's possession.
     However, as  I  indicated  in  the  course  of  submissions  the  only
    conclusion to be drawn from that submission was that the author of  the
    document examination report was either mistaken in providing the report
    or was not telling the truth.  With all due respect to Mr Adebayo, both
    contentions are patently absurd.  There obviously was an examination of
    the passports provided  by  the  appellant's  family  members  and  the
    conclusion obviously  was  that  they  were  genuine  passports.   That
    conclusion was based on an examination, it  would  appear,  of  genuine
    examples, not only of Iraqi passports but of the  entry  and  departure
    stamps in them.

61. Equally, the position on behalf of  the  appellant  put  before  me  in
    submissions in relation to the Iraqi ID card is  similarly  problematic
    for the appellant.  On the one hand it is said that an Iraqi ID card is
    necessary to obtain a passport, and there is background evidence  which
    tends to support that, but on the other hand that  the  Iraqi  ID  card
    relied on  by  the  respondent  is  not  his  and  does  not  bear  his
    photograph.  Those positions are not  absolutely  inconsistent  but  as
    near to inconsistent as makes no difference.  In  relation  to  the  ID
    card, the respondent's decision dated 20 July 2017 refers on page 5  to
    the appellant having said, or it having been said  on  his  behalf,  in
    "mitigation" dated  7  April  2016,  that  the  agent  provided  forged
    passports for the family "and a forged ID card for yourself".  It  goes
    onto state that the appellant claimed to have  been  unaware  that  his
    wife had arranged this on his behalf.  Although I  have  not  seen  any
    written representations made on behalf of the appellant dated  7  April
    2016, that aspect of the decision  letter  has  not  been  disputed  on
    behalf of the appellant.

62. I bear in mind that a colour copy of that ID card had been requested on
    behalf of the appellant and even now  has  not  been  provided  by  the
    respondent.  However, it is clear from the evidence of the  appellant's
    sons, and from that of the supporting witness, that the translation  of
    the ID card contains details of the appellant's spouses, which each  of
    his  sons  respectively,  identified  as  their   mother.    Regardless
    therefore, of what could be said about the photograph in terms  of  its
    clarity or age, there is sufficient information in the  translation  to
    link the appellant to the Iraqi ID card.

63. Furthermore, notwithstanding that each of the witnesses, including  the
    appellant, denied any resemblance between the photograph on the ID card
    and the appellant, for my part I consider that there is a  resemblance,
    even accepting that the photograph is said to have been taken  some  13
    years ago.

64. The appellant's evidence was that there was no resemblance and that  in
    any event he was unable to see it clearly  because  of  poor  eyesight.
    Whether or not the supporting witnesses genuinely believe there  to  be
    no resemblance, or whether the appellant himself was not fully aware of
    what ID card photograph was put before him, matters  not.   As  I  have
    indicated, I am satisfied that there is a resemblance. That resemblance
    can, incidentally, also be seen from comparing the copy  photograph  on
    the ID card in the appellant's bundle at page 7 with the photograph  of
    the appellant outside the Iraqi Embassy at  page  8A.   Admittedly  the
    photograph on the copy of the ID  card  is  not  very  clear,  but  the
    resemblance is in  my  view  unmistakable.   That,  combined  with  the
    details on the ID card to which I have already referred and which match
    those of the appellant's spouses, satisfies me that the Iraqi  ID  card
    does relate to the appellant.  Whether or not it is a false document is
    another matter.

65. The appellant relies on the UNHCR document dated 18  February  2016  in
    relation to the availability of  fraudulent  identification  documents,
    including passports and national identity cards, starting at page 59 of
    the appellant's bundle.  It states in paragraph 1 that there is a  high
    percentage  of  Iraqi  documents  that  are  found  to  be   false   or
    counterfeit.  At paragraph 4.1 it refers to Iraqi passports  bought  on
    the black market as costing around US$100 to US$300  depending  on  the
    quality of the false documents.   There  is  reference  to  a  Landinfo
    Report stating that according to Norway's police authorities:

         "Iraqi passports are relatively easy to manipulate...one method  of
         forgery has been to  take  out  the  personal  page  in  a  genuine
         passport and replace one of the layers of the  page  with  the  new
         one."

    At paragraph 4.2 the Landinfo Report states that false ID cards can  be
    purchased on the open market at a very low price and that  many  people
    do this to save time since it can take several months to get  the  card
    issued properly.

66. To some degree at least, the respondent deals with  the  issue  of  the
    availability of false Iraqi passports  by  the  fact  of  the  document
    examination report.  However, the detail in that report is sparse.  The
    conclusion that the Iraqi passports are genuine, unaltered documents is
    stated to be "Based on comparisons with known  genuine  examples".   It
    refers to  the  immigration  entry  and  departure  stamps  also  being
    compared to known genuine examples and refers  to  the  authorities  of
    Jordan and Iraq also having concluded that the passports were  genuine.
    However, in relation to the comparison  points,  no  detail  is  given.
    Whether or not such information is sensitive in terms of disclosure  is
    not stated, and no such assertion is made on behalf of the  respondent.
    Furthermore, there is little basis for the assertion that the Jordanian
    and Iraqi authorities concluded that the passports were genuine  simply
    by reason of there being entry and departure stamps  in  them.   Again,
    the points of comparison are not stated.  In terms  of  the  entry  and
    departure stamps,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  false  Iraqi
    passports do bear comparison with genuine documents,  quite  simply  so
    that they will be accepted as genuine.

67.  The  document  examination  report  is  evidence  in  support  of  the
    respondent's case, but it has the limitations to which I have referred.



68. So far as  the  Iraqi  ID  card  is  concerned,  I  bear  in  mind  the
    translation of the letter said to  be  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs of Iraq, dated 30 March 2017.  However,  even  now  the  Arabic
    version of that document has not been provided by  the  respondent  and
    there is no explanation for that fact.  The letter states that "We  are
    honoured to confirm the credibility" of the ID card,  with  the  number
    given. That to my  mind  is  not  an  altogether  satisfactory  way  of
    expressing a conclusion that  the  document  is  a  genuine  one.   The
    translation of the letter from the Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  gives
    the date of the card as 11 October 2005 but the translation of the card
    itself states that the year is not clear, although it gives the same 11
    October date.

69. The witness ASA has been found to be an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon,
    his appeal in January 2017 having been determined in his favour on that
    issue.  The evidence before me from that witness to the effect that  he
    knows the appellant from Kuwait undermines the respondent's  case  that
    the appellant is Iraqi.

70. Likewise,  in  relation  to  KONA,  although  the  copy  of  the  FtT's
    determination of his appeal in the appellant's  bundle  is  incomplete,
    the first and title page  being  missing,   the  letter  from  the  FtT
    enclosing a copy of the determination does give  that  witness's  name,
    although without the first page of the determination it cannot be  said
    for certain that it relates to that particular witness.  On  the  other
    hand, there are details at, for example, [5]-[6] of the decision, which
    do tie it to the witness, although not categorically.  In any event, it
    was not disputed on behalf of the respondent but that that witness  has
    been found by the FtT also to be an undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.   Of
    course, the significance of that finding is  that  he  is  one  of  the
    appellant's sons.

71. On the other hand, in relation to that witness, I note from [5] of  the
    FtT's decision that the conclusion that he is  an  undocumented  Bidoon
    itself relies in part on the fact that the appellant's claim to  be  an
    undocumented Bidoon had been  accepted.   Therefore,  reliance  on  the
    decision in KONA's appeal is circular.  Nevertheless, the conclusion of
    the FtT in that witness's case provides some support for the appellant,
    or more accurately, undermines the  respondent's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is not in fact an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon but is an Iraqi
    citizen.

72. Lastly in this respect, I bear in mind that the appellant's other  son,
    AONA, has also been found by the FtT in June 2016 to be an undocumented
    Bidoon.  Nevertheless, the same reservation applies in relation to  the
    conclusions of the FtT in his case, because the FtT took  into  account
    that the appellant had been found to be an undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon
    which supported that witness's claim in that respect.

73. It seems to me that the decisions  in  those  other  appeals  are  good
    illustrations of the point that each case depends on its own facts.  On
    the basis of the evidence that was before the Tribunals in those cases,
    the conclusions were that they were all undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoons.
    However, it must be apparent that those findings are not by  any  means
    determinative in terms of this appellant's appeal.

74. The letter from the Kuwaiti Community  Association  is  plainly  highly
    relevant.  The letter states that  for  individuals  without  documents
    they ask for two  witnesses  from  the  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  community  and
    conduct a short interview with the individual in question.   It  states
    that the verification process, comprising  the  interview  and  witness
    statements, "is tedious and time-consuming for  our  organisation,  the
    clients and  the  witnesses".   It  states  that  they  undertake  that
    verification service because, amongst  other  things,  it  reduces  the
    number of people from other Arabic-speaking countries who falsely claim
    to be Kuwaiti Bidoons.  It also states that they do not issue a  letter
    of support to  clients  that  they  believe  are  not  genuine  Kuwaiti
    Bidoons.   It  is  apparent  therefore,  that  the  Kuwaiti   Community
    Association has an interest in ensuring that the  verification  process
    is a sound one.

75. Brief details are given of the questions that the appellant  was  asked
    in an interview with that Association that took  place  on  5  December
    2017.  The conclusion  in  that  respect  is  that  the  appellant  has
    knowledge of  someone  who  has  been  living  in  Kuwait  and  in  the
    Asulibiyah area.  The two witnesses  who  gave  witness  statements  in
    support of the appellant's claim to be an undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon
    are named, one of whom  is  the  witness  ASA.   It  states  that  both
    witnesses are known to the Association as undocumented Bidoons and  are
    known to the community members as well as the Home Office as such.

76. Significantly, it seems to me, is the fact that in the letter from  the
    Association it states that they also contacted "Recourses" which I take
    to be 'resources' to verify and check the address and  the  appellant's
    "situation" in  Kuwait.   The  conclusion  of  the  "investigator"  (in
    Kuwait) was the appellant is indeed  an  undocumented  Bidoon,  and  it
    gives his address in Kuwait.

77. It is true that no one from the Association attended to  give  evidence
    to support the contents of the letter.  On the other hand, nothing  was
    put before me, and no submissions were made, which otherwise undermines
    the contents of the letter, either in  terms  of  its  plausibility  or
    consistency.  I do consider that it is significant evidence in  support
    of the appellant's appeal.

78. So far as the answers that the appellant  gave  in  the  screening  and
    asylum interviews are concerned, I do not consider  that  it  could  be
    said that the answers he gave could only be given by someone who is  an
    undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon.  The information provided could, it  seems
    to me, be relatively easily learnt, or be information  in  relation  to
    undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoons generally, which may very well  be  common
    knowledge in the region.

79. The evidence relied on by both parties has its deficiencies, as I  have
    sought  to  demonstrate.  However,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    respondent. Having considered all the  evidence  carefully,  I  am  not
    satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  established  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities that the appellant's ILR was obtained  by  deception,  or
    that his grant of refugee status involved misrepresentation or omission
    of facts, including the use of false documents.

80. I am not satisfied therefore,  that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    cancel his ILR or to cease his refugee status.   Accordingly,  I  allow
    the appeal.




    Decision

81. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            29/03/19


                                    ANNEX

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00099/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adebayo, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait  although
    the respondent contends that he is from  Iraq  and  whose  identity  is
    other than that he has given.

 2. He came to the UK in July 2011 and claimed asylum  the  day  after  his
    arrival. He was granted refugee status as an undocumented  Bidoon  from
    Kuwait on 20 September 2011 with  leave  to  remain  granted  until  19
    September 2016. He was subsequently granted indefinite leave to  remain
    ("ILR").

 3. However, on 20 July 2017 a decision was  made  to  revoke  his  refugee
    status pursuant to paragraph 339AB of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  to
    revoke his ILR pursuant to s.76(2)(a) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act")  (wrongly  referred  to  as  s.
    76(2)(A) of the Immigration Rules in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    and the respondent's decisions).

 4. The appellant appealed against those  decisions  and  his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge S J Clarke ("the  FtJ")  on  19  April
    2018 which resulted in the  appeal  being  dismissed  on  all  grounds.
    Permission to appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision, the appeal came
    before me.

 5. The further background to the appeal is that on 29  November  2012  the
    appellant's  spouse  and  six  children  made  applications  for  entry
    clearance for family reunion via Amman in  Jordan,  which  applications
    the  appellant  sponsored.   Those  applications  were  refused  on  27
    February 2013. The FtJ's decision  records  that  the  appeals  against
    those decisions were allowed but the applications were refused again on
    6 July 2017 on the basis that the appellants (in relation to the  entry
    clearance applications) were Iraqi nationals and not Kuwaiti Bidoons as
    was claimed.

 6. The  respondent's  decision,  which  is  the  subject  matter  of  this
    appellant's appeal, refers  to  the  respondent  being  in  receipt  of
    evidence to the effect that the appellant is not a Kuwaiti  Bidoon  but
    an Iraqi national.

 7. The further background to the appeal is best illustrated with reference
    to the FtJ's decision.

    The FtJ's decision

 8. The FtJ further summarised the respondent's  decision  in  that  it  is
    contended that the appellant has a genuine Iraqi ID  card  bearing  the
    same photograph  of  the  appellant  as  that  held  on  UK  Visas  and
    Immigration ("UKVI") systems.  The Iraqi passports used by  his  family
    members are said by the respondent to be genuine Iraqi passports  which
    indicated that false identities and nationalities were provided by  the
    appellant's family members in support of their applications  for  entry
    clearance sponsored by the appellant.   Their  passports  are  said  to
    contain numerous immigration stamps from Jordan and Iraq.   A  document
    examination report ("DER") of 16 November 2015 confirmed the  passports
    to be genuine and unaltered.  The respondent's decision referred to pre-
    decision submissions by the appellant to  the  effect  that  the  Iraqi
    passports were forgeries and  were  bought  to  facilitate  entry  into
    Jordan so  that  his  family  could  apply  for  family  reunion.   The
    appellant had asked the respondent to seek confirmation from the  Iraqi
    authorities that the passports were not genuine.

 9. At [8] of her decision the FtJ said as follows:

         "At the start of the hearing Mr. Briant made an application  for  a
         statement to be admitted under Section 108 of the 2002  Act  and  I
         made a preliminary ruling after  evaluating  the  evidence  that  I
         would read the document, the Appellant and his representative  went
         out of the room for me to examine the  evidence.   I  admitted  the
         document into evidence.  Mr. Adebayo  applied  for  an  adjournment
         which I refused because it was fair to proceed having regard to the
         Section 108 evidence, and there was no other evidence the Appellant
         wanted to garner which he had not already tried to do  and  he  had
         not requested the Respondent to provide further evidence before the
         hearing.  I heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  who  adopted  his
         witness statement, and from his two sons [KONA] and [AONA], and Mr.
         [ASA], and each witness adopted their statement  prepared  for  the
         hearing and I heard submissions by the representatives and  a  note
         of what was said is contained on the court record".

10. At [9] the FtJ said that the respondent had discharged  the  burden  of
    proof on a balance of probabilities that the appellant was  a  national
    of Iraq and that he had  made  a  material  misrepresentation  when  he
    applied for asylum as an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait.  At [10]  she
    said as follows:

         "I place weight upon the Section 108  document  together  with  the
         document examination report found at Annex J  of  the  Respondent's
         bundle.  My  reasons  for  placing  weight  upon  the  Section  108
         document is because it is very reliable, the fear that it is  based
         upon ill-feeling or grudge is  something  I  have  considered  very
         carefully but there appears to be no basis for this  in  the  case,
         and it clearly places the Appellant and his wife and descendants as
         Iraqi nationals and not undocumented Bidoons from Kuwait".

11. The FtJ then went on to state that the appellant's  wife  and  children
    all produced documents  which  have  been  examined  and  found  to  be
    genuine, with the  stamps  within  their  passports  also  having  been
    identified as genuine.  She referred to background evidence  relied  on
    behalf of the appellant and a submission in relation  to  the  type  of
    passports used being ones that are often subject to a particular method
    of forgery.  However, at [13] she said that  she  had  considered  that
    evidence very carefully but when balanced  against  the  "very  strong"
    s.108 evidence, which showed that the appellant was a national of Iraq,
    she concluded that it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the  (Iraqi)
    passports were genuine and have not  been  altered  in  any  way.   She
    stated that:

         "I do not find the witnesses reliable preferring  the  Section  108
         evidence which I find more reliable because there is no  basis  for
         the unidentified person stating that the Appellant is Iraqi  unless
         he is of this nationality".

12. The FtJ referred to a UNHCR letter dated 20 June 2016  and  the  appeal
    decisions in the cases of his two sons who were granted refugee  status
    following successful appeals.  She referred  to  the  appellant's  wife
    apparently living in Greece with some  of  the  children,  with  others
    being in Turkey and  again  others  in  the  UK.   She  said  that  the
    appellant gave slightly different answers regarding the exact number of
    children living in which country.

13. In the next paragraph she referred to the Iraqi ID card said to contain
    a photograph of the appellant.  That card provided the names of both of
    his wives.  The FtJ said that the photograph  matched  the  records  of
    UKVI and although the photocopy in the respondent's bundle  could  have
    been better, she concluded that it did show a resemblance such that  it
    was more likely than not to be the appellant.

14. She next referred to the translation of a letter from the  Ministry  of
    Foreign Affairs, dated 30 March  2017,  noting  that  the  untranslated
    Arabic document was not provided by the respondent.  She concluded that
    the translation was a document that she was entitled to place weight on
    and further noting that the name of the translator and their  role  was
    given.  The letter confirmed that the ID  card  belonged  to  an  Iraqi
    national [ONO], and was issued on 11 October 2005.  The FtJ  said  that
    she took into account the date of issue when finding that  there  is  a
    resemblance to the appellant some 13 years ago.  She concluded that  if
    the appellant had provided that ID card  when  he  claimed  asylum,  he
    would not have  been  granted  refugee  status  and  that  it  was  the
    withholding  of  such  a  document  and  the  bogus  claim  to  be   an
    undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait which  led  to  the  grant  of  refugee
    status.

15. The FtJ thus concluded that the respondent was entitled to  revoke  the
    appellant's refugee status.

16. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR, she noted that the appellant  had
    no partner living in the UK and no dependent children under the age  of
    18 years.  She concluded that he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.   She  found  that  there  were   no
    "insurmountable obstacles" as she put it, to his returning to  his  own
    country (Iraq).  She found that the appellant's wife and  some  of  his
    children living in various countries have the ability to return to Iraq
    and live with the appellant there, or he would be able to return  alone
    and re-establish his life there.  She found that there was no  evidence
    to suggest that he could not return to Baghdad.  She found  that  there
    were no reasons meriting a grant of leave outside the confines  of  the
    Article 8 Rules.

    The grounds and submissions

17. To summarise, the grounds of appeal contend that the FtJ ought  not  to
    have acceded to the s.108 application because s.108 was inapplicable in
    circumstances where the respondent was not suggesting that  a  document
    was a forgery but was suggesting in fact that the  Iraqi  ID  card  was
    genuine.  The provisions of s.108  therefore,  did  not  apply,  it  is
    argued.  The decision in OA (Alleged forgery;  section  108  procedure)
    Nigeria [2007] UKIAT 00096 is relied on.  Various arguments in relation
    to the fairness of the proceedings are advanced in that context.

18. It is further argued that the FtJ erred at [13] in her conclusion  that
    the passports of the appellant's  family  members  were  genuine  Iraqi
    passports, the argument on  behalf  of  the  appellant  being  that  no
    passports were available for  the  FtJ  to  examine  and  thus  it  was
    impossible for her to conclude that the passports were not altered.  It
    is argued that the FtJ's conclusion in relation  to  the  passports  is
    speculative in that she would need to  have  physically  examined  them
    before coming to the conclusions that she did.

19. It is further argued that the FtJ was wrong at [17] to  place  reliance
    on an unsigned translation of a document  in  circumstances  where  the
    original was not provided.  It is contended that an unsigned translated
    document without the original is inadmissible as evidence.

20. Lastly, it is contended that there was an error of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    conclusions in respect of the Iraqi ID cards  said  to  have  been  the
    appellant's.  Firstly, the copy  document  was  very  unclear  and  the
    appellant's solicitor had written to the respondent to provide a  clear
    colour copy of that document, but that was not done.   Secondly,  given
    the poor quality of the photograph the FtJ was not entitled to conclude
    that the document was genuine by reason  of  the  asserted  resemblance
    between the photograph and the appellant, in  circumstances  where  the
    photograph was taken about 13 years ago.

21. In submissions, Mr Adebayo relied on the grounds.  He  referred  me  to
    s.108 of the 2002 Act.  He highlighted [25]-[27] of OA (Nigeria).

22. In relation to the passports, those related to family members  and  not
    to the appellant.  He pointed out that, as revealed at [8],  there  had
    been an application for an  adjournment  in  the  light  of  the  s.108
    application.

23. For her part, Ms Fijiwala submitted that  s.108  did  cover  situations
    such as those that were before the FtJ.  She did  however,  agree  that
    whereas s.108 refers to a public interest  consideration  in  terms  of
    disclosure relating to the detection of  forgery,  the  FtJ's  decision
    does not apparently make an assessment of the public interest.

24. However, it was submitted  that  the  respondent  could  have  made  an
    application pursuant to rule 13 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  In other words,
    as I understood this submission, it was to  the  effect  that  the  FtJ
    would have been entitled  to  withhold  the  s.108  evidence  from  the
    appellant in any event and there were good reasons to do so.

25. So far as the lack of the original or a copy of the untranslated Arabic
    document is concerned, that was a matter of weight and the  translation
    did identify the person who had translated the document.

26. In relation to the FtJ's assessment  of  the  resemblance  between  the
    appellant and the photograph on the Iraqi ID document, that is a matter
    that needed to be seen in the context of the other evidence.

    Assessment and Conclusions

27. At the hearing I informed the parties that I was satisfied  that  there
    was an error of law in the FtJ's decision in respect of her acceding to
    the s.108 application, although I indicated that I had not  come  to  a
    concluded view in relation to the other grounds.  I  further  indicated
    that the error of law that I was at that stage satisfied of in relation
    to s.108 was such as to require the decision to be set  aside  and  for
    the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. As  to  remittal,
    having reflected further in  that  regard,  I  no  longer  consider  it
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    for reasons given briefly  below.  The  following  are  my  reasons  in
    relation to the s.108 issue  and  my  conclusions  in  respect  of  the
    remainder of the grounds.

28. S.108 of the 2002 Act states as follows:

         "Forged document: proceedings in private

         (1)  This section applies where it is alleged -

             (a)  that a document relied on by a party to an  appeal  under
                  section 82 ... is a forgery, and

             (b)  that disclosure to that party of a matter relating to the
                  detection of the forgery would be contrary to  the  public
                  interest.

         (2)  The Tribunal

             (a)  must investigate the allegation in private, and

             (b)  may proceed in private so far  as  necessary  to  prevent
                  disclosure  of  the  matter  referred  to  in   subsection
                  (1)(b)".

29. I consider that there is force in the submission made on behalf of  the
    appellant to the effect that  the  purpose  for  which  the  respondent
    sought to invoke the s.108 procedure was a purpose which that provision
    does not provide for.  The section applies where it is alleged  that  a
    document relied on by a party to an appeal under s.82 is a forgery.

30. Ms  Fijiwala  sought  to  persuade  me  that  although  the  respondent
    contended that the Iraqi ID card was a genuine  document  and  that  it
    related to the  appellant,  the  appellant  contended  that  it  was  a
    forgery, thus the provision did apply because a party  (the  appellant)
    alleged that a document (the Iraqi ID card) was a forgery.

31.  That  submission  has  a  very  superficial  attraction   but   closer
    examination of s.108 reveals the fallacy in the respondent's  argument.
    S.108(1)(a), the part of the section relied  on  for  the  respondent's
    argument, must be read in conjunction with  subparagraph  (b).   It  is
    clear from the conjunctive "and" that subsections (a) and (b)  must  be
    read together.  The effect is that it is the party seeking to  withhold
    information in relation to the detection of the forgery which  will  be
    the  party  alleging  that  a  document  is  a  forgery  and  thus  the
    'applicant' in terms of reliance on s.108.

32. In any event, it was no  part  of  the  FtJ's  reasoning  in  terms  of
    acceding to the s.108 application that it was  the  appellant  who  was
    seeking to rely on a document that was a forgery.  It is apparent  from
    the FtJ's decision that she did not consider the precise words of s.108
    in this context.  The suggestion on behalf of the respondent before  me
    to the effect that she would in any event have been entitled to  invoke
    the s.108 procedure has no merit.

33. There is a further difficulty with  the  FtJ's  consideration  of  this
    provision.  Subparagraph (b) provides that consideration  needs  to  be
    given  to  the  public  interest  in  the  withholding  of  disclosure.
    Sometimes it can readily  be  deduced  what  the  public  interest  is.
    However, that does not absolve a judge from the necessity of making  an
    assessment  of  the  public  interest.   Even  if  the  nature  of  the
    information is such that explaining too much  in  the  judge's  written
    decision would undermine the s.108 procedure, there must  be  at  least
    some recognition that the public interest issue  has  been  considered.
    In this respect I am also satisfied that the FtJ erred in law.

34. The error in the FtJ's consideration of the s.108 issue is in itself  a
    sufficient basis from which to conclude that her decision must  be  set
    aside. One also has to consider the seriousness of the matter in  issue
    here, being revocation of refugee status, and the fundamental principle
    that usually fairness demands that evidence relied on by a party should
    be disclosed to the opposing  party.  That  is  not  to  say  that  the
    document in issue here must to be disclosed, but  the  public  interest
    issue is informed by an assessment of all the circumstances.

35. So far as the other grounds are concerned,  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there is any error of law in the FtJ's conclusions in relation  to  the
    passports.  She had a document examination report in relation  to  them
    and examining the passports for herself is unlikely  to  have  informed
    her assessment in this respect.

36. In relation to the letter said to  be  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign
    Affairs in Iraq, being a translation of another document, although  the
    FtJ took into account that the Arabic version, whether by means of  the
    original or a copy, was not provided, I am satisfied that she erred  in
    law in her conclusions in  relation  to  that  document.   Without  the
    original, neither the appellant nor the FtJ was able, even in a cursory
    way, to match the Arabic version with the English version.  It seems to
    me that the appellant was entitled at least to see the  Arabic  version
    which it is said the English document is a translation  of,  or  to  be
    provided with  some  explanation  as  to  why  that  document  was  not
    available.  Having said that, if that had been the only  error  in  the
    FtJ's assessment of the evidence, I would not have decided to  set  her
    decision aside.

37. As regards the complaint made  about  the  FtJ's  comparison  with  the
    appellant of what is said to be a copy of a 13 year old  photograph  of
    him, I note that the FtJ herself took into account the quality  of  the
    photocopy and the interval  of  time  between  the  appearance  of  the
    appellant before her and what is  said  to  be  a  photograph  of  him.
    However,  the  complaint  in  the  grounds  is  that  the   appellant's
    representatives wrote to the respondent to ask to be  provided  with  a
    clear colour copy of that photograph. On the face  of  it  that  was  a
    reasonable request.  It is not disputed on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    that such a request was made.  In the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied
    that there was unfairness in the proceedings in relation to  the  FtJ's
    conclusion that the appellant resembled the person in the photograph on
    the ID card such that it was more likely than not that  the  photograph
    was of the appellant.

38. No complaint is raised in  the  grounds  about  the  FtJ's  refusal  to
    adjourn the hearing and Mr  Adebayo  did  not  advance  any  persuasive
    reason as to what an adjournment would achieve so far as the  appellant
    was concerned in terms of the s.108 procedure.

39. The errors of law made by the FtJ are material  in  the  light  of  the
    decision letter, and the skeleton argument  before  the  FtJ  in  which
    various arguments are advanced in terms of the documentary evidence and
    the basis upon which it is contended that the appellant is in  fact  an
    undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon,  rather  than  an  Iraqi  national.   For
    example, on behalf of the appellant reliance is placed on a letter from
    the Kuwaiti Community Association which is said to support his case.  I
    make no comment about the lack of reference by the FtJ to that evidence
    since it is not a matter raised in the grounds.

40. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that  the  errors  of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    decision are such as to require her decision to be set aside.

41.  Whereas,  as  indicated  above,  my  provisional  view  was  that  the
    appropriate course was for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, after further reflection I consider that the decision  should
    be re-made in the Upper Tribunal. I have considered  paragraph  7.2  of
    the Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals  and  taken
    into account the extent of any fact-finding required in  the  re-making
    of the decision. I am also mindful of the potentially  difficult  legal
    and practical matters that will need to be resolved.

42. The following directions are made to which  the  parties  are  to  have
    careful regard.

                                 DIRECTIONS

      a) No later than 7 days before the next date of hearing the respondent
         is to notify the Tribunal and the  appellant,  in  writing,  as  to
         whether it is proposed to make an application under  s.108  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  setting  out  the
         legal and factual basis upon which the application is to be made.

      b) The respondent is to  note  that  in  default  of  compliance  with
         direction (a) above, the Tribunal may very well decide to refuse to
         consider any s.108 application.

      c) In relation to any further evidence  relied  on  by  either  party,
         there is to be a further paginated and indexed supplementary bundle
         of documents to be filed and served no later than seven days before
         the next date of hearing.

      d) In relation to any witness whom it is  proposed  should  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is no need for
         any further examination-in-chief.

      e) At the next hearing the parties must  be  in  a  position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact, if any, made  by  the  FtJ
         can be preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     2/11/18






