
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00071/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House via Skype for  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Business                            |                                    |
|On 13 April 2021                    |On 26 April 2021                    |


                                   Before

                     Mr. C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                 SAID OSMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms. C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kainth ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 21  January  2020.
    He had before him  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to revoke his protection status.

 2. The appellant appeals  with  permission  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Brien who granted permission to appeal on all grounds  by  a
    decision dated 19 February 2020.

Anonymity

 3. No anonymity direction was issued by the Judge and no  application  for
    such direction was made before us.

Decision

 4. The hearing before us was listed as a CMR hearing. By  consent  of  the
    parties we treated the hearing as the hearing of the appeal.

 5. The parties formally agreed at the hearing before us that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for  material  error  of
    law, the Judge having possessed no jurisdiction to consider any  matter
    except that set out in  s84(3)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, the  only  permissible  ground  of  appeal  against  a
    decision to revoke protection status, yet apparently  investigated  and
    decided other issues.

 6. In such circumstances, we set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for error of law. It would be wrong for either party to  place
    reliance on anything that happened at, or as a result of,  the  hearing
    before the Judge.

 7. The parties agreed that the appellant does not possess refugee  status,
    having been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  March  1996  as  a
    dependent of his mother who had been recognised as  a  refugee  by  the
    United Kingdom authorities prior to his arrival in this  country.  Such
    agreement was initially confirmed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    again before this Tribunal upon consideration by  the  parties  of  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v. JS (Uganda) [2019] EWCA Civ 1670, [2020]  1  WLR  43,  at
    [73], where  it  was  held  that  refugee  status  under  the  1951  UN
    Convention can only be accorded to a person who has a well-founded fear
    of being persecuted, not  merely  one  derived  from  or  dependent  on
    another person. The appellant's appeal cannot therefore succeed on  the
    grounds specified in s 84(3).

 8. Accordingly, we substitute a decision dismissing the appellant's appeal
    against the revocation of his protection status.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Dated: 14 April 2021
