
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal No RP/00043/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2016                                |On 12 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WARBY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           ABDIHAMID AHMED MOHAMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A A Khan of Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

                                 The Appeal

   1. This is an appeal by a foreign criminal in a deportation  matter.  The
      case also raises an issue about the revocation of refugee status.

                                 Background

   2. The appellant was born in August 1975, and is therefore now  40  years
      of age. He comes from Hargeisa in Somaliland.  In  1987  Hergeisa  was
      part of Somalia. The appellant came to the UK at  that  time.  He  has
      been here ever since. He has been recognised as  a  refugee.    During
      his residence in the UK however he took to drink and acquired a number
      of criminal convictions, including for offences of violence.  By  2014
      he had made 26 appearances before the court for offences going back to
      2001. Thirteen were for theft or  shoplifting,  but  there  were  also
      offences of violence and threats of violence.

   3. On 6 March 2014 in  the  Crown  Court  at  Blackfriars  the  appellant
      pleaded guilty at the first reasonable opportunity to  an  offence  of
      robbery.  This was a street robbery in which  he  tried  to  snatch  a
      mobile phone from a young woman in the early  hours  of  the  morning.
      The case was adjourned for sentence.

   4. Doubtless, the purpose of  adjourning  was  to  allow  a  pre-sentence
      report (PSR) to be obtained. It has been assumed, we believe  rightly,
      that in the process an assessment of the appellant was made using  the
      OASys tool. This is a familiar tool used to  assess  the  reasons  for
      offending and offender risk. Its conclusions commonly form part of the
      pre-sentence report. The defendant and his lawyers  will  be  provided
      with the PSR but not, ordinarily, the OASys report.

   5. On 10 April 2014 the appellant was sentenced by HHJ Pillay to 2 years'
      imprisonment. He was released from prison on 20 February 2015, but has
      been  in  immigration  detention  since  then  with  a  view  to   his
      deportation to Hargeisa.

   6. On 2 July the Secretary  of  State  revoked  the  appellant's  refugee
      status, on the grounds that the circumstances in which he came  to  be
      recognised as a refugee had ceased to  exist.  On  the  same  day  the
      Secretary of State made a deportation order against the  appellant  on
      the grounds that he was  a  foreign  criminal  whose  deportation  was
      conducive to the public good. The Secretary of State proceeded on  the
      basis that s 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

   7. The appellant appealed to  the  FTT  against  these  decisions.  At  a
      hearing on 8 January 2016 Judge Ievins refused to grant an adjournment
      and proceeded to hear the appeal on its merits.  On  29  January  2016
      Judge Ievins promulgated a  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  on  its
      merits.

   8. The appellant put forward four grounds of appeal, the first  of  which
      is a contention that the refusal to  adjourn  was  wrong  in  law  and
      unfair.   On  19  April  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch   granted
      permission to appeal on all grounds.

                              Legal principles

9. Revocation of the appellant's asylum is governed  by  paragraph  339A  of
   the Immigration Rules which provided at the time, so far as relevant:

      "A person's grant of asylum ... will be revoked ... if  the  Secretary
      of State is satisfied that ... (v) he can no longer,  because  of  the
      circumstances in connection with which he has  been  recognised  as  a
      refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail  himself  of
      the protection of the country of nationality."

  10. The remainder of the legal framework with which we  are  concerned  on
      this appeal has been considered by the Court of Appeal  very  recently
      in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

  11. S 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 is set out in full in para [5] of  NA.
      It is sufficient for present purposes to say this. The section  places
      on the Secretary of State a  duty  to  make  a  deportation  order  in
      respect of anyone who is a "foreign criminal" within the meaning of  s
      32(1).  That definition includes those, such as the appellant, who are
      not British citizens and have been sentenced to imprisonment for  more
      than 12 months.  The duty to make a deportation order  is  subject  to
      exceptions specified in s 33 of the 2007 Act.   By s 33(2)

      "Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance  of
      the deportation order would breach-
           (a) a person's Convention rights, or

           (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
           Convention."



  12. The Immigration Rules contain provisions as to how  the  Secretary  of
      State will determine whether paragraph (a) of this Exception  applies.
      The relevant paragraphs of the Rules are paragraphs 398  to  399A,  as
      they stood at the time of the FTT Judge's decision in this case. Those
      provisions are set out in full in paragraph  [9]  of  NA.    Paragraph
      398(b) concerns  a  person  such  as  this  appellant,  who  has  been
      sentenced to at least 12 months imprisonment but less  than  4  years.
      That is a category of person described by the Court of Appeal in NA as
      a 'medium offender'.  The effect  of  paragraph  398(b)  is  that  the
      public interest in  the  deportation  of  a  medium  offender  may  be
      outweighed where certain specified conditions are met.  The  specified
      conditions are set out in paragraphs 399 and paragraph 399A. If  those
      conditions are not met, the public interest will  only  be  outweighed
      where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
      described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


  13. The only specified condition relevant in this  case  is  in  paragraph
      399A, which reads as follows:

      "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) ... applies if -
      (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of  his
life; and
      (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
      (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
      the country to which it is proposed he is deported."


   Paragraph 399A therefore contains three cumulative requirements.

  14. As to the exception in s 33(2) of the 2007 Act, concerning  breach  of
      the Refugee Convention:

    1) Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  excludes  persons  from
       protection if they are a danger to the community.

    2) Section s 72(2) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
       applies for the purpose of the construction and application of  that
       exclusion.  S 72 contains  a  series  of  presumptions  about  those
       matters. Those presumptions are rebuttable.

   In this case, the effect of s  72  and  the  appellant's  conviction  and
   sentence for robbery was that he was presumed  to  be  a  danger  to  the
   community within the meaning  of  Article  33(2).   That  presumption  is
   rebuttable.

  15. For deportation purposes the Immigration Rules are a complete code but
      Part 5A of the 2002 Act  contains  provisions  which  can  affect  the
      application of  the  'Exceptions'  in  s  32  of  the  2007  Act  when
      considering paragraph 398, that is, whether there are very  compelling
      circumstances over and above those falling within  paragraph  399A  of
      the Rules. In doing so, the tribunal must consider the seriousness  of
      the criminality and certain factors set out in s 117B.  By  virtue  of
      Section 117C (2) the more serious offence  committed  by  the  foreign
      criminal, the greater the public interest  in  his  deportation.   The
      effect of s 117C(3) is that as a 'medium offender'  the  appellant  is
      someone whose deportation is required by the  public  interest  unless
      Exception 1 or 2 applies. Exception 1 is set  out  in  s  117C(4).  It
      matches paragraph 399A of the Rules, setting the same three  criteria.
      It applies where the appellant  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the
      United Kingdom for most of his life, he  is  socially  and  culturally
      integrated in the United Kingdom, and there would be very  significant
      obstacles to his integration into the country to which it is  proposed
      he would be deported.

                              The Determination


  16. The FTTJ reached the following conclusions.

    1) First, that the Secretary of State had established that para 339A(v)
       of the Rules applied, because circumstances in Somalia  had  changed
       hugely since 1987 and the appellant would not be at risk in any  way
       if he was returned.

    2) Secondly, that the presumption provided for by s 72(2) of  the  2002
       Act applied: the appellant was presumed to have been convicted of  a
       particular[ly] serious crime and  to  constitute  a  danger  to  the
       community of the UK. The presumption had not been  rebutted  by  the
       appellant.

    3) Thirdly,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been  right  in  her
       application of s  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  Mandatory
       deportation  applied,  and  the  case  did  not  fall   within   the
       exceptions. Deportation would not breach either the Refugee or Human
       Rights Conventions.

  17. The finding that deportation would not breach the  Refugee  Convention
      followed from the Judge's first conclusion.  The  finding  so  far  as
      human rights are concerned was that applying  the  provisions  I  have
      cited, and having regard to the governing authorities,  the  appellant
      did not enjoy a family life with anyone in the UK. So far  as  private
      life is concerned, this was slight but deportation  would  involve  an
      interference  engaging  Article  8.  The  interference,  however,  was
      proportionate to the legitimate aims of preventing crime  or  disorder
      and maintaining immigration control.

                            The grounds of appeal

   i) Refusal of an adjournment

  18. At the sentencing hearing in April 2014 his Counsel mitigated  on  the
      basis that his offending history was due to the  use  of  intoxicating
      substances. The sentencing judge recorded this as follows:-

      "... It is the insight of Mr Cholera that he advances  before  me  the
      course of your criminality, namely abusing  alcohol  and  abusing  the
      substance Khat; all too frequently these courts see  the  consequences
      of addiction to those drugs, both of those, alcohol and Khat...."

  19. Having recorded this point, the Judge proceeded  to  sentence  without
      apparently attaching weight to it, on the following basis:

    1) The Judge noted that the  courts  had  previously  sought  to  avoid
       custodial sentences, but the appellant had  failed  to  respond.  As
       late as April 2013 he had been given community orders  or  suspended
       sentences.  Yet he had proceeded to commit this offence.  The  Judge
       concluded that imprisonment was inevitable.

    2) Applying the sentencing guidelines the Judge took a  starting  point
       of 3 years, and gave full credit for the early plea of guilty so  as
       to reduce the sentence to 2 years. That  was,  said  the  Judge  the
       "least" sentence that could be imposed.

  20. Those remarks were before the FTT Judge.  It was still the appellant's
      case at that stage that his offending was due to alcohol and khat, but
      he contended that he was a reformed man. Accordingly,  he  argued,  he
      was able to rebut  the  presumption  that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
      community whose deportation was conducive to the public good.

  21. The Tribunal gave case management directions for  the  disclosure  and
      production of  documents.  In  August  2015  the  Tribunal  gave  case
      management directions, ordering that "The  Appellant's  representative
      must file with the Tribunal and serve upon the Respondent prior to Pre-
      Hearing review:- ... 2 A copy of any relevant Pre-Sentence  Report..."
      The Tribunal also ordered the appellant's representatives to file  and
      serve "4 A copy of any Parole Report or other document relating to the
      Appellant's period  in custody and/or release..."  No  such  documents
      were filed or served. Mr Khan has been unable to  explain  to  us  why
      not.

  22. On 29 September 2015 the Tribunal made a further direction,  requiring
      the Secretary of State to

      "make enquiries and produce forthwith to the Tribunal, copies (if any)
      of:
      * Judge's Sentencing Remarks
      * Pre-Sentence Report
      * OASyS Report".

   The direction also required that "If such documentation is not available,
   then Designated Judge Peart is to be advised by email..."

  23. The Secretary of State produced some of these documents, including the
      sentencing remarks, but not all. The OASys report was not one of those
      produced.  Nor, it appears, was the Designated Judge advised by  email
      or  at  all  that  the  documentation  was  not  available.  The  best
      explanation that has been offered to us is that those  responsible  on
      her behalf were unaware of the direction. But  evidently  nothing  was
      done about it by the appellant or  his  advisers  either,  until  very
      shortly before the appeal hearing in this matter. On  6  January  2016
      the  appellant's  solicitors  emailed   the   Secretary   of   State's
      representatives seeking a copy of the OASys report. The  reply,  on  7
      January 2016, was  from  the  Probation  Service.  It  said  that  the
      officials were prohibited from disclosing the full  report,  but  they
      did provide a risk assessment. This contained the following:

      "...  His addiction to alcohol appears to  have  been  the  overriding
      factor in his pattern of offending behaviour.  In my  assessment  when
      Mr Mohamed is under the  influence  of  alcohol  he  acts  on  impulse
      without thinking about the consequences of his behaviour on himself or
      others."

  24. At the hearing the following day the FTTJ was provided with copies  of
      the email correspondence and the risk assessment. He did not have  the
      full OASys report. An application to adjourn was made,  on  the  basis
      that the content of the OASys report might be critical to the  Judge's
      conclusions on the issue of danger to the community. It  was  refused.
      In his Determination the FTTJ gave reasons at [4]  and  [5].  He  said
      this:

      "4. At the beginning of the  hearing,  and  after  the  appellant  was
      identified, Mr Khan for the  appellant  applied  for  an  adjournment.
      Directions had been issued on 29 September 2015 for various  documents
      to be served by the respondent "forthwith".  These  were  the  judge's
      sentencing remarks, which are in the respondent's bundle, and the pre-
      sentence report and OASys Report which  are  not.   According  to  the
      email exchange, probation offers were not  permitted  to  disclose  an
      OASys Report but the risk assessment could be sent to a  secure  email
      address (such  as  CJSM.)   A  Samson  Adewole,  a  probation  service
      officer, sent a risk assessment report to the  appellant's  solicitors
      on 7 January (the day before the hearing) ...

      5. I considered that application for an adjournment  but  refused  it.
      Although the directions  were  sent  out  on  29  September  2015  the
      appellant's solicitors did not seek  the  missing  documents  until  a
      matter of days before the hearing.  It was not known  what  the  OASys
      Report would disclose, nor  whether  it  would  be  favourable  to  or
      harmful to the appellant.  The application for an adjournment  was  in
      my judgment both too late and speculative  so  I  refused  it.   I  am
      satisfied that I have all the information before me to  enable  me  to
      determine this appeal justly."

  25. The FTTJ went on to say:

      "19 ...Even though I do  not  have  sight  of  the  OASys  Report  the
      prospects of further offending by this alcoholic offender must  surely
      be rather more than negligible.  When the appellant is drunk  he  does
      not seem to be in full control of himself and there is  obviously  the
      potential for considerable harm to the public...


      23. ....   Although I do not have the OASys Report I am  satisfied  on
      the evidence before me that this appellant, who was sent to prison for
      two years for robbery, has been convicted of  a  particularly  serious
      crime and does still constitute a  danger  to  the  community  of  the
      United Kingdom.  The appellant has not  succeeded  in  rebutting  that
      statutory presumption..."


  26. Mr Khan submits, and it is not in dispute, that when asking whether  a
      Judge  was  wrong  to  refuse  an  adjournment   the   test   is   not
      irrationality; it is whether the refusal was unfair: SH  (Afghanistan)
      [2011] EWCA Civ 128 [13].  Mr  Khan  submits  that  this  refusal  was
      unfair, for two reasons:

    1) It was wrong of the Judge, says Mr Khan, to blame the appellant  for
       the late request  for  the  OASys  report,  as  the  September  2015
       directions imposed the obligation to  produce  that  report  on  the
       Secretary of State and not the appellant, and the Secretary of State
       was in breach.

    2) Secondly,  he  submits  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  treat  the
       application as speculative. Mr Khan points  to  Mugwagwa  (Zimbabwe)
       [2011] UKUT 338to illustrate his point that  an  OASys  report  "can
       determine the outcome" of an appeal.

  27. In our judgment Mr Khan's first submission involves a misunderstanding
      of the Judge's reasoning. He was not proceeding on the basis  that  it
      was the appellant's task to obtain the OASys report but rather on  the
      footing that, the Secretary of State having failed to comply with  the
      direction to produce, the appellant had left it too late  to  complain
      and pursue the matter. That in our view is the proper reading  of  the
      Judge's paragraph 5.  It is unsatisfactory that the Secretary of State
      failed to comply. We agree nevertheless  that  for  the  appellant  to
      delay for over three months before raising the matter, and then to  do
      on the eve of the hearing is unacceptable, and at  variance  with  the
      view that the document was crucial. It was  not  wrong  or  unfair  to
      criticise  the  appellant  for  delay.  If  the  report  was  such   a
      potentially crucial document, steps should have been taken sooner than
      they were.

  28. As it happens, although the Judge did not rely on this point,  it  was
      and remained the appellant's own obligation pursuant to the directions
      of August 2015 to produce the PSR.  He  failed  to  comply  with  that
      direction. There is no reason to doubt that it was in his power to  do
      so. The  document  must  have  been  in  the  hands  of  his  criminal
      solicitors. Alternatively, he had a right to obtain it through subject
      access under the Data Protection Act. Had he done so, there  is  every
      reason to believe that he would thereby have put before  the  tribunal
      the substance of the OASys assessment. In the circumstances it is  not
      necessary to consider whether subject access would have  entitled  the
      appellant to see the OASys report, though we are inclined to the  view
      that he would have had a right to see the conclusions, even if not the
      full reasoning.

  29. We also reject Mr Khan's second point.  In substance,  the  Judge  was
      saying that he saw no realistic prospect that production of the  OASys
      report would have any bearing on the issues for his  decision.  We  do
      not accept Mr  Khan's  submission  that  this  approach  deprived  the
      Tribunal of relevant and potentially crucial evidence on the basis  of
      nothing  more  than  speculation.  The  Judge  himself  addressed  the
      substance of that submission at [23] when he said "the  offender  risk
      assessment which has been provided by Samson  Adewole  does  not  take
      matters much further. The information given is surely  incontestable."
      By this we understand him to mean  that  the  risk  assessment  itself
      indicated what the OASys report would have said, and that it  was  not
      helpful to the appellant.  We agree.

  30. We note that the sentencing remarks of 2014 do not  suggest  that  the
      appellant's then Counsel submitted that he was a reformed man. If  the
      OASys report had supported that view, it would have been reflected  in
      the PSR, and doubtless Counsel would have made play of the  point.  We
      note also that the risk assessment refers to events in 2015, and would
      therefore seem to post-date  the  PSR.  It  is  inconceivable  in  our
      judgment that the OASys report would have been more supportive of  the
      appellant's case than the subsequent risk assessment that  was  before
      the Judge.

  31. The case of Mugagwa is no more than an  illustration  of  one  set  of
      circumstances in which an OASys report made a difference on appeal. As
      Mr Khan was constrained to accept, the case is not authority  for  the
      proposition that an OASys report must in all cases be obtained and put
      before the Tribunal in order to inform the decision on danger  to  the
      community. The decision on whether such a report  is  needed  will  be
      fact-sensitive. We do not believe the FTT Judge's assessment  in  this
      case can be faulted.

  32. The real issue on this aspect of the case was  whether  the  appellant
      could rebut the statutory presumption by showing that despite his  bad
      record of offending linked to substance abuse  he  was  now  reformed.
      There was, in the event, no good reason to think that the OASys report
      would have supported that contention. There was every reason to  think
      that it would not.

  33. We were  nonetheless  concerned  at  the  Secretary  of  State's  non-
      compliance with the Tribunal's order,  which  could  have  had  costly
      consequences. We note the explanation offered, but we also  note  that
      the September direction stated on  its  face  that  a  copy  had  been
      "issued to Home Office: Presenting Officers Unit, EC4Y 8JX", and  that
      it was partially complied with. We are not  in  a  position  to  reach
      conclusions on the issue, but in our view the reasons  for  that  non-
      compliance in this case should be investigated. It seems there may  be
      a policy of non-disclosure of OASys reports. There may be good reasons
      for such a policy, but not for a blanket refusal, least  of  all  when
      the court has ordered disclosure.

  34. We can deal more shortly with the remaining grounds of appeal.

  ii) "Conclusion unsustainable"


  35. At the hearing Mr Khan abandoned this, his second  ground  of  appeal,
      acknowledging that the Secretary of State's response to it  was  well-
      founded.



 iii) Failure to consider evidence as to conditions in Somalia


  36. Mr Khan criticises the Judge's  assessment  of  the  applicability  of
      paragraph 339A(v), on the ground that he "ignores the evidence by  the
      UNHCR in the Appellant's case which clearly indicates that changes  in
      Somalia  are  not  fundamental  or  durable".  This  is  an  untenable
      criticism, in  our  judgment.  Paragraph  [22]  of  the  Determination
      contains a careful review of  the  factors  relevant  to  whether  the
      circumstances that led to the appellant's recognition as a refugee had
      "ceased to exist" as  required  by  paragraph  339A(v).  So  far  from
      ignoring the UNHCR he described the  substance  of  its  report:  "The
      UNHCR in effect urge caution and  a  careful  assessment  of  all  the
      circumstances and such an assessment has been carried out."

  37. The Judge  referred  at  [7]  to  the  Country  Guidance  relating  to
      Somaliland, including AMM and others (Conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
      returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00045 and the earlier  case  of
      NM. We have been referred by Mr Khan to para [126] of NM. The tenor of
      this and subsequent Country Guidance is that since 2005  it  has  been
      safe for former residents with connections with the majority  clan  to
      return. The Judge found that the appellant  comes  from  the  majority
      Isaaq clan, and there is no challenge to this. The Judge further found
      that there was no reason to suppose that  the  Somaliland  authorities
      would not accept him, or that they or anyone else would persecute him.
      For the Secretary of State Mr Tufan submits that  the  UNHCR  evidence
      relied on falls short of the standard required  to  warrant  departure
      from Country  Guidance.  He  reminds  us  that  "cogent  evidence"  is
      required SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940. We agree.

  iv) Failure properly to apply the Immigration Rules


  38. The fourth and final ground of appeal concerns the Judge's decision on
      the applicability of  paragraph  399A  of  the  Rules.  The  appellant
      satisfies the first of the three conditions: as the  Judge  found,  he
      has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his  life,  and  had
      refugee status until 2015. The Judge found however  that  he  was  not
      socially or culturally integrated in the UK. Mr Khan  criticises  that
      finding, submitting that it is at odds with evidence accepted  by  the
      Judge, and a finding that was not open to  him.  In  support  of  this
      ground, Mr Khan points to paragraph [19] where the Judge recorded  the
      following facts: "The appellant is now 40 years old.  He came  to  the
      United Kingdom when he was 11.  He was educated in  this  country  and
      worked here, got married here, and had three daughters...".

  39. There are two main problems with this submission. First, it focuses on
      on part of one paragraph of the Determination, without regard to other
      aspects of the Determination which put that part in context. The Judge
      also made these findings:

      "19... His marriage broke down. I do not know whether he  is  formally
      divorced or not but he is certainly separated from his wife and  seems
      to have had no contact with his  daughters  for  many  years.  He  has
      turned to drink. He has a variety of ... convictions ... there  is  an
      absence of support in this country. He seems to have  minimal  contact
      with his family and nobody came to court on his behalf. He is  on  his
      own. ...

      29...  he is not socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  His last years  have  been  marred  by  a  long  history  of
      persistent drink related offending.  He has few ties in this  country.
      ..."

  40. Secondly, this submission fails to take account of the nature  of  the
      test being applied.  "The term integration imports a qualitative test:
      in order to assess whether  a  person  'is'  socially  and  culturally
      integrated in the UK, one is not simply looking at how long  a  person
      has spent in the UK or even at whether that  period  comprises  lawful
      residence": Bossade [2015] UKUT 415 [24]. As the Upper  Tribunal  made
      clear in the same paragraph of  Bossade,  time  spent  in  prison  may
      affect a conclusion on this issue. In this case, when regard is had to
      the full picture, as found by the Judge, it is clear that his  finding
      that the appellant was not socially and culturally  integrated  cannot
      be faulted.

  41. The third problem with this submission on behalf of the  appellant  is
      that he would need in any event to meet the third  of  the  conditions
      specified in paragraph 399A. The Judge found at [29]: "On the evidence
      before me I am not satisfied there would be very significant obstacles
      to his integration into the country to which  he  is  proposed  to  be
      deported..." That is a conclusion  which  is  not  challenged  by  the
      appellant and was clearly open to the Judge.

  42. By the same token, Exception 1 in s 117C(4) does  not  apply,  and  by
      virtue of s  117C(3)  the  appellant  is  a  'medium  offender'  whose
      deportation is required by the public interest. There was  no  tenable
      case of 'very compelling circumstances'.

                                  Disposal

  43. For the reasons given above, this appeal is dismissed.   There  is  no
      error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ievins  and
      his decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7 July 2016


The Honourable Mr Justice Warby
