
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 July 2016                          |On 03 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H M B
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION PRESERVED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Khubber, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Turpin &
Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burnett
    who, sitting at Newport on 17 March 2016 and in a decision subsequently
    promulgated on 7 April 2016,  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Respondent
    (hereinafter called the claimant),  a  citizen  of  Yemen  born  on  15
    November 1978, against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  8
    December 2015 but solely under Article 3 of the ECHR.

2.   It follows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge upheld the  Secretary  of
    State's Section 72 certificate,  finding  that  the  claimant  had  not
    rebutted the presumption that he was a danger to the community and that
    as such, he was not entitled to protection under the Refugee Convention
    or to Humanitarian Protection.

3.   In that regard the Secretary of State had concluded that  in  light  of
    the claimant's conviction on 10 January 2014 at Guildford  Crown  Court
    of three counts of supplying a Class A drug - Crack Cocaine, for  which
    he was sentenced to three years and four months' imprisonment  and  the
    claimant's  subsequent  failure  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  his
    continued presence in the United Kingdom would constitute a  danger  to
    the community, the Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  certify  in
    accordance with Section 72(9)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) that the presumption under  Section  72(2)
    applied to the claimant such that he was excluded from  the  protection
    of the Refugee Convention.

4.   By virtue of Article 33(3) of the Refugee Convention, the Secretary  of
    State further concluded that the claimant's removal to Yemen would  not
    result in the United Kingdom being in contravention of its  obligations
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

5.   The brief immigration history of the claimant is  that  he  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 19 November  1995  and  claimed  asylum  and  was
    granted refugee status and leave to enter until 4 November 2000.  On  3
    November 2000 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to remain which
    was granted on 11 April 2001.

6.   On  25  July  2007  at  Knightsbridge  Crown  Court  the  claimant  was
    convicted of supplying a Class A drug, namely Heroin, and sentenced  to
    three years' imprisonment.

7.   On 9 January 2008 the Secretary of State notified the claimant  of  his
    liability to be excluded from the Refugee Convention under Section  72.
    On 14 October 2008 the claimant was served with a decision  to  make  a
    deportation order and to cease his refugee status.  That  decision  was
    made on the basis that at the time, there had been a durable change  in
    the country situation in Yemen.  As no appeal was  lodged  against  the
    decision, a deportation order was signed against  the  claimant  on  23
    December 2008 and he was served with the decision on 27 December 2008.

8.   On 4 February 2009 the claimant lodged an out of  time  appeal  against
    the deportation decision and was allowed to proceed and on 7 April 2009
    the appeal was allowed on Article  8  of  the  ECHR  grounds  but  that
    decision was overturned and the appeal dismissed on 19 October 2009.

9.   On 9 November 2009 the claimant  requested  to  be  returned  to  Yemen
    under the  Facilitated  Returns  Scheme  (FRS)  and  that  request  was
    approved on 8 December 2009.

10.  On 25 January 2010  the  claimant  was  refused  permission  to  appeal
    against his dismissed appeal.

11.  On 5 February 2010 the claimant was withdrawn from FRS for  failing  to
    sign a disclaimer.  His appeal rights then became exhausted on 11 April
    2010.

12.  The claimant then failed to maintain  reporting  requirements  and  was
    circulated as an absconder on 21 January 2013.  He next came  to  light
    on 20 December 2013 when he was arrested for drugs offences.

13.  As mentioned, the claimant on 10 January 2014,  was  further  convicted
    (see above) and he did not appeal the sentence imposed upon him.

14.  On 2 December 2014 the claimant again requested  to  be  removed  under
    FRS but on 17 December 2014 he was withdrawn from FRS on the  basis  of
    his submissions where the claimant had claimed to  be  "stateless"  and
    requested that he be treated as a refugee.

15.  On 24 June 2015 the claimant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to  be
    excluded from the Refugee Convention under Section 72 of the  NIA  2002
    to which he responded by expressing his fear of return to Yemen.

16.  In summary, the grounds upon which the Secretary of State  successfully
    sought and obtained permission to appeal submitted that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially erred in law in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 by failing to deal with the reasons advanced in  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter and resolve matters of conflict.  Further the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider the Country  Information  (COIS)
    on Yemen dated November 2015 "and failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    departing from this and as such erred in  finding  the  return  of  the
    Appellant to Aden would breach the Appellant's Article 3 rights".

17.  The grounds referred inter alia, to the fact that whilst in April  2015
    the UNHCR called for countries  to  suspend  the  forcible  returns  of
    nationals and residents of Yemen, that since August 2015 there had been
    notable increases in food, fuel and building material to cities in  the
    south that included Aden, the control of which had been taken back from
    Houthi militias by coalition forces and was now in  the  hands  of  the
    government.

18.  As such, it was claimed, the humanitarian situation in Aden  (and  some
    areas in southern Yemen) whilst  severe,  did  not  in  general  breach
    Article 3.

19.  The grounds contended that whilst the Judge noted the above, he  failed
    to apply this to his findings when determining the appeal.

20.  The grounds further contended that the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude
    that the indiscriminate violence in Yemen was  at  such  a  level  that
    substantive grounds existed that a  person,  solely  by  being  present
    there, faced the risk of harm that threatened his life  or  person  and
    that in consequence the claimant's rights under Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive would also be breached.  It was submitted  that
    again the  Judge  failed  "to  have  adequate  regard  to  the  country
    information which provides this would not be the case  as  the  current
    situation in Aden is much  more  stable".   The  grounds  proceeded  to
    identify the background material that it was claimed, demonstrated this
    to be the case, including that which was contained  in  the  Letter  of
    Refusal.

21.  It was contended for example, that  though  the  evidence  showed  that
    Aden had become increasingly stable since July 2015 when the  city  was
    cleared of Houthi rebels and the government was  slowly  restoring  law
    and order supported by the UAE and that the Judge appeared  "to  attach
    little significance or weight to this".

22.  Further, whilst the Judge found that the  claimant's  father's  profile
    would attract attention to the claimant, it was overlooked  that  there
    had been a general amnesty in Aden "and that  the  (claimant's)  father
    had not been listed among the sixteen who were being tried in absentia"
    and thus "the (claimant) had not  demonstrated  a  profile  that  would
    attract adverse attention from the pro-government forces  or  deny  him
    protection from the Houthi rebels or any other insurgent to any  lesser
    degree than any other Yemeni citizen living in  Aden.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had thus failed to address  this  or  the  other  issues
    raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter adequately and had thus failed
    to address these material matters before making his findings.

23.  Immediately prior to the hearing of the appeal before me, the  Tribunal
    received the  claimant's  Rule  24  Notice.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State sought to challenge the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in relation to allowing the  claimant's  Article  3  and
    Article 8 claims.  I pause there, because  at  the  hearing  there  was
    common ground between myself and the parties, that were I  to  find  no
    material error of law in the Judge's approach and findings in  relation
    to Article 3, issues relating to Article 8 would fall away and need not
    be further considered.  Indeed the Rule 24 Notice acknowledged that  to
    be the case in stating that the challenge to the Article 8 claim rested
    on the challenge to the Article 3 claim.

24.  The  Rule  24  Notice  continued  that  upon  a  consideration  of  the
    Secretary  of  State's  grounds,  they  were  in   effect,   simply   a
    disagreement with the conclusions legitimately reached by the Judge  on
    the evidence before him and thus did not constitute a basis for setting
    it aside.

25.  It was submitted that the Judge's consideration  of  the  evidence  and
    reasoning for his conclusions was "set out with considerable  care  and
    detail in relation to each  material  aspect  of  the  appeal  for  the
    purposes of this challenge by the SSHD."  As to  Article  3  ECHR,  the
    Judge was well aware of the country evidence provided to  him  by  both
    parties  when  he  reached  his  conclusions,   as   applied   to   the
    circumstances  of  the  Appellant.   The  various  paragraphs  of   the
    determination were cited by way of example.

26.  It was thus maintained that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in
    relation to the aspects of the appeal upon which the claimant's  appeal
    was allowed under Articles 3 and 8 and whilst  another  Tribunal  might
    have reached another decision on the evidence, that was not relevant to
    the question of whether a material error of law had been established in
    the Judge's decision under challenge.

27.  In that regard reference was made to  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045
    where at paragraph 40 Carnwath LJ (as then was) who  gave  the  leading
    judgment had this inter alia to say:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy but they are not
         made easier or better by excessive legal  or  linguistic  analysis.
         It is of the nature of such  judgments  that  different  Tribunals,
         without illegality or irrationality may reach different conclusions
         on the same case."


28.  It  was  thus  submitted  that  as  to  any  allegation  of  inadequate
    reasoning, these were misplaced and the claimant further relied on  the
    observations in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 582 at paragraph 13.

29.  Having listened with care to  the  parties'  respective  submissions  I
    reserved my decision.

Assessment

30.  I have concluded that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    insofar as  it  relates  to  the  reasons  he  gave  for  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal under Articles 3 and 8 disclose no material error  of
    law.

31.  It was notable that at the outset of the hearing  (given  that  it  was
    the Secretary of State's position that the country  evidence/background
    material before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  been  properly
    dealt with in his decision) I suggested to Mr  Kotas  that  before  one
    delved into the detail, it was important to identify the nature of  the
    background country material that was placed before the Judge  in  order
    to determine whether there was a large body of country material that he
    simply failed to deal with.   If  that  was  the  case  then  it  would
    arguably be a complete answer to the case that the Judge had  erred  in
    law.

32.  In fact, notably Mr Kotas clarified to me that he  "put  it  this  way"
    and continued:

         "The  Judge  has  treated  the  general  country  situation  as  an
         homogenous mass and so in effect glossed over  the  improvement  in
         the  security  situation  in  Aden.   That  demonstrated  that  the
         security situation  there  simply  did  not  cross  the  Article  3
         threshold".


33.  In the course of his  submissions,  Mr  Kotas  helpfully  acknowledged,
    notwithstanding the quotation in the grounds, that it could not be said
    that the Judge had failed to consider the COIS of November 2015 as  the
    Judge had made reference to the report at, for example,  paragraphs  66
    and 67 of his decision.  Nonetheless the COIS at  paragraph  2.6.7  had
    stated inter alia that:

         "Aden has become increasingly stable, with lower numbers of violent
         incidents being reported, since July 2015 when the city was cleared
         of Houthi rebels by the government backed  by  Saudi-led  coalition
         troops and the Yemen authorities re-established control."


34.  Further I  was  referred  to  paragraph  2.7.6  where  inter  alia  the
    following was stated:

         "Relocating to most parts of Yemen remains difficult, but it may be
         reasonable for persons to relocate to Aden and in the  more  stable
         areas in the south of the country."

35.  I was also referred to aspects of paragraphs 3.11 and 3.12 as follows:

         "Yemen is in a state of armed conflict ... however since July  2015
         the situation has improved in parts  of  southern  Yemen  including
         Aden.


         3.12 The humanitarian situation in Aden and  some  other  areas  of
             southern and eastern Yemen, whilst severe, did not in  general
             add such a level as to breach Article 3".


36.  Mr Kotas  continued  that  it  followed  that  whilst  the  Judge  made
    reference to the report, he had failed to  particularly  address  those
    important aspects of it that should have alerted him to the  very  high
    threshold that had to be crossed when considering Article 3.

37.  Further submitted Mr Kotas, the Judge had  failed  adequately  to  deal
    with the profile of  the  Appellant,  mindful  in  particular  of  what
    appeared to be the Judge's reliance in terms of the claimant's risk  on
    return because of his father's profile as the grounds  have  identified
    and exemplified.

  38.  The Judge had failed to take proper account of the  determination  of
    the Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 19 October 2009  in  relation
    to the claimant, when they rejected the claimant's  claims  of  current
    fear as at that time if now returned to Yemen and  I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs 23 and 24  of  that  determination  that  for  the  sake  of
    completeness I will set out below:

         "23. We have carefully  considered  the  Appellant's  claims  to  a
             current fear if now returned to Yemen.  The  Respondent  notes
             the report  about  the  trial  of  sixteen  named  persons  in
             relation to the events of the 1994 civil war.   The  Appellant
             claims his father was  an  opposition  military  leader.   The
             Appellant has not however asserted there  was  no  documentary
             evidence that his father was one of those tried  in  absentia.
             The Canadian source quoted by the Respondent states that many,
             including those involved in military activity, returned  after
             an amnesty granted in 1994/5.  We accept that there  has  been
             an amnesty and we accept that sixteen named  individuals  were
             the only ones tried, in absentia, and convicted and  sentenced
             in relation to the 1994 internal  conflict.   The  Appellant's
             father's name was not among the sixteen.  We note  the  nature
             of the Appellant's claim.   He  had  not  been  militarily  or
             politically active before he left Yemen.  H  would  then  have
             been 16 years old.  It is not suggested there is in  existence
             a warrant to arrest him.


         24.  Considering the evidence in the  round,  we  accept  that  the
             circumstances in  connection  with  which  the  Appellant  was
             recognised as a refugee have now ceased to exist  because  (a)
             the Appellant's father was not one of the 16  named  as  tried
             and convicted in 1999; (b) he had not been involved  with  any
             military - or  political  activity  before  he  left  and  (c)
             because an amnesty was granted to participants in the conflict
             apart from the sixteen named, so had his father been  involved
             as he claimed he would have been  eligible  for  the  amnesty.
             Consequently we find that the Appellant cannot refuse to avail
             himself of  the  protection  of  Yemen,  the  country  of  his
             nationality.  ..."


39.  In his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge remarked  that  in  terms
    of the claimant's protection claim  that  was  based  upon  his  family
    history and previous claim and the general humanitarian situation,  the
    Judge noted that there was no real challenge to the factual  claim  and
    that the claimant's father's connections were set out  in  the  refusal
    letter.  He continued "the  difference  between  the  parties  was  the
    interpretation of the background evidence of the Appellant's claims and
    the risks posed to him". In that regard the Judge noted that there  was
    "no current report from the UNHCR in respect of this case".

40.  The Judge then  turned  his  attention  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal letter and as he observed at paragraph 60 the letter  "provides
    an analysis of the background county information".

41.  Further at paragraph  61  the  Judge  noted  that  the  refusal  letter
    acknowledged

         ".. from the reports quoted, that Yemen faces the biggest crisis in
         decades with the overthrow of the government by  the  Houthis.   It
         reports that the President was placed under house  arrest  and  has
         since escaped and formed a government  in  exile  in  Riyadh.   The
         report states there has been some success in the retaking of  parts
         of southern  Yemen  and  that  ministers  of  the  Hadi  government
         returned to Aden in August 2015.   In  September  Saudi-led  forces
         were attempting to improve the security situation in Aden".


42.  Having acknowledged those  aspects  of  the  background  material,  the
    Judge continued at paragraph 62  to  remark  that  the  refusal  letter
    suggested that "Aden has become increasingly stable with lower  numbers
    of violent incidents being reported.  It suggested that law  and  order
    are slowly being restored".

43.  That indeed was a further acknowledgement of the  positive  aspects  as
    to the security situation not least in Aden.

44.  At paragraph 63 the Judge noted the claimant claimed to have been  born
    and raised in Aden.

45.  At paragraph 64 in reference to  the  general  humanitarian  situation,
    the Judge noted that the United Nations had

         "declared a level 3 (most severe) emergency response  to  Yemen  in
         July 2015.  It states  that  throughout  the  country,  people  are
         struggling to access food, fuel and medicine with an estimated  8.6
         million people in urgent need of medical care.  It is  stated  that
         the Yemeni population is about 25 million".


46.  At paragraph 65 the Judge observed that the humanitarian situation  was
    described

         "as serious, including in Aden in April 2015 the UNHCR  called  for
         all countries to suspend forcible return.  The report  goes  on  to
         state that the situation has improved and the Home  Office  Country
         Guidance suggests that whilst  severe  the  humanitarian  situation
         does not cross the level to breach Article 3".


47.  At paragraph 66 in taking account of the COI  Report  of  November  15,
    the Judge observed that it "described the  Houthi-Hadi  divide  as  the
    most explosive but that it is not the only  conflict".   Tensions  were
    also unsettling the recent:

         "  'marriage  of  convenience'  between  the  Houthis  and   former
         President Ali Abdollah Saleh.  He has taken  advantage  of  popular
         dissatisfaction and tacitly allied himself with the Houthis against
         their common enemies.  It states that the Southern separatists  are
         internally split and suspicious  of  Hadi  who  supports  continued
         unity with the north.   This  suggests  the  situation  is  complex
         between alliances".


48.  The Judge's consideration  of  the  background  material  did  not  end
    there, because over paragraphs 67 and 68 of  his  decision,  the  Judge
    referred to the claimant's bundle of documents and the reports to which
    the claimant's Counsel had  drawn  his  attention.   These  included  a
    report dated 22 December 2015 relating to a speech by the Ambassador of
    the UK Mission to the UN whom, it was observed in summary,  had  stated
    inter alia:

         "If the Security Council members were an average group  of  fifteen
         Yemenis, twelve would need humanitarian assistance and  four  would
         need emergency food assistance just to survive.  It was stated that
         Yemenis are the midst of one of the worst  humanitarian  crises  in
         the world".


49.  The Judge further noted that "this report  is  the  most  recent  apart
    from two brief reports dated January 2016.  I note that there had  been
    reports of  killings  and  attacks  in  Aden  despite  this  being  the
    temporary main capital".  (Emphasis added).

50.  The  Judge  continued  that  "the  reports  in  the  Appellants  bundle
    generally echo those of the Home Office and  in  fact  several  of  the
    reports in the Appellant's bundle are the COI's  that  I  have  already
    referred to".

51.  At  paragraph  68  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
    background  material  before  him  that  he  had  carefully  considered
    provided "alarming reading and gives an impression of a dire  state  of
    affairs.  It is very difficult to assess how people, said to be  allied
    to separatist conflicts of the past would be viewed".

52.  The Judge continued that the claimant had been absent  in  the  interim
    twenty years but that

         "in the very volatile situation that it is at present, he is likely
         to be treated with great suspicion.  This could put him at  extreme
         risk.  I consider that  there  would  be  a  risk  of  there  being
         attributed to him a political opinion which could put him  at  risk
         of persecution and ill-treatment by the various warring factions".


53.  At paragraph 69 the Judge continued that in his judgment:

         "given  the  humanitarian  crisis  at  present  and   despite   the
         suggestion in the COI that the Article 3 threshold is not  crossed,
         I conclude that threshold  is  crossed,  especially  for  a  person
         returning without any connections, family or support  networks.   I
         also take into account the Appellant has an  addiction  which  also
         makes him particularly vulnerable at this time."


54.  The Judge however acknowledged that given his  judgment  about  Section
    72, the claimant was excluded from humanitarian protection despite  the
    provisions of paragraph 339C that a person would otherwise  be  granted
    humanitarian protection where there were substantial grounds shown  for
    believing the person concerned on return to his country of origin would
    face a real risk of suffering serious harm and was unable or  owing  to
    such risk unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country.

55.  At paragraph 75, the Judge concluded that due to the risks that he  had
    earlier identified, he allowed the appeal in reliance  upon  Article  3
    from which he was clear that there could be no derogation.

56.  Upon my own careful consideration of  the  background  material  before
    the Judge, his treatment of it and the submissions of the parties, I am
    satisfied that contrary to the assertions in the grounds, the Judge  in
    fact carried out a careful detailed  and  frank  analysis  of  all  the
    evidence before him, in terms not only of the material upon  which  the
    Secretary of State relied in her refusal  letter,  but  which  in  fact
    included up-to-date country evidence as well as of course the  evidence
    of the claimant.

57.  Indeed over paragraphs 9 to 12 of his determination, he  made  a  point
    of setting out the background material before him including the COIS of
    November 2015 and the Tribunal determination of 2009 but  it  was  also
    apparent over paragraphs 60 to 69 of his decision in  particular,  that
    there was an analysis of the claimant's position in the light  of  that
    evidence and in the light of his profile.

58.   That  profile  included  the  claimant's  father's  history  and   the
    claimant's   own   circumstances   which   included   his    identified
    vulnerability, lengthy absence and of course the  current  position  in
    Yemen, not least in Aden.  However, it was also  clear  the  Judge  was
    well aware of the improvements on the ground in Aden as  apparent  from
    not least paragraphs 62 to 65 of the decision to  which  I  have  above
    referred.

59.  As Mr Khubber in his submissions rightly pointed  out,  the  Judge  had
    discharged the duty upon him to carry out a  fact-sensitive  evaluation
    of the circumstances of the claimant upon his return to Yemen in  terms
    of his profile.  That led him at paragraph 69 to  conclude  in  summary
    that

         ".. given the  humanitarian  crisis  at  present  and  despite  the
         suggestion in the COI that the Article 3 threshold was not crossed,
         I conclude  the  threshold  is  crossed  especially  for  a  person
         returning without any connections, family or support  networks.   I
         also take into account the Appellant has an  addiction  which  also
         makes him particularly vulnerable at this time".


60.  The Judge clearly considered those aspects of the  background  material
    that demonstrated improvement in Aden but it was also clear that  there
    was a need to take a fact sensitive approach to it.

61.  Indeed, having looked again at the paragraphs of the COI  to  which  Mr
    Kotas referred me, paragraph 2.5.8  began  by  pointing  out  that  the
    humanitarian  situation  remained  "serious  throughout   the   country
    including Aden and in April 2015 the UNHCR called for all countries  to
    suspend forcible returns of nationals and habitual residence of Yemen".

62.  At paragraph 2.6.7 whilst there was an acknowledgement Aden had  become
    increasingly stable,  the  passage  opened  by  stating  that  "violent
    clashes continue with  civilians  largely  bearing  the  brunt  of  the
    conflict, fighting and  armed  clashes  have  increasingly  moved  into
    central .................  in  Yemen  although  the  situation  remains
    fluid".

63.  As to paragraph 2.7.6 the passage opened by  stating  that  "relocating
    to most parts of Yemen remains difficult, but it may be reasonable  for
    persons to relocate between Aden and the more stable areas in the south
    of the country."  The passage however continues as follows:

         "Decision makers must give careful consideration to  the  relevance
         and reasonableness of internal relocation on a  case-by-case  basis
         taking  full  account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of   the
         particular person including where they originate from in Yemen  and
         where they will be returning to.  Decisions makers  must  refer  to
         the latest available country information when considering  internal
         relocation".


64.  It is apparent upon my reading of the decision, that this was the  task
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge carried out and his analysis  chimes
    with that guidance  in  concluding  that  for  the  cumulative  reasons
    identified, it was not safe for the claimant to return to Aden where he
    would be at real risk of suffering Article 3 ill-treatment.

65.   I  would  agree  with  Mr  Khubber  that  this  is   a   question   of
    interpretation and the conclusion that the Judge reached was  one  that
    he was perfectly entitled to make.

66.  As to the situation as it related to  the  profile  of  the  claimant's
    father, that was of course only one aspect of the claimant's  case.   I
    do not find that even if the Secretary  of  State's  interpretation  on
    that profile demonstrates a misunderstanding on the part of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that that in itself would not demonstrate that  the
    decision as a whole was infected such as to lead to a  material  error,
    as clearly the Judge had reached his decision  on  a  series  of  other
    issues and it was the cumulative impact that had to be looked at in the
    round.   It  is  clear  that  the  Judge's  conclusions   reached  over
    paragraphs 61 to 69 of his decision did not  rely  exclusively  on  the
    implication to the claimant on the basis of his father's profile.

67.  As Mr Khubber submitted, whilst the father's profile was found  not  to
    have established a continuing basis for refugee protection in  2009  at
    the time of the Tribunal's decision, it  was  nonetheless  relevant  to
    consider now in terms of the deteriorating  situation  in  Yemen  as  a
    whole in 2016 when this appeal was being considered and the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  was  thus  perfectly  entitled  to  consider  that  the
    claimant's father's profile might have an impact on the claimant if  he
    was now returning twenty years after he had left  but  again  I  repeat
    that that was only one aspect of the various  considerations  that  the
    Judge made in terms of Article 3 not only over paragraphs 61 to 69  but
    also over paragraphs 70 to 75 of his decision.

68.  Whilst it might be the case that another  Judge  considering  the  same
    evidence would  come  to  a  different  conclusion,  I  find  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  challenge  is  in  substance  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with that conclusion.

69.  I find the grounds thus fail to  disclose  an  error  of  law  upon  my
    careful reading of the Judge's decision.

70.  The grounds assert in  summary  that  the  Judge's  decision  discloses
    inadequate reasoning and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    make findings of fact on every  issue  arising  and  generally  express
    disagreement with the findings made.

71.  I am satisfied that it is entirely  clear  from  the  Judge's  decision
    read as a whole, why the appeal was allowed  under  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.  The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  that  regard
    cannot be said to be irrational  nor  his  conclusions  perverse.   The
    Judge was required to explain why he reached his  conclusions  but  was
    not required to assemble and set out in  the  determination  everything
    that was capable of supporting a contrary view.  In that regard I would
    again refer to Mukarkar (above) at paragraph 40.

72.  It is apparent to me that in terms of Article 3 of the ECHR the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge reached findings that were supported by and open to
    him on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

73.  In Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    it was made clear that the conclusions in the central issues of appeals
    need not be extensive if the decision as a whole made  sense.   I  find
    that within the Judge's determination, comprehensive reasons, supported
    by the evidence were provided by him for his conclusions.  This is  not
    a case where I find such reasoning could in any sense by  described  as
    inadequate.  It is apparent the Judge's decision in terms of Article  3
    reveal no  misdirection.   Further  the  Judge's  fact-finding  process
    cannot be criticised.  It is apparent that he properly took account  of
    the background material before him that he set against the backdrop  of
    the facts as found.

74.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  his  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him.  The findings that he made were clearly  open
    to him on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the previous decision involved the making of  no  error  on  a
point of law and I order that it shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant  to  Rule  14  and  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed                                  Date 18 July 2016


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
