
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00167/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 8th August 2017                           |On: 9th August 2017          |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [M S]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, [MS], is a national of Somalia born on the 2nd  October
    1979.  On the 20th February 2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  M.
    Davies) allowed his deportation appeal. The Secretary of State now  has
    permission[1] to appeal against that decision.
 2. The background facts are these.  [MS] arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    1995, when he was 15 years old. His father had  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee and [MS], his mother and siblings were given leave to enter  in
    order to facilitate the reunion  of  the  family.    [MS]  was  granted
    refugee status and 'indefinite leave to remain' in line with his father
    on the 21st April 1997.  Between 2004 and 2010 [MS] was convicted of  a
    number of different offences, none of which  resulted  in  a  custodial
    sentence. On the 14th February 2012 however, he received a sentence  of
    32 months imprisonment for the offences of robbery and possession of an
    imitation fire-arm.  As a result, he was notified of his  liability  to
    deportation on the 26th April 2012.   He made  various  submissions  in
    respect of his position  in  the  UK,  notably  placing  reliance  upon
    Article 8 ECHR.


 3. These submissions were rejected. The  Secretary  of  State  noted  that
    s32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 required [MS]'s  deportation,  unless
    he could demonstrate that one or more of the exceptions set out in  s33
    of the Act applied. Finding that none of them  did,  the  Secretary  of
    State signed the order on the 30th November 2016.

 4. On appeal the matters to be decided were therefore:

              i) Whether the exception at s33(2)(a) applied, i.e. would  the
                 deportation breach the UK's obligations under the  European
                 Convention on Human  Rights?  In  the  case  of  [MS]  that
                 required the Tribunal to consider whether  his  removal  to
                 Somalia would:


                    a) engage Article 3


                    b) be a disproportionate interference with [MS]'s family
                       and private life, as protected  by  Article  8.  This
                       would require consideration of paragraphs 398-399A of
                       the Immigration Rules.


             ii) Whether the exception at s33(2)(b) applied,  ie  would  the
                 deportation breach the UK's obligations under  the  Refugee
                 Convention. Because [MS] had already been recognised  as  a
                 refugee that required the Tribunal to:


                      a)  Determine   whether   [MS]   had   rebutted   the
                         presumption at s72 of the Nationality, Immigration
                         and Asylum Act 2002. If he  could  not,  then  his
                         status  would  not  prevent  his  refoulement,  in
                         accordance  with  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
                         Convention.


                      b) The Secretary of State further argued that even if
                         the  presumption  in   s72   was   rebutted,   the
                         circumstances in connection with  which  [MS]  had
                         been recognised as a refugee had ceased  to  exist
                         in  Somalia  and  his  protection  status   should
                         therefore be revoked.


 5. In relation to those matters the First-tier Tribunal found as  follows.
    It was found that the Secretary of State had not carried out  a  proper
    'best interests' assessment in respect of [MS]'s three children and  as
    such the decision - in respect of both the  Refugee  and  Human  Rights
    Conventions - was 'not in accordance with the law'. The  Tribunal  held
    that the presumption in s72 is rebutted because [MS] does not and  will
    not in the future constitute a danger to the community. No  finding  is
    made on the cessation argument put in the refusal letter.  Nor  is  any
    finding made on Article 3.


 6. The grounds are lengthy and  detailed  but  can  be  distilled  to  two
    points: the Tribunal failed to apply the correct legal  framework,  and
    failed to give adequate reasons for its findings. I  need  not  address
    each and every point in the grounds since I find  that  both  of  these
    central criticisms are made out.

 7. The legal framework that should have been applied in this case is  that
    set out above at paragraph 4.

 8. The starting point on Article 8 should have been paragraphs 398-399A of
    the Rules. The fact that it would be contrary to the best interests  of
    [MS]'s children if he were to be removed is not  a  question  posed  in
    those  rules.  The  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider  whether  his
    deportation would have unduly harsh consequences for his children. That
    question was not answered in this  determination.  Turning  to  private
    life, it does not appear to be in dispute that [MS] has lived  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom since the day that he arrived in 1995.   He would
    prima facie meet at least the first limb of paragraph  399A  (20  years
    continuous residence) but no consideration has been  given  at  all  to
    whether he could meet the second (socially and culturally integrated in
    the UK) or third (no social, cultural or family ties to Somalia).   The
    determination is therefore flawed for legal misdirection on Article  8,
    and for a failure to make relevant findings.


 9. In respect of the protection aspect of the claim the Tribunal did  make
    findings to the effect that [MS] had rebutted presumption in  s72,  but
    no findings are made at all on Article 3 or whether [MS] would continue
    to face a real risk of harm.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department had expressly invoked  the  cessation  clause  and  she  was
    entitled to have her argument considered. If [MS] is no longer at  risk
    of harm in Somalia then the findings on s72 are otiose.

10. The grounds are made out and the decision is set aside in its entirety.










    Decision and Directions


11. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of  law  and  it  is  set
    aside.

12. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts of  the
    case I see no reason to do so.

13. Given that the decision has been set aside in its entirety  I  consider
    it appropriate, given the extent of the fact finding required, to remit
    this matter to be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

14. I am conscious that [MS] is without legal representation.  He  informed
    me that he is out of work and has no money to pay for a lawyer. He  has
    not thus far been able  to  secure  free  legal  advice.  I  agreed  to
    facilitate a short delay in re-listing to enable [MS] to try and find a
    representative. As I explained at the hearing the law is  complex,  and
    both he and the Tribunal would benefit  from  submissions  made  by  an
    immigration law specialist.

15. I direct that both [MS] and his father (who attended the  hearing  with
    him)  submit  signed  witness  statements  explaining  their  remaining
    connections to Somalia, whether they  have  any  relatives  there  etc.
    These statements should also explain why [MS] considers himself  to  be
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK. [MS] might also  find  it
    helpful to submit up to date evidence  relating  to  his  relationships
    with his children. This could  include  statements  from  the  children
    themselves,     from     their     mothers,     and      any      other
    relatives/friends/professionals  involved  with  the  family  such   as
    teachers or social workers.  These statements should  be  sent  to  the
    Home Office and the Tribunal no later  than  7  days  before  the  next
    hearing.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             8th August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Easterman) on
the 26th May 2017


