

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2016                   |On 21 March 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [F A]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel instructed by Warnpala &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Somalia. He entered the  UK  when  he  was
around 15 and claimed asylum  in  December  2000.  He  was  granted  refugee
status in May 2001 on the basis that he was a member of a minority clan.  On
20 December 2012 he was convicted on two counts of  possession  of  Class  A
drugs with intent to supply/supplying  and  was  sentenced  to  3  years  10
months imprisonment.


2. In March 2013 the appellant was issued with  a  notice  of  liability  of
intention to deport and on 6 December 2013 the respondent issued him with  a
section 72 notice under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
giving him the opportunity  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  he  had  been
convicted of a particularly serious crime and was a danger to society.

3. On 18 Feb 2014 the respondent notified the appellant of her intention  to
cease his refugee status by way of a revocation decision  taken  under  para
339A of the Immigration Rules.  On 23 February 2015 the  respondent  made  a
deportation order against him as a foreign criminal under s.32(5) of the  UK
Borders Act 2007 and a decision to revoke the  appellant's  refugee  status.
In the notice and decision letters that accompanied these decisions  it  was
stated that given the improvement of the  situation  in  Mogadishu  and  the
latest country guidance case of MOJ & Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  (Rev  1)
(CG) [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC), the appellant would no longer be  at  real  risk
of persecution or ill treatment on return even though he was a member  of  a
minority clan (the  Reer  Hamar/Benadiri).  It  was  also  stated  that  the
appellant did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and  had
not demonstrated compelling circumstances such as to warrant  exempting  him
from deportation on Article 8 grounds.

4. The appellant appealed against the deportation and revocation  decisions.
In a decision sent on 21 October 2015 the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  (Judge
Parkes and Mr Sandall) dismissed his appeal.  The  FtT  concluded  that  the
situation in  Somalia  was  now  significantly  different  from  that  which
prevailed in  2000/2001  when  the  appellant  left  and  as  a  result  the
respondent was entitled to decide he had ceased to be a  refugee.   The  FtT
went on to say that in any event the appellant was caught by the  provisions
of s.72 albeit his case had not been certified, stating: "[i]t  is  for  the
Appellant to show that he  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  danger  to  the
community. Whilst the reports he relies on are supportive of him  we  cannot
overlook the seriousness of what he [did] and the sentencing  remarks."  The
FtT also rejected the appellant's  appeal  on  EEA  grounds  and  under  the
Immigration Rules on Article 8 and deportation.

5. The grounds of appeal brought by  the  appellant  (both  those  dated  26
October 2015 and those dated 29 November 2015) raise two  points:  that  the
FtT had given no consideration of humanitarian protection in  the  decision;
and that at [29] the judge had failed to make findings  as  to  whether  the
claimant is to be regarded as a danger to the community. In relation to  the
first ground, attention was drawn to an addendum skeleton  argument  and  an
expert report of Professor  Aguilar  dated  21  September  2015  which  were
before the FtT and were said to show that  the  appellant  would  become  an
Internally Displaced Person and would have to live in an IDP camp.

6. In submissions before me Ms Allen contended first of  all  that  the  FtT
had not made a proper finding, as was  required  by  s.72,  on  whether  the
appellant  was  a  danger  to  the  community,  especially  given  that  the
appellant  had  made  considerable  efforts   since   his   convictions   to
rehabilitate, which was supported by the documentation  and  reports  placed
before the FtT.

Ms Allen's submitted secondly that the FtT had  not  correctly  applied  the
guidance given in MOJ & Others which stated that when considering return  to
Mogadishu regard should be had to the period of  absence  from  Somalia  and
the presence or otherwise of family support.  It  required  there  to  be  a
careful assessment of the evidence. The FtT had  applied  MOJ  &  Others  in
generic fashion without regard to the appellant's particular  circumstances.
The FtT had not addressed humanitarian protection.

7. Mr Wilding maintained that if the appellant was properly  found  to  have
ceased to be a refugee, the s.72 notice/decision did not  bite.  As  regards
humanitarian protection, it was for the appellant to show  he  would  be  at
risk on return and the appellant had not done so.  The  FtT  considered  the
expert report of Professor Aguilar, a report which was  problematic  in  any
event, given that it was largely a disagreement with  MOJ  &  Others  rather
than an objective assessment taking into account evidence on all  sides.  He
cited the Tribunal case of AAW (expert evidence-weight) [2015] UKUT  673  as
support for his criticisms of the Professor's report. The appellant had  not
shown that he would not receive remittances from members of  his  family  in
the UK. It had also to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  appellant  would  be
eligible for a  Facilitated  Return,  which  would  mean  he  would  not  be
returned in destitution or have to go to an  IDP  camp.  The  appellant  had
worked in the UK and had transferable skills.

8. I am not persuaded that the grounds identify any material error of law.

9. As regards the s.72  issue,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  respondent
proceeded to certify the appellant's case under s.72,  notwithstanding  that
she had sent him a notice of intention to do so. If that is right,  then  it
is likely to have been because in the  meantime,  in  the  light  of  MOJ  &
Others, she had decided to take cessation action  against  him  instead.  In
any event, as a matter of law, once a person ceases to be  a  refugee,  they
fall outside the scope s.72 and any certificate made under it  would  simply
fall away. Section 72(1) states that "This section applies for  the  purpose
of the  construction  and  application  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
Convention (exclusion from  protection)".  Article  33(2)  applies  only  to
person who are refugees.  ("The benefit of the present  provision  may  not,
however, be claimed by a refugee  whom  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
regarding...."). I would add that in any event, insofar as the grounds  seek
to rely on  the  failure  by  the  FtT  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's rehabilitation, they clearly did consider  that  and  reached  a
firm view about it: see the final sentence of [29].

10. Even if I am wrong about the s.72  issue,  and  even  assuming  it  were
considered the FtT had been  wrong  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  fell
within the terms of s.72, any such error could not be material in this  case
unless there was material error in the cessation decision to revoke  refugee
status or in the corresponding decision that the appellant was not  entitled
to humanitarian protection.

11. The grounds set much store by  the  argument  that  the  FtT  failed  to
address  the  appellant's  situation  under  the   humanitarian   protection
provisions,  particularly  as  regards  the  provision  in  the  Rules(339C)
transposing Article 15c of the Qualification  Directive.  However,  although
it is true that [22]-[29] of the  decision  are  placed  under  the  heading
"Refugee Status",  and  there  is  no  specific  heading  for  "Humanitarian
Protection Status", it  is  clear  from  the  assessment  made  by  the  FtT
considered as a whole that: (a) it did not consider that the  appellant  had
established he would any longer face  risk on  return  of  any  kind  (which
would also cover Article 3 ECHR risk); (ii) when making  its  assessment  in
these paragraphs it can be understood to have  borne  in  mind  its  earlier
self-reminder  at  [14]-[16]  that  if  an   application   for   asylum   is
unsuccessful, then in order to succeed on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
an appellant must show that there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing
that if returned to his country of origin [he] would face  a  real  risk  of
suffering serious harm and that "[i]n the  event  that  an  application  for
asylum and humanitarian protection is  not  allowed  consideration  must  be
given to whether the return of the Appellant  to  their  country  of  origin
would place the UK in breach of its obligations under the  ECHR";  (iii)  in
the grounds of appeal the only  humanitarian  protection  matter  identified
concerned Article 15c of  the  Qualification  Directive  which  requires  an
assessment of whether there is  a real risk of an applicant facing  harm  on
the basis of indiscriminate violence in situations  of  armed  conflict.  In
[27] the FtT states that it is permissible to depart from the findings of  a
country guidance case  but  evidence  is  required  to  show  that  such  an
approach is warranted in a particular case:

      "We  note  the   other   evidence   provided   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives but that is of a general nature, it confirms that there
    is internal armed conflict within Somalia but it does not show that the
    conclusions reached by the Upper Tribunal  were  erroneous  or  do  not
    apply to the Appellant".

12. A further point ((iv)) is that the appellant's grounds  wholly  fail  to
appreciate that  the  guidance  given  in  MOJ  &  Others  was  specifically
confined to Article 15c, i.e. to the issue of humanitarian protection.  That
is clear from the headnote to this decision,  which  states  under  the  sub
head Country Guidance, as follows:


     "(i)                 The country guidance  issues  addressed  in  this
           determination are not identical to those  engaged  with  by  the
           Tribunal in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
           returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT  445  (IAC).  Therefore,
           where country guidance has been given by the Tribunal in AMM  in
           respect of issues not addressed in this determination  then  the
           guidance provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.


     (ii)               Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"
           (i.e. not associated with the security  forces;  any  aspect  of
           government  or   official   administration   or   any   NGO   or
           international organisation) on returning to  Mogadishu  after  a
           period of absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk
           of harm such as to require protection under  Article  3  of  the
           ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.  In
           particular, he will not be at real risk  simply  on  account  of
           having lived in a European location for  a  period  of  time  of
           being viewed with suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as  a
           possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as an apostate
           or someone whose  Islamic  integrity  has  been  compromised  by
           living in a Western country.


     (iii)             There has been durable change in the sense that  the
           Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no
           real prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That
           was not the case at the time of the country  guidance  given  by
           the Tribunal in AMM.

     (iv)             The level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-
           military casualties that clearly fall within Al  Shabaab  target
           groups  such  as  politicians,   police   officers,   government
           officials and  those  associated  with  NGOs  and  international
           organisations,  cannot   be   precisely   established   by   the
           statistical  evidence  which  is  incomplete   and   unreliable.
           However, it is established by the evidence considered as a whole
           that there has  been  a  reduction  in  the  level  of  civilian
           casualties  since  2011,  largely  due  to  the   cessation   of
           confrontational warfare within the city and Al Shabaab's  resort
           to asymmetrical warfare  on  carefully  selected  targets.   The
           present level of casualties does not amount to a sufficient risk
           to ordinary civilians such as  to  represent  an  Article  15(c)
           risk.

     (v)               It is open to an ordinary citizen  of  Mogadishu  to
           reduce further still  his  personal  exposure  to  the  risk  of
           "collateral damage" in being caught up in an Al  Shabaab  attack
           that  was  not  targeted  at   him   by   avoiding   areas   and
           establishments  that  are  clearly  identifiable  as  likely  Al
           Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for him to do so.

     (vi)             There is no real risk of  forced  recruitment  to  Al
           Shabaab for civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent
           returnees from the West.

     (vii)           A person returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in
           the city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing
           a livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority
           clans may have little to offer.

     (viii)         The significance of clan membership  in  Mogadishu  has
           changed.  Clans  now  provide,   potentially,   social   support
           mechanisms and assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing
           less of a protection function than previously. There are no clan
           militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based
           discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

     (ix)              If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to
           Mogadishu after a period of absence has  no  nuclear  family  or
           close relatives in the city to  assist  him  in  re-establishing
           himself on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of
           all of the circumstances. These considerations will include, but
           are not limited to:

           .       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           .       length of absence from Mogadishu;
           .       family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           .       access to financial resources;
           .       prospects of securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
              employment or self employment;
           .       availability of remittances from abroad;
           .       means of support during the time  spent  in  the  United
              Kingdom;
           .       why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no
              longer enables an appellant to  secure  financial  support  on
              return.


     (x)               Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing
           return to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
           economic opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic
           boom, especially  as  there  is  evidence  to  the  effect  that
           returnees are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never
           been away.


     (xi)             It will, therefore, only be those  with  no  clan  or
           family support who will not be in receipt  of  remittances  from
           abroad and who have no real prospect of  securing  access  to  a
           livelihood on return who will face the  prospect  of  living  in
           circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in
           humanitarian protection terms.

     (xii)            The evidence indicates clearly that it is not  simply
           those who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return
           to live in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)
           risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On  the  other  hand,
           relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no
           former links to the city, no access to funds and no  other  form
           of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to  be  realistic
           as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form of
           ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of having no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards."


13,  The Rules mirror the  Qualification  Directive  in  applying  cessation
clauses  both  in  respect  of  refugee  status  (339A)   and   humanitarian
protection  status  (339G).  Of  course,  application   of   the   cessation
provisions requires it to be shown that  the change in the circumstances  in
the country of origin is durable and non-temporary. Although  MOJ  &  Others
were not addressing a cessation case, it is quite clear that the  considered
the change in circumstances to be non-temporary and durable.

14. The grounds also avow, and this was the main point pressed by  Ms  Allen
in submissions, that the FtT failed to apply or adhere to the  guidance  set
out in MOJ & Others. It is something of a struggle to discern this point  in
the appellant's written grounds, Be that as it may,  I  disagree  with  this
submission. Adverting to the wording of the  head  note  in  MOJ  &  Others,
whilst it is true the Tribunal emphasized the  importance  of  examining  an
appellant's particular circumstances, it also made clear that  the  onus  of
proof is on the appellant and that: " ...it will be for  the  person  facing
return to  explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
opportunities that have been produced by the economic  boom,  especially  as
there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are  taking  jobs  at  the
expense of those who have never been away."

15. In the appellant's case the  respondent's  notice/decision  letters  had
based themselves on the guidance in MOJ & Others and had concluded,  as  the
FtT noted at [23], that in the light of that guidance:

     "the Appellant could return to Mogadishu, he is a young  man  with  no
    health problems and has acquired skills that he could  use  on  return.
    Despite the Appellant's claim that his parents had died records  showed
    a phone number for  his  father.  His  clan  membership  would  not  be
    relevant..."

16.  In  his  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  the
appellant relied essentially on general evidence relating to  conditions  in
Mogadishu and Somalia, including the report of Professor  Aguilar;  the  FtT
specially observed at [27] that this evidence was  "of  a  general  nature".
Whilst  therefor  the  FtT  can  be  criticised  for  not   addressing   the
appellant's particular circumstances in  more  detail,  its  reasoning  made
clear that faced with the purely general response made by the  appellant  to
the respondent's assessment that his particular circumstances did not  bring
him within any of the MOJ & Others risk factors,  they  were  not  satisfied
that the appellant had established a real risk of serious harm based on  any
circumstances taking his case out of the ordinary case  of  a  single  young
man returning after a considerable lapse of time.

17. Ms Allen seeks to rely  on  the  contents  of  the  appellant's  witness
statement, but it is clear that the FtT did not accept his  own  account  of
having no family network in Mogadishu. Read  together  with  representations
made on his behalf, the appellant's statement, sent on 7 March  2014  itself
makes clear why it was reasonable of the respondent and in turn the  FtT  to
assume that on return the appellant would have transferable skills.  He  had
said that he started working in 2003 with  NYK  Logistics,  Northampton  and
worked for them until 2008; and, prior to being made redundant he  had  been
promoted  to   Warehouse   Supervisor   controlling   30   people   in   the
establishment.  The appellant had also started training  to  obtain  a  mini
cab driver licence.  In prison he had obtained a number of  certificates  of
achievement, including barber, drugs awareness and family relations.

18. It is necessary for completeness to address  one  particular  aspect  of
the appellant's case relating to the fact that he has been accepted to be  a
member of a minority clan. The guidance given in  MOJ  &  Others  identified
lack of membership of a majority clan as  a  relevant  factor  in  assessing
risk on return. However, it is not in dispute that the appellant's  minority
clan  is  Reer  Hamar  which  is  considered  to  be  part  of  or   closely
interconnected with the Benadairi clan. In her reasons  for  refusal  letter
the  respondent  devoted  considerable  space  to  addressing  whether   the
background country evidence identified  any  particular  risk  to  the  Reer
Hamar. Her conclusion was that "the Reer Hamar/Benadiri are  not  considered
marginalised...They are exploited but not marginalised" [28].  At  [29]  the
respondent noted that specific clan protection was no  longer  important  as
individuals who require protection can approach the police, elders or  their
local MP and in this way obtain protection  from  the  authorities.  It  was
also noted that:

    "Further to this, Mogadishu is home to a sizeable Benadiri  population,
    and it is reasonable for you to live amongst your own clan  within  the
    city. In your asylum statement you mentioned  that  your  parents  went
    missing and that your sister sought refuge with  your  uncle.  On  your
    return you can seek and re-establish ties with your sisters and  uncle.
    You would also have the opportunity to  find  your  parents.  If  there
    remains a  network  of  extended  relative  or  extended  relations  in
    Somalia, you could re-establish ties with them..."


19. It can thus be seen that the respondent had  addressed  the  appellant's
minority clan status and given clear reasons why it was not considered  this
would give rise to risk to the appellant. The FtT  clearly  considered  this
evidence, alongside the other materials produced to it.  In  light  of  that
evidence, it cannot  be  considered  an  error  for  the  FtT  not  to  have
addressed the appellant's  clan  position  further.  Given  the  appellant's
transferable skills, there was no reason to consider he would be  exploited.


20. For completeness I would record that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal
did not challenge the FtT decision as regards the  appellant's  EEA  grounds
and Article 8 grounds. Even if a challenge  had  been  raised,  I  am  quite
satisfied that the appellant had no realistic prospect of success on  either
ground. His wife by religious marriage was in the  Netherlands  and  so  the
appellant  could  not  come  within  the  personal  scope  of  the  Citizens
Directive even assuming  his  wife  had  Dutch  nationality.  There  was  no
evidence to show that the appellant had close  ties  with  his  children  or
that their care and welfare was been  negatively  affected  by  his  absence
from their lives.

21. For the above reason the FtT did not  materially  err  in  law  and  its
decision dismissing the appellant's appeal must stand.




                               Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
