
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00019/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|means)                               |                                     |
|On 10th March 2020                   |On 8th April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    ahaa
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ferguson of Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by remote means.   There
    were technical difficulties for Ms Ferguson accessing the  video  call,
    on which she could be seen but not heard and the problems could not  be
    resolved at the hearing.  With agreement of the  parties,  the  hearing
    proceeded with Ms Ferguson joining by telephone rather than video.  The
    file contained the  documents  partly  in  paper  format  and  in  part
    available electronically.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Roots promulgated  on  29  October  2020,  in
    which AHAA's appeal against the decision to revoke his refugee  status,
    refuse his protection and human rights claims was allowed only on human
    rights grounds under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights, and dismissed on all other grounds.  For  ease  I  continue  to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with
    AHAA as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on  25  August  1997,  who
    entered the United Kingdom  on  26  September  2010  under  the  family
    reunification provisions and was granted leave to remain in  line  with
    his father up to 20 April 2018.

 4. On 4 November 2013, the Appellant was cautioned for assault occasioning
    actual bodily harm.  On 5 May 2015,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
    possessing a knife in a public place for which he was  sentenced  to  a
    nine month referral order, ordered to pay costs and a victim surcharge.
     On 4 December 2018, the Appellant was convicted of robbery and  common
    assault for which he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment,  with  a
    two month concurrent sentence and ordered to pay a victim surcharge.

 5. On 23 January 2019, the Respondent issued the Appellant with a decision
    to deport letter and on  12  June  2019  the  Respondent  notified  the
    Appellant that section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 applied and that there was an intention to revoke his  refugee
    status.  The latter was also notified to the UNHCR, who responded on 11
    November 2019.  The Appellant made written submissions in response on 5
    September 2019.

 6. A Deportation Order was made against the Appellant  on  3  March  2020,
    followed by the Respondent's decision dated 4 March 2020 to revoke  his
    refugee status and refuse  his  human  rights  claim.   The  revocation
    decision was based on an improvement in conditions  in  Mogadishu  such
    that following the country guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), the Appellant would no longer be at
    risk on return because he was from a minority clan, nor was  there  any
    risk to him from Al-Shabaab and the  circumstances  for  the  grant  of
    refugee  status  had  therefore  ceased  to  exist.    The   Respondent
    considered that the Appellant  had  not  rebutted  the  presumption  in
    section 72  such  that  that  certificate  remained  and  excluded  the
    Appellant from a grant of humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph
    339D of the Immigration Rules.  For essentially the same reasons, there
    would be no breach of Articles 2 or 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 7. In relation to the Appellant's right to respect for private and  family
    life, this was an automatic deportation case such that  the  Respondent
    followed paragraphs 398 and following of the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant did not have a partner or child in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    could not therefore meet the family life exception to deportation.  The
    Appellant could also not meet the private life exception as he had  not
    spent half of his life in the United Kingdom, the  Respondent  did  not
    accept that he was integrated in to the United Kingdom in light of  his
    criminal convictions and there would be no very  significant  obstacles
    to his reintegration in Mogadishu.

 8. Finally, the Respondent considered that the Appellant  had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom as a minor, his respective ties to Somalia  and  the
    United  Kingdom,  his  criminal  offences,  that  no  family  life  was
    established with his parents and siblings for the purposes of Article 8
    and concluded overall that there were no very compelling  circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

 9. Judge Roots allowed the appeal on Article 3 grounds, but dismissed  the
    appeal on all other grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  29  October
    2020.  In summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  upheld  the  section  72
    certificate on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumption contained therein and as such he was excluded  from  asylum
    and humanitarian protection.  In relation to Article 3, the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the factors in paragraph (ix) of  the  headnote  in
    MOJ and concluded that there was a real risk  of  the  Appellant  being
    destitute on return to Mogadishu and living in an IDP  camp,  which  in
    accordance with MOJ would be a breach of Article  3.   In  relation  to
    Article 8, the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  Appellant  did  not
    meet  either  of  the  exceptions  to  deportation  (although  he   was
    integrated in the  United  Kingdom  and  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration on return, he had not spent at least half of
    his life in the United Kingdom)  and  there  were  no  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

The appeal

10. The Respondent appeals  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in failing to consider and apply the  case  law
    which followed MOJ which clarified that the factors taken into  account
    in the decision from the country guidance did not establish a real risk
    of a breach of Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    Further, that the First-tier Tribunal had not made any finding that the
    Appellant would be precluded from  taking  advantage  of  the  economic
    opportunities available in Mogadishu, nor precluded from  seeking  clan
    support and given that he had access to financial support, he would not
    in these circumstances be forced to live in an IDP camp.

11. There was no cross-appeal by the Appellant against any  other  part  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision in  which  his  protection  and  human
    rights claims were otherwise dismissed.

12. At the oral hearing, Mr Lindsay pursued the appeal on Article 3 grounds
    only, identifying two specific issues in this  regard,  both  of  which
    individually contained sufficient errors to establish a material  error
    of law.  These were first, was the Appellant at real risk of living  in
    an IDP camp on return; and secondly, if so, was there a  real  risk  of
    serious harm to him.

13. The First-tier Tribunal made clear findings in paragraphs 67(e) of  the
    decision that the Appellant had at least some prospect of  establishing
    a livelihood on return and in paragraph 67(f) that  he  was  likely  to
    receive some financial remittances from  abroad.   On  those  findings,
    even if the  factors  in  MOJ  were  applied  in  isolation,  the  only
    available conclusion would be  that  there  is  no  real  risk  to  the
    Appellant of being destitute or forced to live in an IDP camp.

14. Further, the approach to the  application  of  MOJ  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to follow the subsequent case law in Secretary of State
    for the Home Department  v  Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442,  SB  (refugee
    revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00358 (IAC),  and  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v MA (Somalia) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994.
    In these cases, paragraph (xi) of the headnote in MOJ (which comes from
    paragraph 408 in  the  decision)  was  disapproved  of  so  far  as  it
    purported to refer to Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights; paragraphs 407(h) and 408 only being concerned with the ability
    of a person to support themselves on  return  but  not  concerned  with
    either Article 15(b)  or  (c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   The
    conditions  in  an  IDP  camp  could  not,  save  for  in   exceptional
    circumstances,  establish  a  breach  of  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and there were no findings by the First-tier
    Tribunal that could support such a conclusion, going no further than  a
    finding of deprived living conditions which is not sufficient.

15. The First-tier Tribunal fell into error by simply having  gone  through
    the factors in MOJ and concluding that there  would  be  a  substantial
    risk, without factoring in the chance of the Appellant  establishing  a
    livelihood and receiving remittances and jumps to a finding  that  that
    would be a breach of Article 3, which the findings were not capable  of
    establishing as a matter of law.

16. Mr Lindsay did acknowledge that the First-tier Tribunal made  reference
    in the decision to  the  cases  of  Said  and  SB  (Somalia)  but  that
    evidently these were not followed in relation to the  correct  approach
    to Article 3.  He further acknowledged that the Respondent's CPIN  from
    January 2019 referred only  to  the  headnote  in  MOJ  but  that  this
    predated the later authority and had not been updated to  reflect  that
    as yet.

17. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Ferguson resisted the appeal and  relied
    on her skeleton argument.  She accepted Mr Lindsay's  submissions  that
    being forced to live in an IDP camp would not  alone  be  a  breach  of
    Article 3 to the correct standard, with paragraph 408 of  MOJ  being  a
    conflation of difference standards, the correct one for destitution and
    living conditions being that in N v UK [2005] 2 AC 296.

18. However, Ms Ferguson submitted that the Appellant is at risk  not  just
    of destitution but also because of the risk  of  specific  violence  to
    him.  Although he has been excluded from  the  refugee  convention  and
    humanitarian protection, it is important  that  he  would  still  be  a
    refugee outside of Mogadishu in Somalia and these factors are  relevant
    to the assessment under Article 3.  It was however  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had not found that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    on return and these matters did not form part of the Appellant's  claim
    before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to Article 3.   Ms  Ferguson
    submitted however that although it is  not  generally  unsafe  for  the
    general population, the Appellant is a minority  clan  member  and  his
    circumstances must be assessed individually, including that he would be
    unlikely to receive economic support or protection  from  his  clan  as
    minority clans have little  to  offer.   In  these  circumstances,  the
    Appellant is not on an equal playing field to other returnees  and  the
    factors in MOJ point to  this  Appellant  not  being  able  to  support
    himself on return.  Although the  Appellant's  family  said  that  they
    would try to assist him, the First-tier Tribunal found  that  this  was
    unlikely to  be  meaningful  financial  assistance  and  there  was  no
    certainty of any money being available under the  Financial  Assistance
    Scheme.

Findings and reasons

 1. In this appeal, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its  assessment
    of whether the Appellant's return to Mogadishu would breach  Article  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights by relying solely on factors
    in paragraph (ix) and the conclusion in paragraph (xi) of the  headnote
    in MOJ without following the later guidance which clarified that  these
    factors were not referring to Article 3 and  the  appropriate  standard
    which should be applied for such an assessment.  The reasons  for  this
    are set out below by following through the developments in the case law
    following MOJ.

19. The relevant  parts  of  MOJ  are  summarised  in  the  headnote,  with
    additional cross-referencing to the original paragraphs numbers in  the
    main body of the decision given in square brackets for  ease  of  cross
    referencing to relevant paragraphs in later decisions below; these  set
    out as follows:

      vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming from majority clan members, as minority
           clans may have little to offer.  [paragraph 407(f)]

     viii) The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
           Clans now provide, potentially, social  support  mechanisms  and
           assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of   a
           protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias
           in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and no clan-based discriminatory
           treatment, even for minority clan members.  [paragraph 407(g)]

       ix) If it is accepted that a person facing return to Mogadishu after
           a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives  in
           the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
           there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all   the
           circumstances.  These considerations will include, but  are  not
           limited to:


           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure:
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self-employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial  support  on  return.
             [paragraph 407(h)]

        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have  never  been  away.
           [paragraph 407(h)]

       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.  [paragraph 408]

      xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing  a  real  risk  of  destitution.   On  the  other   hand,
           relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with  no
           formal links to the city, no access to funds and no  other  form
           of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to  be  realistic
           as, in the absence of means to establish a home and some form of
           ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of having no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is  a  real  prospect  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions  that  will  fall   below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards.  [paragraphs 424 and 425]

20. There is some concern expressed by the Court of Appeal in  Said  as  to
    conflation between factors  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  internal
    relocation, humanitarian protection and Article 3 in MOJ, which need to
    be set out in full.  The discussion is at paragraphs  26  to  31  which
    states as follows:

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are directed to the issue that  arises
         under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Sub-paragraphs
         (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
         Mogadishu, and the current absence of  risk  from  belonging  to  a
         minority clan.  Sub-paragraph (h) and paragraph 408 are  concerned,
         in broad terms, with the ability of a returning Somali national  to
         support himself.  The conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises
         the possibility of a person's circumstances failing below what  "is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".  It is, with respect,
         unclear whether that is a  reference  back  to  the  definition  of
         "humanitarian  protection"  arising  from   article   15   of   the
         Qualification Directive.  These factors do not  go  to  inform  any
         question under article 15(c).   Nor  does  it  chime  with  article
         15(b), which draws on the language of article 3 of the  Convention,
         because the fact that a person might be returned to  very  deprived
         living conditions, could not (save in  extreme  cases)  lead  to  a
         conclusion that removal would violate article 3.

         ...

         28. In view of the reference in the paragraph immediately preceding
         para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras 407(h) and 408
         are likely to have been  introduced  in  connection  with  internal
         flight  or  internal  relocation  arguments,  which  was  a  factor
         identified in para 1 setting out the scope  of  the  issues  before
         UTIAC.  Whilst they may have some relevance in a search for whether
         a removal to Somalia would give rise to a violation of article 3 of
         the Convention, they cannot be understood as  a  surrogate  for  an
         examination of the circumstances to determine whether such a breach
         would occur.  I am unable to accept that if a Somali national  were
         able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he would  have
         established that his removal to Somalia would breach article  3  of
         the Convention.  Such an approach would be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and  Convention  jurisprudence  which  at  para  34  UTIAC
         expressly understood itself to be following.

         29. Having set out its guidance,  UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
         IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.   It
         recognised that  the  label  was  problematic  because  there  were
         individuals who are considered as internally displaced persons  who
         have settled in a new part of Somalia in "a reasonable standard  of
         accommodation" and with access to food, remittances from abroad  or
         an independent livelihood.   UTIAC  considered  that  the  position
         would be different for someone obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the
         conditions  of  some  of  which  "are  appalling",  para  411.   It
         continued by quoting from evidence of armed attacks on  IDP  camps,
         of  sexual  and  other  gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible
         recruitment of internally displaced children into violence,  albeit
         that it  did  not  accept  the  evidence  it  quoted.   UTIAC  also
         mentioned overcrowding, poor  health  conditions  and  (ironically)
         that  the  economic  improvements  in  Mogadishu  were  leading  to
         evictions from IDP camps in urban centres with  vulnerable  victims
         being unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         30.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that  the  discussion  of  this
         evidence, which  is  culled  from  expert  reports,  understandably
         touches on concerns about violence, which in article 3 terms  would
         be analysed by reference to the approach in MSS and Sufi  and  Elmi
         cases, and aspects of  destitution,  which  would  be  analysed  by
         reference to the approach in the N and  D  cases.   The  conflation
         continues in para 412:

             "Given what we have  seen,  and  described  above,  about  the
             extremely harsh living  conditions,  and  the  risk  of  being
             subjected to a range of human rights abuses, such a person  is
             likely to found to be living  at  a  level  that  falls  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards."

         Having further discussed the contradictory evidence about how  many
         people lived in IDP camps, UTIAC concluded that "many thousands  of
         people are reduced  to  living  in  circumstances  of  destitution"
         albeit that there was no reliable figure of how many  people  lived
         in such destitution in IDP camps.  The determination continued:

             "420. Whilst it is likely that those who  do  find  themselves
             living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in  an  IDP  camp
             will be experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to
             engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR, we do not  see
             that it gives rise to an enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since
             there  is  an  insufficient  nexus  with  the   indiscriminate
             violence which, in any event, we have found not to be at  such
             a high level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm.  Nor does the evidence support  the  claim  that
             there is an enhanced risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
             for those in the IDP camps or  that  such  a  person  is  more
             likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack ...

             421. Other  than  those  with  no  alternative  to  living  in
             makeshift accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp,  the  humanitarian
             position in Mogadishu  has  continued  to  improve  since  the
             country guidance in AMM was published.  The famine is confined
             to  history  ...  The  "economic  boom"  has  generated   more
             opportunity for employment and ... self-employment.  For  many
             returnees remittances will be important ...

             422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to
             civilian returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that  no  Somali
             national can succeed in a refugee or  humanitarian  protection
             or article 3 claim.  Each case will fall to be decided on  its
             own facts.  As we have observed,  there  will  need  to  be  a
             careful assessment of all the circumstances  of  a  particular
             individual."

         31. I entirely accept that some of the  observations  made  in  the
         course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that
         if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3.  Yet such a stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts.  In my judgement the position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered.  An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
          Impoverished conditions which were the direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

21. The question of whether the risk of deprivation on return would lead to
    a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
    revisited in MA (Somalia).  Lady Justice  Arden,  being  bound  by  the
    decision in Said, confirmed that there is no violation of Article 3  by
    reason of a person being returned  to  a  country  which  for  economic
    reasons  can  not  provide  him  with  basic  living  standards.    The
    Respondent in MA contended that the situation in  Somalia  was  brought
    about by conflict, which is recognised by the European Court  of  Human
    Rights as an exception to the analysis.   Lady  Justice  Arden  however
    concluded at paragraph 63 that:

         "... It is true that there has historically been severe conflict in
         Somalia, but, on the basis of MOJ, that would  not  necessarily  be
         the cause of deprivation if the respondent were returned to Somalia
         now.  The evidence is that there is no present reason why a person,
         with support from his family and/or prospects of employment, should
         face unacceptable living standards."

22. This test has been expressly endorsed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MI
    (Palestine) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1782 and by the Upper Tribunal in SB (Somalia).

23. It is well established that in Article 3 cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual is not from treatment emanating from intentionally inflicted
    acts of the public authorities in the receiving state or from those  of
    non-State bodies in that country when the authorities there are  unable
    to afford him appropriate protection; it is only  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances that there would  be  a  violation  of  Article  3.   The
    principles are summarised by the European Court of Human Rights in N as
    follows:

         "42. Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.

         43.  The court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling.  However, it considers that it should maintain the high
         threshold set in D v UK ... and applied in its subsequent case law,
         which it regards as correct in principle, given that in such  cases
         the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
         or omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies, but instead
         from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.

         44...  Advances  in  medical  science,  together  with  social  and
         economic differences between countries, entail that  the  level  of
         treatment available in the Contracting State  and  the  country  of
         origin may vary considerably.  While it  is  necessary,  given  the
         fundamental importance of Article 3 in the Convention  system,  for
         the Court to retain a degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in
         very exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an  obligation  on
         the Contracting State to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the
         provision of free and unlimited healthcare to all aliens without  a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction.  A finding to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."

 2. The position has been developed slightly further  in  the  case  of  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17,
    but not in a way which is relevant to the facts of the present appeal.

 3. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal  decision  that  none  of  the
    above was taken into account or applied by it  when  assessing  whether
    the  Appellant's  return  would  breach  Article  3  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights.  Although there is  specific  reference  in
    paragraph 66 to the cases of SB (Somalia) and Said, this appears to  be
    in relation to the need to focus on the individual circumstances of the
    Appellant as opposed to the correct approach to the findings in MOJ and
    the test for Article 3.  Having referred to these cases, the First-tier
    Tribunal then immediately turns to the factors identified in  paragraph
    (ix) of the headnote in MOJ, finding that assessing  these  factors  in
    the round there would be a real risk  that  the  Appellant  would  find
    himself destitute and living in an IDP camp which would, in  accordance
    with the country guidance and factors identified in MOJ, be a breach of
    Article 3.  As a matter of law, those findings could not  amount  to  a
    breach of Article 3 for the reasons set out in the case law above  such
    that the First-tier Tribunal could not lawfully  allow  the  appeal  on
    that basis.  It is only in very exceptional cases that there may  be  a
    breach of Article 3 in circumstances such as this, but  there  were  no
    findings of any such factors in this  appeal  beyond  a  risk  of  poor
    living conditions and even then, coupled with a  finding  of  at  least
    some financial support from the United Kingdom.

 4. The Respondent also challenges the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion  in
    paragraph 69 that the Appellant would face a real risk  of  destitution
    and living in an IDP camp on  return  to  Mogadishu  on  the  basis  of
    findings that the Appellant would be in receipt of limited  remittances
    from family in the United Kingdom and had not shown that  he  would  be
    unable to secure  a  livelihood  on  return  -  albeit  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found based on limited evidence  that  he  would  likely  face
    significant difficulties in doing so and a real risk of him  not  being
    able  to  do  so  within  a  reasonable  period.   The  conclusion   on
    consideration of all of the factors set out  in  paragraph  67  of  the
    decision is arguably at odds with the  country  guidance  in  paragraph
    (xi) of the headnote that: "it will, therefore, only be those  with  no
    clan or family support who will not be in receipt of  remittances  from
    abroad and who have no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood
    on return who will face the prospect of living in circumstances falling
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection  terms.",  at
    least in respect of financial remittances given that on  the  findings,
    the  Appellant  would  not  be  without  all  three  forms  of  support
    (clan/family, remittances from abroad and no  prospect  of  securing  a
    livelihood).   However,  whether  the  findings  and  conclusion   were
    properly open to the First-tier Tribunal following MOJ is not  material
    to the outcome of this appeal, as even taking those findings  at  their
    highest, the threshold for a breach of Article 3 can not, as  a  matter
    of law, be met for the reasons already set out above.

 5. At the hearing, there was some discussion as to the next steps in  this
    appeal if an error of law was found.  Mr  Lindsay  appropriately  noted
    that there was a forthcoming  country  guidance  appeal  likely  to  be
    listed before the Upper Tribunal in June to  include  consideration  of
    destitution and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights in
    relation to Somalia.  Ms Ferguson stated that the Appellant would  wish
    to rely on other risk factors for the purposes of Article 3,  including
    his membership of a minority  clan  and  as  such  further  submissions
    and/or a further hearing may  assist  the  Tribunal  in  re-making  the
    decision.

 6. In all of the circumstances and on the facts of this appeal  I  do  not
    consider that any further submissions  or  hearing  are  required.   In
    relation  to  risk  factors  and  clan  membership  which  Ms  Ferguson
    indicated the Appellant would wish to rely for the purposes of  Article
    3, it is noted and was accepted by her that these formed no part of the
    submissions to the First-tier Tribunal and that there were no  findings
    of risk in the Appellant's favour made by the First-tier Tribunal  upon
    which the Appellant could rely; and upon which there was no application
    for permission to cross-appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  clear
    findings that the Appellant was not at risk on return to  Mogadishu  by
    reason of being a minority clan member or otherwise, there was  a  lack
    of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that could  support  such  a
    claim and no suggestion that the Tribunal should depart from the  clear
    findings in MOJ that a person such as the Appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on return.  There is therefore nothing further that could be taken
    into account for the purposes of Article 3 in this regard.   There  was
    no indication of any new evidence or change of circumstances since  the
    very recent decision of the First-tier Tribunal since  the  hearing  in
    October 2020.

 7. For the reasons set out above, the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    at their highest were not capable of establishing a real  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return to Mogadishu to the correct threshold and  standard
    applicable to Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  In
    those circumstances and in the absence of any further  evidence,  there
    is no need for any further submissions as the appeal must be  dismissed
    on human rights grounds, the facts not being capable of amounting to  a
    breach of Article 3.

 8. I do not consider, in all of the circumstances, that it  is  necessary,
    appropriate or in the interests of justice to  delay  the  remaking  of
    this decision pending a decision in the up-coming country guidance case
    in the Upper Tribunal.  Whilst there may be some overlap in the issues,
    I take into account that it is unlikely that the country guidance  will
    be heard until at least  June  2021  with  a  decision  not  reasonably
    expected until some months after that; that the  country  guidance  can
    have no impact on the test to be applied upon which  there  is  binding
    Court of Appeal authority and that in the present case,  there  was  no
    further background country evidence  to  consider  or  any  request  to
    depart from the current and still binding country guidance.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law in relation to Article 3 of  the  European
Convention on Human rights.  As such  it  is  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision in relation to that part only.  The making of the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal on all other grounds did not involve  the  making  of  a
material error of  law  and  as  such,  those  parts  of  the  decision  are
confirmed.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
Article 3 findings only and remake the appeal as follows:

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   G Jackson                           Date         26th March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

