
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00092/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2016                            |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     ma
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  27  October  1975.   He
    arrived in the UK on 24 September 1989 accompanied by his  family.   He
    and his siblings were  granted  refugee  status  on  4  November  1990,
    followed by indefinite leave to remain on 15 July 1995.

 2. The appellant has been convicted of a number of offences, from 1998  to
    2013.  Mostly, these have involved offences  in  relation  to  class  A
    drugs, including supplying.  In particular, on 23 December 2010 he  was
    convicted of four counts of  supplying  class  A  drugs  for  which  he
    received a total sentence of four years and six  months'  imprisonment.
    On 18 November 2013 he was convicted of offering to supply  a  class  A
    controlled drug and offering to  supply  a  class  B  controlled  drug,
    receiving a sentence of 14 months' imprisonment on 13 December 2013.

 3. On 1 October  2015  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant, to cease his refugee status and to  refuse  a  human  rights
    claim.  His appeal  against  those  decisions  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew ("the FtJ") on 16 August 2016.  She dismissed the
    appeal in terms of the  decision  to  revoke  the  appellant's  refugee
    status (although her decision in this respect is not  entirely  clear),
    and also in relation to a certificate pursuant to  section  72  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the   2002   Act")
    (presumption  of  particularly  serious  crime  and   danger   to   the
    community).   She  further  dismissed  the  appeal  with  reference  to
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The grounds of appeal relate solely to the FtJ's decision  in  relation
    to Article 3.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 5. The appellant claims to be a member of the Gaboye  or  Midgan  minority
    group.  It is argued that the FtJ was wrong to reject  the  appellant's
    claim of membership of that group on the basis that there was no  other
    evidence than his to support that contention.  It is  argued  that  the
    FtJ's decision appears to  require  corroboration  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in that respect.  Reference is made  in  the  grounds  to  the
    decision in TK (Burundi) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  There was no unexplained failure on  the  part  of
    the appellant  to  produce  evidence  that  was  reasonably  available.
    Independent evidence in the form of an expert  report  would  not  have
    assisted given  that  the  Gaboye  have  no  physically  distinguishing
    characteristics which may  have  enabled  an  expert  to  identify  the
    appellant as being a member of that group.  In addition, the  appellant
    was not able to call family members in support of this  aspect  of  his
    claim given the fact that the family no longer support him.

 6. It is  further  argued  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  take  into  account
    background evidence in relation to the  appellant's  minority  clan  in
    making her assessment of his credibility.  It is contended that  regard
    to such background evidence was of particular importance given the fact
    that independent verification of his claim to be a member of the Gaboye
    could not be provided.  The  appellant's  claim  included  having  been
    bullied, ostracised and called derogatory names at school, all  matters
    which are consistent with the background evidence, the details of which
    are set out in the grounds.

 7. At [11] of the grounds it is contended that the FtJ had failed to  take
    into account the notes of the appellant's representative  which  showed
    that the appellant had consistently claimed  to  be  a  member  of  the
    Gaboye since his initial contact with his representatives in 2013.

 8. Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ had stated at [35] that she  had
    been referred to no country information to the effect that  the  Midgan
    are targeted.  On the contrary, there was background evidence  to  that
    effect.

 9. Similarly, the FtJ had failed to take  into  account  relevant  country
    guidance, in the form of the decision  in  YS  and  HA  (Midgan  -  not
    generally at risk) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00088.  It is said that that
    decision assesses the importance of protection/patronage for the Gaboye
    from the majority and 'noble' clans in Somalia.  It is argued that part
    of the appellant's case before the FtJ was that the evidence  that  was
    before the Tribunal in YS and HA supported the appellant's claim to  be
    from the Gaboye, since on his evidence his father previously worked for
    Siyad Barre, and there was evidence before the Tribunal in YS and HA to
    the effect that there was an explicit policy  of  advancing  low-status
    people.  The appellant's claim was thus "congruent" with the background
    evidence.

10. The oral submissions can be summarised as follows.  Mr Toal  relied  on
    the grounds.  I was referred to various parts of the FtJ's decision.  I
    was also referred to various aspects of the background  material  which
    it was submitted was before the FtJ, including in terms of the skeleton
    argument before her.

11. It was  submitted  that  the  FtJ  needed  to  assess  the  appellant's
    credibility in the context of the background material.  In other words,
    it was not simply the case that there was only the appellant's evidence
    as to his minority group status.  There was background  evidence  which
    supported his claim.  In terms of his return to Somalia,  there  needed
    to   be   an   assessment   of   his   particular   circumstances   and
    characteristics.

12. Mr Melvin relied on the 'rule 24'  response.   It  was  submitted  that
    there was no evidence before the respondent or the FtJ to  support  the
    appellant's claim to be from the Midgan.  There was no expert's  report
    or language assessment.  Similarly, no member  of  his  family  or  the
    Somali community gave evidence in support of his claim.   The  FtJ  was
    entitled to reject the appellant's bare assertion as  to  his  minority
    group status.

13. Furthermore, there was no evidence to support the claim that his father
    previously worked for Siyad Barre and was therefore part of  the  Barre
    regime.   There  was  a  conflict  in  the  evidence  about  where  the
    appellant's family was from, in terms of  what  his  mother  had  said.
    There was nothing to support the claim that he  was  born  in  southern
    Somalia or that his father was killed as claimed.

14. There is nothing to indicate that in any further appeal any judge would
    be in any different position  from  that  of  the  FtJ  who  heard  the
    appellant's appeal.

15. In reply, Mr Toal submitted that the appellant could not call  evidence
    from his family in the light of the FtJ's conclusion  that  the  family
    had disassociated themselves from him.  There was a  witness  statement
    from his cousin who said that he could not help him.   Given  that  the
    appellant left Somalia at the age  of  9,  expert  linguistic  evidence
    could not assist.

    Conclusions

16. At [28]-[35] the FtJ said as follows:

         "28. When the Appellant first came to the United Kingdom his mother
             claimed asylum for herself with the Appellant and his siblings
             as her dependants.

         29.  It was then said that the Appellant was born  in  Hargeisa  in
             1975.  Hargeisa is now part of Somaliland.  It was  also  said
             that the Appellant lived  in  Hargeisa  until  1988  when  his
             mother fled the town with the Appellant and his siblings.

         30.  Whilst I accept that  the  Respondent  has  not  produced  the
             documents showing that the Appellant's mother claims that  she
             fled from Hargeisa it is accepted  by  the  Appellant  in  his
             statement that this is what was said.  I have also noted  that
             on Travel Document application forms dated December  1997  and
             15th February 1999 the Appellant said he was born in Hargeisa.
              However, the Appellant now says that this was  incorrect  and
             that he was born in Shabeela in Southern Somalia and  that  he
             would be at real risk if he were to be returned there.

         31.  Other than the Appellant's assertions I have nothing  to  show
             that the Appellant was born in Southern Somalia.  There is  no
             credible reason as to why the Appellant's mother  should  have
             claimed to be from Hargeisa or why the Appellant  should  have
             done so in his applications for a  Travel  Document.   I  have
             nothing  before  me  to  show  that  there  was  conflict   in
             Somaliland, as the Appellant now claims and this  is  why  his
             mother made this claim.

         32.   Further,  in  his  statement  which  is  at  page  3  of  the
             supplementary Bundle paragraph 9 the Appellant  says  that  he
             arrived in the United Kingdom with his father as well  as  his
             mother  and  siblings.   However,  it  is  apparent  from  the
             Respondent's records that it  was  his  mother  who  made  the
             asylum claim not his father.

         33.  The Appellant further claims that at  some  point  his  father
             returned to Somalia because in September or  October  1991  he
             was executed in Mogadishu apparently because he had worked for
             the  Barre  regime.   Again,  other   than   the   Appellant's
             assertions, I have no evidence of this before me.

         34.  The Appellant also asserts that his father was a member of the
             Midgan or Gaboye clan.  He claims that if deported to  Somalia
             he will suffer persecution because of this.  Once again I have
             nothing other than the Appellant's assertions to  confirm  his
             claims.

         35.  Even if I am wrong about this  I  have  been  referred  to  no
             country information has been adduced (sic) to  show  that  the
             Midgan are targeted in either Somalia or in Somaliland."

17. At [36] the FtJ said that if she was wrong about the place  from  which
    the appellant comes, on the basis of MOJ and Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) there had  been  a  fundamental  and
    durable change in the country which can be assumed to remove the  basis
    of the fear of persecution.  In the following paragraph  the  FtJ  said
    that she had taken into account the letter from the UNHCR dated 2  July
    2015 (dealing, amongst other things with cessation of  refugee  status)
    but that for the reasons she had already given she  did  not  find  the
    appellant's claim that he is a member of the Gaboye to be credible.

18. Nowhere in the FtJ's decision is there any  reference  to  any  of  the
    background material in relation to minority  clans  or  the  Gaboye  in
    particular, that was before her.  The appellant's skeleton argument  at
    [30]  identifies  various  paragraphs  of  the  Home  Office's  Country
    Information and Guidance on south and central Somalia:  Majority  clans
    and minority groups dated March 2015 ("the CIG").  To summarise,  those
    passages refer to the disadvantages suffered  by  members  of  minority
    groups, and the lack of support network available to them.   It  refers
    to minority ethnic groups being marginalised and facing  discrimination
    in Mogadishu, although  being  unlikely  to  face  persecution  on  the
    grounds of ethnicity alone (1.3.8).  There is reference to  members  of
    such groups returning or relocating to Mogadishu being without  support
    networks  and  having  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to   a
    livelihood, they may face unacceptable living conditions.

19. As I pointed out to the parties at the hearing  before  me,  the  FtJ's
    very clear manuscript notes indicate that submissions were made to  her
    in relation to the background material.

20. In the letter from the UNHCR dated 2 July 2015, there is  reference  to
    background material in  relation  to  minority  groups,  including  the
    Midgan.   The  respondent's  decision  letter  itself  makes  extensive
    reference to the situation for minority  groups,  and  specifically  in
    relation to the Midgan.

21. Although the FtJ referred to the UNHCR letter, as  Mr  Toal  submitted,
    there is no indication from her decision as to what  she  made  of  the
    background information referred to in that  letter,  and  there  is  no
    analysis of it.

22. Furthermore, I consider that the FtJ was wrong to state  that  she  had
    not been referred to any country information to show  that  the  Midgan
    are targeted in either Somalia  or  in  Somaliland.   At  [66]  of  the
    respondent's decision letter there is reference to a 2014 report  which
    states that the Gaboye, amongst others, often face  discrimination  and
    social stigma due to their occupations, and  that  their  situation  in
    northern Somalia where most of them live  is  considered  bad  although
    slightly improving.  At [63] there is reference to information from  an
    international NGO working in south and central Somalia  to  the  effect
    that there are  two  groups  of  people  who  are  most  vulnerable  in
    Mogadishu.  These are either marginalised or exploited and groups  such
    as Midgan, Gaboye, and others, are marginalised in Mogadishu.

23. At 2.5.5 of the CIG, it states that the Midgan/Gaboye, amongst  others,
    are one of the groups of particularly vulnerable minorities.  A further
    report referred to at 2.5.9, in relation to Mogadishu, also  identifies
    the Midgan and Gaboye as  being  a  marginalised  group  and  that  the
    position of minorities is still precarious.

24. The FtJ was referred to the decision in YS  and  HA,  albeit  that  the
    appellant's skeleton argument before the FtJ  does  not  refer  to  it.
    Although that decision is now rather dated, there was  expert  evidence
    before the Tribunal in that appeal, referred to at  [42],  that  during
    the time of the Barre regime there was an explicit policy of  advancing
    low-status people, in  keeping  with  the  socialist  ideology  of  the
    regime.  Certain individuals were raised to important positions in  the
    government.  That evidence, as suggested in the grounds before  me,  is
    consistent with the appellant's claim.

25. It is true that there is inconsistency in the information given to  the
    respondent by the appellant's mother and by the appellant, as  set  out
    in the FtJ's decision at [30] and [31].  In addition, I do not consider
    that there is any merit in the contention that the FtJ erred in failing
    to take into account notes from the appellant's representatives showing
    consistency in his account.  Although it  is  evident  from  the  FtJ's
    manuscript notes that this was an issue that was  put  before  her  and
    there is a copy of the notes  in  the  appellant's  bundle,  I  do  not
    consider that this could be said to be a matter of  significance  which
    is capable of undermining the FtJ's findings on credibility.

26. I accept that it may sometimes, if not often, be the case that a  judge
    is entitled to reject an account which comes only from an appellant and
    which  is  unsupported  by  other  evidence.   Much  depends   on   the
    circumstances.  As I have indicated, it is the case that here there was
    some inconsistency in the information provided to the respondent as  to
    the appellant's circumstances.  There are arguments either way in terms
    of the extent to which the appellant could have produced evidence  from
    other sources as to his minority group status, although the  FtJ  found
    that his family had disassociated from him and so no evidence could  be
    expected from that source.

27. Nevertheless, these are issues which  need  to  be  assessed,  and  his
    credibility generally, in the context of a correct appreciation of  the
    background evidence.  It is apparent that the FtJ did  not  assess  the
    appellant's credibility in that context.   She  was  plainly  wrong  to
    refer to an absence of evidence about the targeting of  the  Midgan  or
    Gaboye.  There was such evidence before her.

28. It may be that a full analysis of  the  background  evidence  may  have
    resulted in the same outcome in the light of the decision  in  MOJ  and
    Others.  However, it is not for  me  in  considering  whether  the  FtJ
    materially erred in law, to undertake the detailed  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim in the  context  of  the  background  material  which
    should have been undertaken by the FtJ.

29. The appellant is excluded from refugee protection.  That is the  effect
    of the s.72 certificate and  the  revocation  of  his  refugee  status,
    neither of which are matters upon which the  FtJ's  decision  has  been
    challenged.   However,  at  large  before  the  FtJ  were   issues   of
    humanitarian protection (contrary to what the FtJ said  at  [26]),  and
    Article 3 of the ECHR.   The  appellant's  personal  circumstances  and
    individual characteristics are plainly  relevant  to  those  issues  in
    light of the  guidance  in  MOJ  and  Others.   In  the  light  of  the
    conclusions  I  have  come  to  above  about  the   FtJ's   credibility
    assessment, and failure to have regard to relevant background evidence,
    these are issues that have yet to be determined.  I am  satisfied  that
    the FtJ erred in law in her conclusions, and the error of law  is  such
    as to require the decision to be set aside.

30. I have considered whether it  is  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper  Tribunal.
    I am satisfied that the appropriate course is  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted, having regard to the nature and extent of the judicial  fact-
    finding required,  and  taking  into  account  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

31. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    for consideration of the issues of the appellant's clan status and  his
    circumstances on return to Mogadishu.  The question of the  appellant's
    refugee status and the s.72 certificate have been resolved and  require
    no further consideration.  Similarly, the Article 8 claim has also been
    resolved against the appellant and no distinct  error  of  law  in  her
    decision in that respect has been contended for.  Accordingly,  on  its
    own terms no further consideration of Article 8 is required, except  to
    the extent that any conclusions in the appellant's favour  in  relation
    to Article 3 necessarily, but probably only technically, reflect on the
    Article 8 conclusions.

32. Although further fact-finding is required, the findings  of  fact  that
    can be preserved are easily identifiable.  The findings  of  fact  that
    are to be preserved are those at [38] and [39] of the  FtJ's  decision,
    except in relation to the FtJ's findings in relation to  the  prospects
    of the appellant obtaining employment on  return,  and  the  consequent
    conclusion in relation to whether he would need to live in an IDP camp.
     At [40] the FtJ concluded that  the  appellant  was  in  good  health.
    Unless that situation changes, that is  also  a  finding  that  can  be
    preserved.

33. Although at [50] the FtJ concluded that there was a lack of evidence to
    show that the appellant would be at real risk in  Somaliland,  Mr  Toal
    submitted that  the  appeal  was  predicated  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant would be returned to Mogadishu, and Mr Melvin did not dissent
    from that proposition.

    Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision in relation to Article 3 of  the  ECHR
    is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh hearing before a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew, with findings of fact to be preserved as indicated above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        16/12/16
