
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00099/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 19th March 2019                   |On 22nd March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MR JUSTICE DINGEMANS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     TL
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr E Waheed, instructed by Freemans solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant in this determination  identified  as  TL.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings


      1. Mr TL is a Zimbabwean National and is now 43 years old.  He arrived
         in the UK in May 2007 and applied for asylum. His  application  was
         refused by the Secretary of State but following a successful appeal
         before immigration Judge Grimshaw of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal in September 2007 he was  recognised  as  a  refugee.  The
         basis of his claim for asylum was that he had been a member of  the
         Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) in  Zimbabwe  since  2000  and
         that he had two same-sex relationships while living in Zimbabwe and
         described himself as a gay man. Judge Grimshaw  found  as  credible
         his claim that although he was an ordinary member of the MDC he had
         been perceived to be an active member following  discovery  by  the
         green bombers of MDC leaflets in his  shop.  Judge  Grimshaw  found
         that TL's sexual orientation was known to the authorities and  that
         Zimbabwe would not be "a safe place" for him to be returned.

      2. In January 2013 TL was granted indefinite leave to remain. In  June
         2016 he was convicted of making false representations and sentenced
         to 12 months' imprisonment. On 10 November  2016,  TL  what  served
         with a notice of intention to revoke his refugee status. From  that
         letter it seems TL was issued  with  notice  of  the  Secretary  of
         States duty to deport him because he was a foreign criminal who had
         been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 12 months. We do  not
         have a copy of that letter, but nothing  turns  on  that.  TL  made
         representations on 11 August 2016 and 24 November 2016 setting  out
         why in his view he should be neither deported and  nor  should  his
         refugee status be revoked.

      3. A deportation order was signed on 17 May 2018  in  accordance  with
         s32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. On the same date  the  Secretary
         of State took a decision to revoke his  protection  status  and  to
         refuse his human rights claim.

      4. TL appealed that decision. His appeal  was  heard  and  allowed  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Row for reasons set  out  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 9 November  2018.  The  Secretary  of  State  sought
         permission to appeal on the following grounds

             "The appellant a National from  Zimbabwe  as  acknowledged  at
             paragraph 2 of the  determination  meets  the  criteria  of  a
             foreign national criminal. It is respectfully  submitted  that
             the FTTJ has materially heard in law  in  his  approach  to  a
             revocation of refugee status.

             At paragraph 19 of the determination the FTTJ  relies  on  the
             authority of MS (Art 1C(5)) Mogadishu [2018] UKUT 196.  It  is
             contended that the court of appeal authority of  MA  (Somalia)
             [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994  of  Lady  Justice  Arden  should  take
             precedence over that of the Upper  Tribunal  authority  of  MS
             (Art 1C(5)) Mogadishu [2018] UKUT 196."

      5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First  Tribunal  judge  Grant
         -Hutchison in the following terms:

             "It is arguable that the judge has erred in law by relying  on
             the authority of MS (Art 1C(5)) Mogadishu [2018] UKUT 196  and
             not MA  (Somalia)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994  [in]  coming  to  a
             decision."

      6. Permission to  appeal  was  not  limited.  Nor  did  the  grant  of
         permission treat the grounds as  any  wider  than  a  challenge  to
         paragraph 19. The appeal first came before the  Upper  Tribunal  on
         24th January 2019. There was no request  to  amplify  or  amend  or
         clarify the grounds upon which permission was sought.  The  hearing
         was adjourned, and  directions  made  for  filing  and  service  of
         skeleton arguments, and, if either party sought to  rely  upon  any
         further evidence, a rule 15(2A)  notice  must  be  served.  Neither
         party served a 15(2A);  both  parties  filed  and  served  skeleton
         arguments.

      7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Row held:

             "11. Having persuaded Judge Grimshaw of his political  opinion
             and sexual orientation the appellant does not appear  to  have
             pursued either his political activities or his sexuality  with
             any great enthusiasm in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  could  not
             provide no [sic] evidence  of  any  involvement  in  political
             activity other than saying that he attended a rally on  8  May
             2018.

             12.   The  appellant  seems  to  have  begun  a   heterosexual
             relationship with his partner ...,  a  female  and  a  British
             citizen, in 2009 ... There was no evidence that the  appellant
             had engaged in any homosexual activities with anyone since  he
             was granted asylum and his evidence was that he had not.

             13.  The respondent has not taken any point on  the  appellant
             sexuality. The findings of Judge Grimshaw are not binding upon
             me but they are not to be ignored. In the absence of  evidence
             to the contrary they are to be taken  as  having  decided  the
             issues in dispute between the parties.

             14.  The appellant was convicted ...

             15.  The respondent argues that the situation in Zimbabwe  has
             changed since the removal of the former  president  Mr  Robert
             Mugabe. There is a new regime. The appellant  would  therefore
             no longer be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  harm  there.  The
             respondent's reasoning is set out at pages 3-6 in the  refusal
             letter. It is not necessary for me to recite this in full. The
             reasoning is based partly on the change in leader in  Zimbabwe
             and  the  country  guidance  in  CM  (EM   country   guidance:
             disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 00059.  That  case  indicates
             that low-level members of the MDC are  not  likely  to  be  at
             risk. There are areas of Zimbabwe where are they could  be  at
             risk but areas where they would not be. The respondent did not
             deal with the question of the appellants sexuality at  all  in
             the refusal letter saying that  it  had  not  been  raised  in
             representations made.

             16.  The country guidance  in  LZ  (homosexuals)  Zimbabwe  CG
             [2011] UKUT 00487  indicates  that  male  homosexuality  is  a
             criminal offence in Zimbabwe but prosecutions are  very  rare.
             Some  homosexual   suffer   discrimination,   harassment   and
             blackmail. Personal circumstances may place some at  risk.  It
             is open to a homosexual man at risk in his community  to  move
             elsewhere. The police and other state agents  do  not  provide
             protection.

             17.  It is argued on behalf of the  appellant  that  he  would
             still be  at  risk  because  of  his  political  opinions  and
             sexuality. The appellant relies upon a letter from UNHCR dated
             16 January 2017 in the  respondent's  bundle  which  indicates
             that homosexuals are still at risk of persecution and harm and
             that the changes in Zimbabwe over a relatively short period of
             time do not indicate a fundamental  and  durable  change.  The
             appellant also relies upon newspaper articles  from  [sic]  in
             the appellants fundable showing that  political  opponents  of
             the current regime were still at risk of persecution and harm.

             18.  The burden of proof is upon the respondent to  show  that
             revocation of refugee status  is  justified  under  paragraphs
             333A and 339A the respondent relies upon paragraph 339(v).  On
             the facts of this appeal I do not find that the respondent can
             show that revocation is justified. The appellant says that  he
             is at risk from the authorities because of his MDC affiliation
             and because of his homosexuality which is illegal in Zimbabwe.
             In the country guidance  is  that  the  authorities  will  not
             provide protection to the appellant. If the appellant,  either
             because of his political opinions or sexuality,  cannot  avail
             himself of the protection of the  Zimbabwean  authorities  and
             then paragraph 339A(v) cannot apply.

             19.  Although both country guidance cases  referred  to  above
             indicate that the appellant  could  move  to  a  part  of  the
             country where he would not be at risk. The Upper Tribunal case
             of MS (Art 1C(5)) Mogadishu 2018 UKUT 196  indicate  that  the
             respondent is not entitled to revoke a person's refugee status
             solely on the basis of the change in circumstances in one part
             of the country of proposed return. The  appellant  has  to  be
             able  to  rely  upon  the   protection   of   the   Zimbabwean
             authorities. If he cannot, and if you can only escape risk  in
             some parts of Zimbabwe, paragraph 339A(v) does not  apply.  It
             also cannot be said that the changing situation in Zimbabwe is
             of  such  a  significant   non-temporary   nature   that   the
             appellant's fear of persecution can no longer be  regarded  as
             well founded. If the appellant cannot rely upon the protection
             of the state and would have to live  in  a  part  of  Zimbabwe
             where he might be safe this cannot be the case."

      8. The Secretary  of  State  does  not,  in  terms,  take  issue  with
         paragraph 13 of judge Row's decision.  Although  the  Secretary  of
         State in his grounds seeking permission to appeal submits that  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge has materially erred in law,  we  do  not
         accept the proposition that such a formulation includes a challenge
         to paragraph 13 of the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The  skeleton
         argument is  addressed  to  what  is  described  as  the  "critical
         passage" of the determination - paragraph  19.  In  particular  the
         skeleton refers to the case of MS, MA and, since the  Secretary  of
         State grounds were initially submitted, the Upper Tribunal reported
         case of AMA (Article 1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia
         [2019] UKUT 00011. The challenge is to paragraph 19 of the decision
         only.

      9. The headnote of MS reads as follows

             "The Secretary of State is not entitled to  cease  a  person's
             refugee status  pursuant  to  Article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee
             Convention solely on the basis of a change in circumstances in
             one part of the country of proposed return."

     10. The nub of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek' s reasoning in MS is  to
         be found in paragraphs 51-57:

             "51. The Secretary of State's  position  as  set  out  in  the
             decision letter dated 15 September 2015  states  at  [53]  and
             [54] that the circumstances  under  which  the  appellant  was
             granted refugee status have now changed, because  although  it
             was accepted he was from Kismayo, "you  were  granted  refugee
             status due to the situation in Mogadishu". However, relying on
             MOJ & Ors, the Secretary of State says  that  "there  has  now
             been a significant and enduring change  in  Mogadishu".  Quite
             clearly therefore, the Secretary of State puts  the  situation
             in Mogadishu at  the  heart  of  the  decision  to  cease  the
             appellant's refugee status.

             52.   However,  in  my  judgement  the  Secretary  of  State's
             approach in this respect is fundamentally flawed. The basis of
             the appellant's refugee claim (or more accurately the basis of
             his mother's claim upon which he was a dependant) is  that  he
             had a well-founded fear of persecution in the country  of  his
             nationality, Somalia. That well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             arose in his home area of Kismayo.  Naturally,  the  issue  of
             internal  relocation  would  have  been  a  factor  that   was
             considered at the time of the decision to grant refugee status
             to the family. Presumably, although the  information  has  not
             been  provided,  internal  relocation  to  Mogadishu  was  not
             considered a viable option at the  time.  In  my  view  it  is
             contrary to the humanitarian principle of surrogate protection
             under the Refugee Convention for the Secretary of State to  be
             able to seek to identify an area of a country where  it  could
             be said that an individual no longer has a  well-founded  fear
             of persecution, and to which he  could  now  relocate  if  the
             claim were now made.

             53.  The UNHCR's Cessation Guidelines make the point that  not
             being able to move or  to  establish  oneself  freely  in  the
             country of origin would indicate that  the  changes  have  not
             been fundamental. The Secretary of State does not suggest that
             the appellant's claim to refugee status in terms of  the  risk
             to him in his home area has been  extinguished  by  reason  of
             fundamental and durable changes in the country as a whole.

             54.  Although it was suggested on behalf of the respondent  in
             submissions that there was no difference in principle  between
             the grant or the cessation of refugee status, because a person
             is only a refugee so long as there is no safe area of  return,
             I do not agree. There is, in my judgement, a very  significant
             philosophical and  indeed  practical  difference  between  the
             grant and the cessation of refugee status, illustrated by  the
             UNHCR Cessation Guidelines, but  also  reflected  in  the  two
             authorities to which I have referred.

             55.  If the Secretary of State's position was to hold good, it
             would mean that a person claiming asylum would be  in  a  more
             advantageous position than a person who  already  has  refugee
             status and whose  status  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
             rescind. Thus, if the person whose claim for asylum depends on
             an assessment of an internal flight  option,  that  individual
             would have that issue assessed on the basis of undue harshness
             and the reasonableness of internal relocation. However, in the
             case of a person whose refugee status is  to  be  taken  away,
             once it is decided that there is a  part  of  the  country  in
             which the change of circumstances is of such a significant and
             non-temporary nature that  the  person's  fear  is  no  longer
             regarded as well-founded (in that area), that  individual  may
             be returned without the sort of examination of the  issues  of
             undue  harshness  and  reasonableness  of   return   to   that
             particular area which would occur in considering  a  grant  of
             refugee status. That is so  notwithstanding  the  respondent's
             Asylum Policy Instruction  on  revocation  of  refugee  status
             which I have set out at [42],  which  does  not  provide  full
             coverage of the issue of internal relocation.

             56.  Thus, what was recognised in Hoxha as being the need  for
             a "strict" and "restrictive"  approach  to  cessation  clauses
             would be significantly undermined. Put another way,  it  would
             make it easier to cease a person's refugee status than to make
             a grant of refugee status; a position which is  contrary  both
             to logic and principle.

             57.  In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the  FtJ  was
             correct to conclude that the respondent was  not  entitled  to
             cease the appellant's refugee status on the basis only of  the
             change in circumstances in Mogadishu since his claim was made.
             That is not to afford the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines a  status
             of being determinative of the issue in  question,  but  in  my
             view it does mean that those Guidelines are  correct  in  what
             they say in this respect."

     11. Paragraph 2(1) of MA sets out  the  conclusions  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in so far as relevant to the cessation clauses:

             "2.  For the reasons given below, and  in  the  light  of  the
             careful submissions that we have had on the important decision
             of the Court of Justice of  the  European  Union  ("CJEU")  in
             Joined Cases C-175/08,  C-176/08,  C-178/08,  C0179/08,  Aydin
             Salahadin Abdulla, Kamil Hasan, Ahmed Adem, Hamrin Mosa  Rashi
             & Dier Jamal v Bundesrepublik Deutschland,  2  March  2010  ("
             Abdulla "), I have concluded that:

                  (1)  A  cessation  decision  is  the  mirror  image  of  a
                  decision determining refugee status. By that I  mean  that
                  the grounds for  cessation  do  not  go  beyond  verifying
                  whether the grounds  for  recognition  of  refugee  status
                  continue to exist. Thus, the relevant question is  whether
                  there has been a significant and non-temporary  change  in
                  circumstances so that the circumstances which  caused  the
                  person to be a refugee have ceased to apply and  there  is
                  no other basis on which he would be held to be a  refugee.
                  The recognising state does not  in  addition  have  to  be
                  satisfied that the country  of  origin  has  a  system  of
                  government or an effective  legal  system  for  protecting
                  basic human rights, though the absence of such systems may
                  of course lead to the conclusion that  a  significant  and
                  non-temporary change in circumstances has not occurred."

     12. The Upper Tribunal heard AMA after MA; its headnote reads

             "(1) The compelling reasons proviso in article  1C(5)  of  the
             1951 Refugee Convention, as amended, applies in the UK only to
             refugees under article 1A(1) of the Convention.

             (2)  Changes in a refugee's country of origin  affecting  only
             part of the country may, in principle, lead  to  cessation  of
             refugee status, albeit it is difficult to see how in  practice
             protection could be said to be  sufficiently  fundamental  and
             durable in such circumstances.

             (3)   The  SSHD's  guidance  regarding  the   role   of   past
             persecution can not in itself form a lawful basis for  finding
             that removal would lead to a breach of the Refugee Convention,
             given  the  limited  appeal  rights  at  section  82  of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended  and
             SF and others (Guidance - post-2014 Act) Albania  [2017]  UKUT
             120 (IAC) 10 when read in its proper context."

     13. AMA considered R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Hoxha [2005] 1  WLR
         1063, [2005] UKHL 19, which does not appear to have been brought to
         the attention of the Court of Appeal in MA. Hoxha was raised by  Mr
         Waheed in his submissions but, although it may be relevant in  some
         cases, we are satisfied that at this stage of  determining  whether
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law such that  his  decision
         is set aside, it is not relevant. AMA considered whether there  was
         a divergence between MS and MA:

             "42. I appreciate that  at  first  glance  this  might  appear
                  inconsistent with Judge Kopieczek'  s  observation  in  MS
                  that there is a "very significant and practical difference
                  between the grant and the cessation  of  refugee  status".
                  However, upon closer scrutiny, any difference in  approach
                  between MA and MS is more apparent than real.  At no stage
                  in his reasoning did  Judge  Kopieczek  suggest  that  the
                  cessation enquiry is a wider or more generalised one  that
                  includes  the  consideration  of  humanitarian   standards
                  unrelated  to  the   requirements   within   the   Refugee
                  Convention.  Indeed, Judge Kopieczek appears to agree with
                  the need for symmetry between the grant and  cessation  of
                  refugee status, when  he  deprecates  any  differences  in
                  approach to the consideration of  internal  relocation  at
                  [55].  Similarly, Arden LJ's approval of symmetry  between
                  the grant and the cessation of refugee  status,  does  not
                  obviate the obvious differences that  exist.   First,  the
                  burden of proof is on the applicant to establish  that  he
                  is entitled to refugee status, but the burden of proof  is
                  upon the state to demonstrate that refugee  status  should
                  cease.   Secondly,  there  is  a  strict  and  restrictive
                  approach to cessation for reasons explained by Lord  Brown
                  in Hoxha at [65-66] and the  UNHCR  Cessation  Guidelines.
                  That is reflected in the high and exacting test that  must
                  be met.  Contrast this with the benefit of the doubt given
                  to asylum  claimants.   Thirdly,  whilst  the  same  lower
                  standard of proof must be applied  when  deciding  whether
                  the  person  meets  the  requirements   of   the   Refugee
                  Convention at both stages (see [88] of Abdulla), for there
                  to be cessation  there  is  the  discrete  and  additional
                  requirement that any change in circumstances must be of  a
                  "significant and  non-temporary"  nature,  such  that  the
                  factors which formed the basis of the  refugee's  fear  of
                  persecution may be regarded as  having  been  "permanently
                  eradicated" (see [73] of Abdulla).

              43. Notwithstanding the differences set out  above,  I  accept
                  there  remains  a  symmetry  between  the  grant  and  the
                  cessation of refugee  status.  As  the  CJEU  observed  in
                  Abdulla at [89]:

                      "At both of those  stages  of  the  examination,  the
                      assessment relates to the same question of whether or
                      not the established circumstances constitute  such  a
                      threat that the person concerned may reasonably fear,
                      in the light of his  individual  situation,  that  he
                      will in fact be subjected to acts of persecution."

              44.  In  addition,  the  individual  approach  to  determining
                  whether a person is entitled  to  refugee  status  remains
                  when considering whether to revoke that  status.   As  the
                  CJEU in Abdulla indicates at [76],  for  the  purposes  of
                  assessing a change of circumstances, regard must be had to
                  "refugee's  individual  situation".   In  MA,   Arden   LJ
                  approved of the "individualised approach" in this respect,
                  at [49].

              45. All the  ingredients  in  article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee
                  Convention must therefore be met at  both  stages  of  the
                  examination: when determining status and whether to  cease
                  that status.  This commonly requires the following: (i)  a
                  well-founded  fear  of  persecution;  (ii)   for   reasons
                  relating to a Convention Reason; (iii) making  the  person
                  unable or unwilling to avail himself of the protection  of
                  the country.  The  final  ingredient  is  based  upon  the
                  principle of surrogacy and necessarily includes an enquiry
                  as  to  whether  the  person  can  be  expected  to   seek
                  protection in another part of his country of origin.   The
                  widely  accepted  test  is  whether  the  person  can   be
                  reasonably expected to internally relocate - see Januzi  v
                  SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 at [7-8] and [48-49].

              46.  The  wording  of  article  1C(5)   also   supports   this
                  symmetrical approach.  It clearly refers not just to  "the
                  circumstances  in  connection  with  which  he  has   been
                  recognised as a refugee" having "ceased to exist" but also
                  to  the  person  not  being  able  to  avail  himself  "of
                  the protection of the country of his  nationality".   The
                  principle of surrogacy is therefore found in both  article
                  1C(5) and article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.   There
                  is therefore a prima facie argument that if  a  person  is
                  able to avail himself of protection in  one  part  of  the
                  country then (unless that protection  lacks  the  positive
                  qualities required of  it,  including  being  effective  /
                  durable / fundamental / significant / non-temporary), they
                  do not meet the refugee definition, and if they are  being
                  considered for cessation they are no longer a refugee.  In
                  other words, if effective protection is available  then  a
                  person does not meet the definition of a refugee.

              47.  However,  the  reality  of  the  situation  is  that  the
                  expectation  that  a  person  can  avail  himself  of  the
                  protection of another part of his country of  nationality,
                  i.e.  through  internal  relocation,   only   arises   for
                  consideration where it is accepted that there is  a  well-
                  founded fear of persecution for a Convention Reason in the
                  home area of that country.  It is  difficult  to  envisage
                  how and in  what  circumstances  a  well-founded  fear  of
                  persecution   can   be   said   to   be   "non-temporary",
                  "significant" or "permanently eradicated" in a country for
                  a particular  person,  wherein  it  is  accepted  that  it
                  continues in the person's home area of that  same  country
                  and / or the person cannot safely move around the country.
                    The  necessary  requirement  for  the  changes   to   be
                  fundamental and durable is most likely to be  absent.   It
                  follows that the availability of  internal  relocation  is
                  generally unlikely to be  a  material  consideration  when
                  applying  article  1C(5)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  or
                  article 11 of the QD.

     14. The difficulty with paragraph 19 of the decision is that the First-
         tier Tribunal judge has  failed  to  undertake  an  examination  of
         whether TL is a refugee in his home area before turning to consider
         whether internal relocation was a viable option. If TL is no longer
         a refugee, then the question of internal relocation does not arise.
         Whilst the first four  sentences  of  paragraph  19  may,  in  some
         circumstances, be uncontroversial, it is plain that there has to be
         an individualised approach to TL's individual situation.  This  has
         not been done.   This is because the First-tier Tribunal judge  has
         asserted (5th sentence of paragraph 19 - set out in paragraph 7  of
         this decision above), that the changing situation  in  Zimbabwe  is
         not sufficiently significant (we paraphrase) without  any  analysis
         of the current situation in Zimbabwe.   Such  consideration  should
         have involved an analysis of whether the Country Guidance cases  of
         CM and LZ meant that TL who was recognised as  a  refugee  in  2007
         because he was a  low  level  MDC  supporter  and  because  of  his
         homosexuality  but  whose  political  activity  has,  since   2007,
         consisted of attendance at one rally in May 2018 and who  has  not,
         on the evidence, expressed his sexual orientation  in  any  obvious
         way since recognition as a refugee, remained at any relevant risk.

     15.  Instead  of  this  analysis  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has
         summarised the effect of the findings of CM and LZ as being to  the
         effect that TL could move to a part of the country where he was not
         at risk.  That was part  of  the  findings  made  in  those  cases.
         However this ignores the fact, recorded by the First-tier  Tribunal
         judge in paragraph 15 of the decision, that CM had  indicated  that
         low-level members of the MDC were not likely to be  at  risk.   The
         decision as to internal relocation cannot stand absent  a  decision
         on whether TL is or is not a refugee and the extent to which it  is
         necessary to consider internal relocation in the reaching  of  that
         decision. It will  be  recalled  that  the  reasons  given  by  the
         Secretary of State for revocation were that the security  situation
         in Zimbabwe had changed significantly; the decision was  not  taken
         on the basis that TL remained at risk of being persecuted in Hwange
         (his home area) but could internally relocate.   Although, as found
         in AMA, there is little significant difference in the ratio  of  MS
         and MA, it is  to  be  recalled  that  MS  was  a  decision  on  an
         individual who was found to be a refugee in his home area  and  for
         whom internal relocation was found to be unduly  harsh;  a  similar
         factual matrix applied in AMA. MA concerned an individual  who  had
         been found in the past  to  be  a  refugee  in  Mogadishu  and  the
         intention was to return him to Mogadishu.

     16. Therefore, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 14 and  15  above,
         the application of MS by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as  set  out
         in paragraph 19 of the First-tier Tribunal decision is  too  stark.
         This is  because  it  fails  to  illustrate  the  careful  analysis
         required, as explained in MA and  AMA,  in  determining  whether  a
         decision to revoke refugee status is correct,  in  accordance  with
         the relevant burden and standard of proof.

     17. For these reasons we are satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge erred in law in his finding that the Secretary of  State  was
         not entitled to revoke TL's refugee status.

     18. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

     19. When we have set aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires us to remit the case to the First
         tier with directions or remake it for ourselves. In this appeal the
         nature and extent of any judicial fact finding which  is  necessary
         in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
         having regard  to  the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
         appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

     20. We note the First-tier Tribunal judge found that TL  did  not  meet
         either of the Exceptions  in  s117C  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002. There was no  cross  appeal  by  TL  against  that
         finding. We did not hear submissions  from  either  party  in  that
         regard.







    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and remit it for hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    We make an order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 20th March 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
