
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00158/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2019                  |On 8 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MOHAMED [O]
                       [Anonymity direction not made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr J Greer, instructed by Greater Manchester Immigration
For the appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Foudy  promulgated  28.2.19,  allowing  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  revoke  his
    refugee status, to refuse his human rights claim,  and  to  deport  him
    from the UK.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Manuell  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.2.19. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission to  appeal  on
    21.3.19.

 3. The background to the application is as follows. The  case  is  one  of
    cessation of refugee status under Article 1C of the Refugee Convention,
    on the basis of significant and non-temporary changes in the  objective
    circumstances in Somalia on  which  the  claimant's  grant  of  refugee
    status was based. In allowing the appeal, Judge  Foudy  referenced  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AMA  (Article  1C(5)  -  proviso  -
    internal relocation)  Somalia  [2019]  UKUT  00011,  holding  that,  in
    principle, changes  in  only  one  part  of  a  country  could  justify
    cessation but in practice it would be difficult to see  how  sufficient
    protection could  be  provided  in  those  circumstances.  Finding  the
    claimant to be a vulnerable minority  clan  member  with  enduring  and
    severe mental illness, the judge concluded  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect him to relocate to Mogadishu. Further,  the  judge  was
    not satisfied that Mogadishu had experienced the  required  significant
    and non-temporary change in circumstances.

 4. In essence, the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  are  that  the
    correct approach is that of MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA  Civ  994  and  to
    determine whether the claimant would be recognised as a refugee at  the
    present time. It is suggested that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    bound by AMA and that the Secretary of State is not  required  to  show
    that the appellant's home area is safe.

 5. At the hearing before me on 30.5.19, Mr Tan pointed to the  facts  that
    there were two inconsistent Upper Tribunal decisions on this issue, the
    second being MS (Somalia) [2018], both of  which  were  shortly  to  be
    considered by the Court of Appeal, listed for 10.7.19, to determine the
    correct approach. Mr Tan's application was to postpone  the  appeal  in
    the present case to await the outcome of the Court of Appeal's decision
    on the issue. Mr Greer did not object to the adjournment.

 6. I considered whether it would be more productive to determine the error
    of law issue and, if found,  postpone  the  remaking  of  the  decision
    behind the Court of Appeal decision. However,  it  is  clear  that  the
    issues in contention in the error of law aspect of the present case are
    identical  to  those  pending  before  the  Court  of  Appeal.  In  the
    circumstances, I agreed to adjourn this matter to await the outcome  of
    the decision in the Court of Appeal, in accordance with the  directions
    below.

 7. At a further hearing before me on 23.9.19, listed for case  management,
    it was noted that the Court  of  Appeal  had  promulgated  the  awaited
    decision in MS (Somalia) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1345. Both parties  had
    submitted position statements but those had not been  received  by  the
    Upper Tribunal. I listed the matter  for  substantive  hearing  of  the
    error of law issue and directed that steps be taken to ensure that  the
    position statements had been received by the Upper Tribunal.

 8. The matter then came before me for hearing on 17.12.19. I  pointed  out
    that the position statements had not been received.  Eventually,  those
    documents were produced or sent so that I have been able to  take  them
    into account along with the oral submissions of both representatives.

 9. I have also carefully  read  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  MS
    (Somalia). In summary, the Court of Appeal held  that  cessation  is  a
    mirror-image of the grant of refugee status and can be justified on the
    basis of significant and non-temporary change of circumstances  in  the
    place of proposed relocation,  and  does  not  require  a  country-wide
    change in circumstances. Lord Justice Hamblen stated:

         "49. In summary, in a case in which refugee status has been granted
         because the person cannot reasonably be  expected  to  relocate,  a
         cessation decision may be made if circumstances change,  so  as  to
         mean that that person could reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate,
         provided that the change in circumstances is, in  the  language  of
         the  Qualification  Directive,  "significant  and   non-temporary".
         Helpful  guidance  in   relation   to   the   assessment   of   the
         reasonableness of  internal  relocation  is  given  in  the  recent
         decision of this Court in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019]  EWCA  Civ
         873.

         50.  The size of the area of relocation will  be  relevant  to  the
         reasonableness of being expected to  relocate  there  and  also  to
         whether  the  change  in  circumstances  is  significant  and  non-
         temporary. I do not, however, accept that there is any  requirement
         that it be a substantial part of the country. Article 7,  which  is
         relied upon by Mr Vokes, is concerned with the different  issue  of
         the circumstances in which non-State parties or  organisations  may
         be regarded  as  actors  of  protection.  In  that  context  it  is
         understandable that they should be required to be in control  of  a
         substantial part of the State.

         51.  I also have reservations about the generalised statements made
         by UT Judge Plimmer in AMA that it will be  difficult  in  practice
         for a change in circumstances  in  a  place  of  relocation  to  be
         sufficiently fundamental  and  durable  or  "significant  and  non-
         temporary" for there to be cessation. That may be so in some cases,
         but it will all depend on the evidence in any particular  case  and
         one should not generalise.

         52.  I recognise that this involves differing from the approach set
         out in paragraph 17 of the UNCHR  Guidelines  in  so  far  as  that
         states that "changes in the refugee's country of  origin  affecting
         only part of the  territory  should  not,  in  principle,  lead  to
         cessation of refugee status". I accept, however, as the  Guidelines
         state, that "not being able to move or establish oneself freely  in
         the country" is relevant to whether the change in circumstances  is
         fundamental, or "significant" and "non-temporary".

         53.  It follows that the FTT and the UT erred  in  law  in  holding
         that the availability of internal relocation  cannot  in  principle
         lead to a cessation of refugee status and the case will have to  be
         remitted to consider whether or not it does so on the facts in this
         case."

10. Lord Justice Underhill agreed but added:

         "82. I only wish to say anything of  my  own  on  ground  1,  which
         raises the only issue of general application.   I  appreciate  that
         our conclusion differs from that  of  UNHCR  at  para.  17  of  its
         Guidance, quoted by Hamblen LJ at para. 33 of his  judgment.   That
         is not something that I take lightly, but I have to say that  I  do
         not find convincing either of the reasons given by  UNHCR  for  the
         proposition that  "changes  in  the  refugee's  country  of  origin
         affecting only part  of  the  territory  should  not  ...  lead  to
         cessation".  The first is that the risk of persecution  should  not
         be regarded as having been removed if the refugee "has to return to
         specific safe parts  of  the  country";  but,  with  respect,  that
         statement is itself unreasoned, and I  cannot  see  any  principled
         basis for it, given that the refugee would not  have  been  granted
         protection in the first place if there were a part of  his  or  her
         own country where they could be safe and to which it was reasonable
         for them to relocate.  The  "mirror  image"  approach  endorsed  by
         Hamblen LJ seems to me both fair and principled.  I recognise  that
         the fact that the refugee has left their  home  country  and  found
         safety in the country of refuge, perhaps years previously, must  be
         taken into account; but,  so  far  as  the  Convention  issues  are
         concerned, the way that that is done is not by changing  the  basic
         criteria for protection but by  the  requirement  for  a  specially
         strict approach to  their  application,  with  the  burden  on  the
         Secretary of State, as enjoined in Hoxha (see para. 48  of  Hamblen
         LJ's judgment).  It may also of course, separately,  and  depending
         on the particular facts, give the refugee grounds for arguing  that
         his or her removal is in breach of their rights under article 8  of
         the ECHR.  As for the UNHCR's second reason, namely that  the  fact
         that only part of the country is safe indicates  that  the  changes
         have  not  been  fundamental,  I  cannot   see   that   that   will
         axiomatically be so.  Whether it is  or  not  will  depend  on  the
         particular facts.

         83.  At para. 50 of his  judgment  Hamblen  LJ  rejects  Mr  Vokes'
         submission (by way of alternative to his main point) that cessation
         will not be legitimate in an internal relocation  case  unless  the
         safe area is "substantial".  I agree with him, but the context must
         be appreciated.  The Secretary of State proposes to  return  MS  to
         Mogadishu.  Mr Vokes' submission proceeded on the  assumption  that
         even if Mogadishu is safe that cannot justify cessation because  it
         does not constitute a substantial part of Somalia as a  whole.   In
         terms simply of land area, that is no  doubt  true,  but  in  other
         respects it is plainly not: on the contrary, it is the capital  and
         the largest city in the country, and home to a substantial part  of
         its  population.   I  do  not  accept  that  the   possibility   of
         return/relocation to  such  a  place  is  incapable  of  justifying
         cessation, though of course whether it in fact does so will  depend
         on the assessment of the tribunal."

11. The Secretary of State's position as drafted by Mr Tan was to  rely  on
    MS (Somalia) and to maintain that there was an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Foudy. Mr Diwnycz had nothing  to  add  to  Mr  Tan's
    position statement.

12. Mr Greer's position statement and reply to the the Secretary of State's
    submissions is that MS (Somalia) does  not  advance  the  Secretary  of
    State's case at all. It  is  pointed  out  that  AMA  was  not  Country
    Guidance and was not overruled. It had been agreed  that  the  claimant
    would be at risk of persecution in his home area. It is submitted  that
    Judge Foudy  properly  considered  whether  the  claimant  could  avail
    himself of an internal flight alternative by relocating  to  Mogadishu,
    properly directing herself on the appropriate legal test.

13. As Mr Greer pointed out in his submissions, whilst referencing  AMA,  a
    reading of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  demonstrates  that
    the judge did not in fact rely on Judge Plimmer's observation  and  did
    not proceed on the basis that a  change  of  circumstances  had  to  be
    country-wide rather than confined to a place of relocation. It is clear
    that the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider whether there had been
    the required 'significant and non-temporary' change in circumstances in
    Mogadishu to justify cessation of the appellant's refugee  status,  and
    made a fact-specific assessment of his circumstances, in particular his
    mental health issues. It was on that  basis  that  at  [22]  the  judge
    concluded that it "would be unduly harsh to expect this claimant, "with
    an enduring and severe mental illness, who also belongs to  a  minority
    Somali clan, to relocate to Mogadishu where he has no contacts  and  no
    family support network."

14. Having considered the matter carefully, I  reach  the  conclusion  that
    Judge Foudy took the  course  mandated  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    considered whether internal  relocation  to  Mogadishu  could  properly
    justify cessation of refugee status on the basis  of  'significant  and
    non-temporary' change in circumstances. Necessarily, that involved  not
    only consideration of the relevant country background  information  but
    also the particular circumstances of the claimant.

15. As far as the country background information is concerned, Judge  Foudy
    had before her two country expert reports and the Secretary of  State's
    own policy, which recognised the difficulty for a minority clan  member
    to relocate to Mogadishu.

16. In relation to the claimant's  mental  health  issues,  the  judge  had
    cogent medical evidence that he has suffered from  schizophrenia  since
    2013 and had both self-harmed and tried  to  kill  himself,  acting  on
    voices in his head. His history  demonstrated  a  'revolving  door'  of
    relapse and recovery typical of schizophrenic sufferers.  It  was  also
    clear that he needed the support of his wife not just to remind him  to
    take medication but to  prompt  him  to  eat  and  wash.  The  evidence
    suggested that if he departed from his required medication routine,  he
    would inevitably relapse and become psychotic again, at which point his
    ability to keep himself safe would be diminished and the risks of self-
    harm increased.

17. The judge carefully considered whether the claimant would  be  able  to
    access medical support in Somalia. In this regard, the grounds complain
    that the judge made no reference to the objective evidence cited in the
    refusal decision to the effect  that  Somali  has  five  mental  health
    centres run by the Habib Mental Health  Foundation,  including  one  in
    Mogadishu. However, it is not necessary for the judge to  address  each
    item of evidence. Further, there was also expert  evidence  before  the
    judge in the report of Markus Hoehne (at  paragraphs  52  to  65)  that
    health care in general and mental health care in particular in  Somalia
    is extremely poor. The Habeeb Clinics is referenced  at  paragraph  65,
    where it is noted that the clinic is run not by a  psychiatrist  but  a
    nurse,  and  that  the  facilities   are   moderate,   suffering   form
    shortcomings in personnel, medication, and treatment.

18. I am satisfied that it was open to the judge to  rely  on  the  country
    background and medical evidence to  conclude  that  for  this  claimant
    relocation to Mogadishu would be unduly harsh and unreasonable, so that
    he remains entitled to refugee status. As the judge stated at  [22]  of
    the decision, the claimant is a vulnerable man  with  an  enduring  and
    severe mental illness, who even struggles to keep himself safe  in  the
    highly supported surroundings of the UK where he has close  family  and
    the NHS to rely on. Adequate and cogent reasoning for  this  conclusion
    has been provided, so that it cannot be  said  that  the  decision  was
    perverse, irrational, or in error of law or fact.

19. In all the circumstances, I agree with the submission of Mr Greer  that
    the Court of Appeal's decision in MS  (Somalia)  does  not  assist  its
    case. On the facts of the present case, the judge  reached  a  decision
    that was open to her on the evidence and for which cogent reasoning has
    been provide. It follows that I find no error of law in the decision.



Decision

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law

      2. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appeal
         remains allowed.

      3. I make no fee award.






     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        2 March 2020

