
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: rp/00023/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                         |On 17 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr a s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Clapham Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Judge allowing Mr [S]'s appeal against a decision refusing a
    protection and human rights claim.  I think not a great deal  needs  to
    be said about the judgment.  The judge  considered  the  provisions  of
    section 72 with regard to  cessation  and  concluded  that  though  the
    offence that had been committed by him was a particularly serious crime
    the judge concluded that he had rebutted the second element of  section
    72 of being a danger to the public and allowed  the  appeal  purely  on
    that basis.  The Secretary of State challenges  this  decision  on  the
    basis that although the judge had taken matters so far he had not  gone
    on to consider whether he was a refugee at the relevant date and it was
    an error of law not to complete the  task  having  made  a  section  72
    finding.  I think it is essentially common ground that the judge  erred
    in that regard and although some reservations are  expressed  from  the
    Secretary of State's side it does seem to me bearing in mind  there  is
    no cross-appeal that the proper outcome for this matter is for it to go
    back to Judge Page who is the judge in question for him to complete his
    task so the appeal is allowed to that extent.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 25 September 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

