
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00018/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 January 2016                       |On 22 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Somalia born 20 May  1988.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 17 October 2002 at the age of  14  and  has  been
    continuously resident here since.  He was recognised as a refugee on 22
    January 2003.

 2. On 6 January 2009 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  three  counts  of
    supplying a Class A controlled drug and sentenced  to  four  years  and
    nine months' imprisonment.  On 4  September  2012  he  was  once  again
    convicted of supplying a Class A controlled drug and on  this  occasion
    was sentenced to five years and seven months' imprisonment.

 3. On 16 June 2014 the Secretary of State sent notice to the appellant  of
    her intention to 'cease' his refugee status.    On  9  April  2015  the
    Secretary of State made a decision headed: "Decision to deport  and  to
    refuse a protection claim and/or human rights claim",  in  relation  to
    which the appellant brought an appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is this decision which forms the focus of the appeal before us.

 4. In a  lengthy  decision  promulgated  on  20  October  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal judge Davey dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was subsequently granted  on
    27 November 2015 by FTTJ Andrew.

 5. In the hearing before us Mr Yeo began by asserting  that  the  recently
    amended s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the
    2002 Act") is not exhaustive in  its  description  of  the  grounds  an
    appellant can deploy before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that,  even
    subsequent  to  the  amendments  to  this  section  introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, the Tribunal retained jurisdiction  to  allow  an
    appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 6. During the course of these submissions  it  became  apparent  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 9 April 2015 suffered  from  a  hereto
    unforeseen fundamental inadequacy that not only rendered  it  unlawful,
    but also had the same effect on the proceedings before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The decision of 9 April 2015 states on its faces that  it  is  provided
    "in  compliance  with  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations   2003"
    ("Notices Regulations"). This though is clearly not the case.

 8. Its text conveys the following conclusions:

      i) a certificate is issued by  the  Secretary  of  State  pursuant  to
         Section 72(9) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 -
         the appellant having committed a particularly serious crime and not
         able to rebut the presumption that his continued  presence  in  the
         United Kingdom would constitute a danger to the community;

     ii) a decision has been made to cease the appellant's refugee status;

    iii) the appellant's deportation would not lead to a breach of  Articles
         2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

 9. A significant feature of the decision is found on its page  20  of  23,
    which reads:

         "Appeal

         You have the right to appeal against the decision  to  refuse  your
         human  rights  claim  under  Section  82(1)  of  the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 from within the UK.

         Any appeal must be made on one or more of the following grounds:

       . that your removal from the UK would  breach  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention;

       . that your removal from the UK would breach the UK's obligations  in
         relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a   grant   of   humanitarian
         protection;

       . that your removal from the UK would be unlawful under Section 6  of
         the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary  to
         Human Rights Convention).

         You must not appeal on grounds which do not apply to you.  You must
         also explain  the  reasons  that  you  are  appealing  against  the
         decision and provide any supporting evidence that is  available  to
         you in order to substantiate your grounds of appeal."

10. After the amendments to s.82 of the  2002  Act  brought  about  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, the decisions against  which  applicants  have  a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are identified  exhaustively
    in the following terms:

         "82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal


             (1)  A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -

                  (a)  the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                      protection claim made by P,

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
                      rights claim made by P, or

                  (c)  the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                      protection status.

             (2)  For the purposes of this Part -

                  (a)  a 'protection claim' is a  claim  made  by  a  person
                      ('P') that removal of P from the United Kingdom -

                      (i)  would breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
                           under the Refugee Convention, or

                      (ii) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection;

                  (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the  Secretary  of
                      State makes one or more of the following decisions -

                      (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
                           the Refugee Convention;

                      (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection;

                  (c)  a person has 'protection status' if  the  person  has
                      been granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United
                      Kingdom as a refugee or as a person  eligible  for  a
                      grant of humanitarian protection;

                  (d)  'humanitarian  protection'  is  to  be  construed  in
                      accordance with the Immigration Rules;

                  (e)  'refugee' has the same  meaning  as  in  the  Refugee
                      Convention..."

11. Section 84 of the 2002 Act (as amended by  the  Immigration  Act  2014)
    sets out the grounds which an applicant is entitled to  deploy  in  any
    appeal against a decision identified in section 82(1) of that Act:

         "84. Grounds of appeal


             (1)  An appeal under Section 82(1)(a) (refusal  of  protection
                  claim) must be brought on one or  more  of  the  following
                  grounds -

                  (a)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under
                      the Refugee Convention;

                  (b)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                      relation  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of
                      humanitarian protection;

                  (c)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                      would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights
                      Act 1998 (public authority not  to  act  contrary  to
                      Human Rights Convention).

             (2)  An appeal under Section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
                  claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision  is
                  unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

             (3)   An  appeal  under  Section   82(1)(c)   (revocation   of
                  protection status) must be brought on one or more  of  the
                  following grounds -

                  (a)   that  the  decision  to   revoke   the   appellant's
                      protection  status  breaches  the  United   Kingdom's
                      obligations under the Refugee Convention;

                  (b)   that  the  decision  to   revoke   the   appellant's
                      protection  status  breaches  the  United   Kingdom's
                      obligations in relation to  persons  eligible  for  a
                      grant of humanitarian protection."

12. Pursuant to the Notices Regulations the Secretary of  State  must  give
    written notice to a person of any immigration decision or EEA  decision
    taken in respect of him or her which is appealable under s.82(1) of the
    2002 Act (regulation 4  of  the  Notices  Regulations).   Regulation  5
    thereof identifies in mandatory  terms  that  the  notice  given  under
    regulation 4 shall also include, or  be  accompanied  by,  a  statement
    which advises the person of -

         "(3) (a) his right of appeal and the statutory provision  on  which
             his right of appeal is based;

         (b)  whether or not such an appeal may  be  brought  while  in  the
             United Kingdom;

         (c)  the grounds on which such an appeal may be brought; and

         (d)   the  facilities  available  for  advice  and  assistance   in
             connection with such an appeal."

13. It is apparent, and was accepted by Mr Walker, that the decision  of  9
    April 2015 fails to display the mandatory features required  of  it  by
    regulation 5.  Although it is headed "a decision to refuse a protection
    claim and/or human rights claim" it is clearly not former  because  the
    appellant already had protection status (granted as long ago  as  2003)
    and has not, for obvious reasons, made any  subsequent  claim  in  this
    regard.  Neither is there anything  before  us  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant made a human rights claim prior to 9 April 2015.

14. The decision of 9 April 2015 is, without doubt, a  decision  to  revoke
    the appellant's protection status.  As a consequence the appellant  had
    a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  operation  of  s.
    82(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.

15. In accordance  with  regulation  5  of  the  Notices  Regulations,  the
    decision of 9 April 2015 was required to include within it a  statement
    which, inter alia, advised the appellant of: (i) the right of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal, (ii) the legislative provision upon which such
    right is derived and (iii) the  grounds  of  appeal  available  to  the
    appellant. It discloses none of these features. It may be that this was
    as a consequence of  confusion  arising  in  the  decision-makers  mind
    brought about by the recent amendment to  the  appeal  provisions,  and
    grounds, in sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act.

16. We observe in particular that at  paragraph  32  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision the appellant is notified that  he  does  not  have  a
    right of appeal against the decision to cease his refugee status. Later
    in the decision letter he is incorrectly notified that he has  a  right
    of appeal against the decision refusing a human rights  claim  -  there
    having been no such claim. These failings are compounded further by the
    notification of the grounds identified in the decision that are said to
    be available for the appellant  to  rely  upon  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; such notification failing to include those found  in  s.84(3)
    of the 2002 Act, and mistakenly including those grounds  relevant  only
    to an appeal against a decision to refuse a protection claim.

17. For these, and indeed other, reasons the decision  letter  of  9  April
    fails to comply with the requirements of the Notices Regulations. It is
    therefore unlawful. There was therefore no valid decision against which
    the appellant could have brought an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr Walker accepted this to be  so,  acknowledging  that  the  appellant
    could not be taken to have  waived  the  requirements  of  the  Notices
    Regulations given that he had no knowledge that such  requirements  had
    not been complied with.

18. Mr Yeo  sought,  and  absent  objection  from  Mr  Walker  we  granted,
    permission for the appellant to amend his  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to include the submission that the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision was made without jurisdiction.

19. For the reasons given above we acceded to this  ground.  The  appellant
    has been the subject of a  decision  which  is  'appealable',  and  was
    therefore entitled to a  notice  complying  with  the  requirements  of
    Notices Regulations. He has not, as yet, received such a notice and has
    not waived the need for the Secretary  of  State  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of the Regulations, despite lodging an appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

20. In such circumstances the First-tier Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to
    determine the appeal brought before  it  and  its  decision  is  of  no
    effect. There is nothing left for  the  Tribunal  at  either  level  to
    determine.

                                   Signed:
                                    [pic]
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
