
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2016                         |On 17 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Manmohan Singh
                        (anonymity direction REVOKED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals  with  leave  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert promulgated on 27 June 2016  granting
    an appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  27
    August 2015 to revoke the appellant's indefinite leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  I will refer to the respondent in this appeal  as  the
    appellant as he was against the decision of the Secretary of State.

2.   The appellant's history and circumstances are laid out in paragraphs  3
    to 9 of the determination.  Briefly the appellant  is  a  35  year  old
    Afghan national married to a UK national with British children aged  8,
    6 and 1.  He entered the United Kingdom in 1999 and was  granted  leave
    to remain in 2001.  He was convicted of driving offences  in  2004  and
    disqualified from driving for twelve months.  He was granted indefinite
    leave to remain on 26 January 2006.  In 2010 and 2011 he was  convicted
    of two offences of dishonesty.  The second offence, fraud, attracted  a
    sentence of 32 months' imprisonment.

3.   A deportation order was made by the Secretary of State on 24 May  2014.
     The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision.   It  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge Wiseman and was successful on Article 8 ECHR grounds.
      The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal   against   that   decision   was
    unsuccessful.  On 27 August 2015 the Secretary of State made a decision
    to revoke the appellant's indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  Section
    61(1) of the 2002 Act.

The Legal Basis for the Secretary of State's Decision

4.   Section 76(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides:

         "(1) The Secretary of State may revoke a person's indefinite  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person -


             (a)  is liable to deportation, but


             (b)  cannot be deported for legal reasons."

    It is agreed that the appellant is liable for deportation but  that  he
    cannot be deported for legal reasons.


5.   In R (on the application of Fitzroy George) [2014] UKSC 28 the  Supreme
    Court held that the revocation of the deportation order did not  revive
    an individual's indefinite leave to remain but the Secretary  of  State
    was entitled to regulate his status by means of limited or  conditional
    leave.  At paragraph 31 Lord Hughes giving the  opinion  of  the  court
    observed that  it  makes  perfect  sense,  whilst  the  legal  obstacle
    remains, for the Secretary of State to be in a position to revisit  the
    terms of leave to enter.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

6.   In reaching his decision the Immigration Judge adopted the findings  of
    Judge  Wiseman  in  the  appellant's  successful  appeal  against   the
    deportation order.  He found  that  the  appellant  has  a  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom which would be significantly impeded
    should his indefinite leave to remain be revoked.   He  would  have  to
    reapply at intervals for leave to remain with all the  uncertainty  for
    the family that that would entail as well as  a  significant  financial
    cost.   There  was  no  good  reason  why  a  person  who  has  clearly
    rehabilitated himself to a significant extent and  not  reoffended  for
    the Secretary of State now to revoke his indefinite leave to remain.

7.   The Immigration Judge  found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    followed her own guidance.  Applying the principles set out  in  Razgar
    there would be significant and serious consequences of a  removal  from
    the UK for both himself and his three  British  citizen  children.   He
    found that there were compelling and  compassionate  circumstances  for
    his family and that the decision was disproportionate to the legitimate
    aims to be achieved.

8.   Finally he considered that the Secretary of State had failed  to  apply
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

The Secretary of State's Appeal

9.   The grounds of appeal followed three broad grounds.  First it  is  said
    that the Immigration Judge made a material  misdirection  in  law.   He
    found that the Secretary of State had not followed her own guidance  on
    revocation of indefinite leave to remain dated 19 October 2014.

10.  In particular, he misapplied paragraph  4.1  and  gave  weight  to  the
    length of time between the offending behaviour  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.  Moreover, he had failed to  identify  factors  which
    were said to be exceptional as to justify displacing the obligation  of
    the Secretary of State to protect the public  interest.   None  of  the
    examples identified in paragraph 44 applied.  The Immigration Judge had
    erred in his assessment of exceptional and compassionate  circumstances
    that should be  held  in  mitigation  against  removal  as  opposed  to
    assessing the effect of limiting grants  of  leave  to  short  duration
    rather than indefinite leave to remain.

11.  Secondly it was said that the Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the exercise  of  discretion  by  the
    Secretary of State was unreasonable.  The decision  was  one  that  was
    within the Secretary  of  State's  discretion  and  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances.

12.  Finally, under reference to the case of  Fitzroy  George  it  was  said
    that the Immigration Judge had failed to follow a binding precedent.

13.  Mr Avery, the Home Office Presenting Officer, in his  submissions  said
    that the Immigration Judge's determination was vague.  He  pointed  out
    that the purpose of Article 8 was to protect fundamental  human  rights
    and it was difficult to see how the facts  found  established  in  this
    case breached Article 8.  There was no question of the appellant  being
    removed at this time and that was a misconception on the  part  of  the
    Immigration Judge.  He had applied Razgar but that was not the question
    at issue in this case.

14.  Mr Avery pointed out that at paragraph 47 the Immigration  Judge  found
    that the Secretary of State had failed to follow the guidelines in that
    the decision ought to have been referred to a  senior  caseworker.   In
    fact he said that it had been referred to a senior  case  worker.   The
    Presenting Officer  had  never  been  asked  about  that.   Finally  he
    referred me to the case of Fitzroy George and the assistance here.

The Appellant's Response

15.  Mr Dhanji on behalf  of  the  appellant  accepted  that  Section  76(1)
    applied and that the decision was taken under that  Section,  and  that
    the case of Fitzroy George applied.  He also accepted that  the  policy
    point taken in respect of the Immigration  Judge's  decision  was  well
    made.  He referred me  to  the  skeleton  argument  placed  before  the
    Immigration Judge.  He said that the decision to revoke the  indefinite
    leave to remain was one which was appealable on Article 8  grounds  and
    that what had occurred in this case was a disproportionate interference
    into  private  and  family  life.   That  should  be  considered  as  a
    standalone  argument  distinct  from  the  policy  argument   and,   he
    submitted, was properly addressed by the Immigration Judge.

16.  So far as Razgar is concerned he accepted that Razgar in its terms  was
    not applicable but submitted nevertheless that there was an appropriate
    test to be met and the test was akin to the Razgar test.

17.  Finally he submitted that there was a rational basis for  the  decision
    on the appeal.  The Immigration Judge in his appraisal places weight on
    the length of time between the appellant's offending and  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to revoke indefinite leave to  remain  on  27
    August 2015.  Although the conviction was in 2010 the Immigration Judge
    (at paragraph 34) quotes Judge Wiseman  that  because  of  the  lengthy
    investigation it was now six or seven years  since  the  appellant  had
    offended.  He had now lived in the community for a  further  two  years
    without reoffending and he was unlikely to offend again.  A letter from
    the National Probation Service to the effect that he was at low risk of
    reoffending was before the Immigration Judge.

Discussion

18.  At paragraph 40 the Immigration Judge finds  that  there  was  no  good
    reason why it was a person who has clearly rehabilitated himself  to  a
    significant extent that he has not committed any further  offences  for
    many years for the Secretary  of  State  now  to  seek  to  revoke  his
    indefinite leave to remain at this stage.  He then  went  on  to  state
    that the Secretary of State had not followed her own guidance.

19.  At paragraph 42 the Immigration  Judge  quotes  paragraph  4.1  of  the
    guidelines for revocation of indefinite leave to remain published on 19
    October 2015.  It is clear that he was under the  misapprehension  that
    the consideration of time between offending and decision is relevant to
    a consideration of  revocation  of  leave  under  Section  76(1).   The
    guidance states that the length of time between the incident and review
    of a person's continuing entitlement to indefinite leave to  remain  is
    relevant to cases under Section 76(2) and  76(3)  but  not  to  Section
    76(1).  In a sentence omitted by the  Immigration  Judge  the  guidance
    states the reason for that distinction.  The sentence reads:

         "For cases under Section 76(1) length of time spent in the UK  will
         not constitute a bar to revocation of indefinite leave because  it,
         and any other Article 8 considerations, will have been  taken  into
         account in deciding whether the person should be deported."

20.  In my opinion the Immigration Judge has clearly misdirected himself  in
    a material way in the assessment.   I  note  at  paragraph  49  of  the
    Immigration Judge's decision that the length of time played a  part  in
    his overall assessment.  For that reason the appeal must succeed.

21.  However, I also consider that the  Immigration  Judge  has  misdirected
    himself  on   the   assessment   of   exceptional   and   compassionate
    circumstances.  He purports to have conducted an  Article  8  exercise.
    In my opinion Article 8 is not engaged.  While  it  is  true  that  the
    action of the Secretary of State will impact on the  family  I  do  not
    consider that they constitute an  interference  with  the  right  to  a
    private and family  life.   That  misdirection  is  emphasised  by  his
    application of the principles in Razgar.  A proper  reading  of  Razgar
    makes it clear that the principles apply when  a  person  is  resisting
    deportation on Article 8 grounds.  Removal from the UK is not an  issue
    in this case but  the  judgment  in  part  reads  as  if  that  is  the
    determining factor.

22.  At paragraph 45 he states in terms that there  would  flow  significant
    serious consequences for his removal from the UK for both himself,  his
    wife and his three British citizen children.  While there is no doubt a
    balancing exercise to be drawn between the interests of the  appellant,
    his wife and family  on  the  one  hand  and  the  public  interest  in
    regulating the terms of stay in the UK while a legal  obstacle  to  his
    removal remains on the other it is not the same exercise  as  when  the
    appellant's removal from the UK has been pursued.  The consequences  of
    removal are far more severe than those which flow from a revocation  of
    indefinite leave to remain.  Nowhere  is  that  recognised  within  the
    Immigration Judge's decision.  Accordingly, for both of these reasons I
    find that the appeal should be allowed.

23.  The issue then is whether or not I  should  remake  the  decision.   Mr
    Dhanji asked that I consider allowing further written submissions.   Mr
    Avery on the other hand considered  that  I  could  make  the  decision
    myself.  On the basis of the information before me and the findings  of
    fact I consider that I can do so.

24.  There is no doubt that a revocation of indefinite leave to remain  will
    have consequences for the appellant and  his  family.   I  accept  that
    there will be difficulties in getting bank accounts and bank loans.  He
    may find it harder or even impossible to obtain a mortgage in  his  own
    name.  He will find travel more  difficult  and  that  may  impede  his
    ability to go abroad with his family on  holiday.   He  will  have  the
    uncertainty of not knowing whether an application for renewal of  leave
    would be successful or not and there will  be  the  not  inconsiderable
    costs associated with applications for renewal.  Perhaps most important
    here is the potential adverse effect on the  children.   As  they  grow
    older they may become more aware of  the  precarious  nature  of  their
    father's stay in the UK and that may have a disruptive effect  on  them
    although no doubt it may be mitigated  with  careful  handling  by  the
    parents.

25.  The Immigration Judge took into  account  the  fact  that  one  of  the
    children has a medical condition.  With respect, I do not think that is
    a valid consideration in the context of withdrawal of indefinite  leave
    to remain.  It would be different if the issue was deportation.

26.  There remains an issue as to how far  the  length  of  time  since  the
    offending behaviour and the appellant's low risk of  reoffending  is  a
    factor in the decision-making process.  In my view, however, this is  a
    matter which is primarily for the Secretary of State.   Parliament  has
    vested a discretion in her.  As Lord Hughes made clear in the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in Fitzroy George at paragraph 31, the  status  of
    the appellant as a person liable  to  deportation  has  long  ago  been
    decided.  The fact is that he is a person whose presence in the  UK  is
    not conducive to the public good.

27.  Accordingly the issue is one of balance between the public interest  in
    regulating the right to remain of  a  person  whose  presence  in  this
    country has been judged not to be conducive to the public good  against
    the interests of the appellant and his family.   While  there  will  be
    effects on the family I do not accept that they amount to  interference
    into private and family life under Article 8.  Even if they  did  I  am
    satisfied that the decision to revoke indefinite leave to remain is not
    disproportionate.  Accordingly I shall remake the  decision  and  allow
    the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.




                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 17 October 2016
