
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP000142016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 July 2017                               |On 21 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jaquiss, Counsel, instructed by Dicksons
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  McIntosh,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 24 April  2017  allowed  the  appeal  of  SN  against  a
    decision dated 11 February 2016, of the Secretary of  State  to  deport
    him under the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  in  May  1977.  He
    arrived in Britain on 29 January 2002 at the  age  of  24  and  claimed
    asylum.  He was interviewed and granted  refugee  status  on  18  March
    2002. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I will
    for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier. Similarly I  will  refer  to  SN  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   On 31 March 2014 he was convicted at Northampton Crown  Court  of  "not
    being an authorised person in relation to regulated  activity".   On  9
    April 2014 he was sentenced to four and a half years' imprisonment.  He
    was served on 11 June 2014 with a notification of intention  to  deport
    and notification of the provisions of Section 72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   He  was  invited  to  rebut  the
    presumption that the offences for  which  he  had  been  convicted  and
    sentenced were particularly serious  and  he  posed  a  danger  to  the
    community and to the United Kingdom.  In April 2015  the  Secretary  of
    State wrote to the appellant to notify him of the  intention  to  cease
    his  refugee  status  and  he  was  given  an  opportunity  to   submit
    representations with regard  to  his  continuing  entitlement  to  such
    status.  Those representations were made during 2015 but on  1  October
    that year his refugee status was revoked.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant with regard  to  his  claim
    to asylum.  She noted that he  had  received  threats  of  violence  in
    Zimbabwe from ZANU-PF as he had joined the MDC and was a member of that
    party.  Adverse attention had also been brought on him because of  what
    he had said in an address at his brother's funeral.  He had stated that
    he was also at risk because of his father's role with the ZIPRA,  which
    had been targeted by those who had supported ZANU-PF.

5.   The appellant's evidence regarding his  private  and  family  life  was
    that he had met his wife, Mrs SLN in 2006.  They have  three  children,
    all born in Britain the eldest was born on 4  April  2005,  the  second
    child was born on 25 January 2008 and the third on 12 July  2012.   The
    children, as is the appellant's wife, are British,  his  wife  who  was
    born in Zimbabwe entered Britain in 1993  at  the  age  of  15  and  is
    naturalised.

6.   The judge considered in some considerable detail the appellant's  crime
    taking into account the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Mayo  as
    well as the OASys assessment which had been completed on 25  May  2016.
    She noted that that report had been based solely on the  account  given
    by the appellant to the writer.  She noted the appellant's case that he
    is rehabilitated and had tried to use his time in prison to gain skills
    which could  be  used  in  the  community  and  moreover  that  he  had
    maintained constant contact with his wife and children.

7.   The judge also heard evidence from the appellant's wife  regarding  the
    difficulties which she  had  suffered  after  the  appellant  had  been
    sentenced and the effect that that had had on the children.  It was her
    evidence that she would not be able to  return  to  Zimbabwe  with  the
    appellant and that it was her preference to remain in Britain  and  for
    the children to remain in the environment and  culture  in  which  they
    were born.  She stated that the appellant's presence in the life of the
    children was essential, particularly for a young black male today.

8.   Having heard submissions from both representatives the  judge  set  out
    her findings in paragraphs 38 onwards.  She  placed  particular  weight
    on the sentencing remarks of Judge Mayo.  She noted that the  appellant
    had been arrested in 2011 but had not been sentenced until  2014.   She
    noted that the judge,  although he had found the appellant  lacking  in
    credibility, accepted that he had not deliberately targeted  vulnerable
    investors apart from one person and stated that it was  the  case  that
    between 43 and 66% of the initial investments made to the appellant had
    been paid back - the appellant had operated what appeared to have  been
    a Ponzi scheme.  She stated that although a large number of people  had
    lost substantial savings "it is also right that the appellant  made  no
    significant personal gain to himself or his family".  She  stated  that
    he had learnt skills while in custody and also  noted  that  the  OASys
    assessor had rated his likelihood of reoffending as being  low  overall
    and low in relation to non-violent and violent type offences.  She said
    that in taking into account the appellant's rehabilitation she had also
    taken into account his conduct in custody in the OASys assessment.  She
    stated the  evidence  before  her  was  supportive  evidence  that  the
    appellant presented a low risk of reoffending.

9.   The judge then quoted from the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 163 at paragraph 19.  She placed weight also
    on the fact that the OASys assessment might not be relevant because the
    author of the report was  reliant  upon  information  provided  by  the
    appellant but said that, however, before the index offence he had  been
    a man of good character and his conduct in prison had  been  exemplary.
    She said that her conclusion was that he did not pose a danger  to  the
    community and did not pose a risk of reoffending.

10.  The judge then turned to consider the provisions of Section 72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She noted the definition
    of serious criminal and stated that with regards to the facts which she
    had considered - the  appellant's  conduct,  the  terms  of  the  OASys
    statement, his qualifications while in prison and indeed certain of the
    comments made by the judge that she considered that the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption in Section 72.

11.  Turning to the issue of the  appellant's  claim  to  asylum  the  judge
    stated that his account was consistent and  credible  and  that  having
    considered the country guidance in  his  bundle  and  referred  to  the
    report of potential risk to returnees who had no connection with  ZANU-
    PF who were returning after considerable absence she considered that he
    might face serious ill-treatment.   She  noted  that  although  country
    guidance indicated that in certain  areas  returnees  from  the  United
    Kingdom might not face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF even if they
    were an MDC supporter she on balance found that given  the  appellant's
    family's association with the MDC and particularly the role  which  the
    appellant's father played in relation to ZIPRA there would  be  a  real
    risk of harm to him on return.  With regard to the appellant's  private
    and family life she referred to the three children and  the  length  of
    time the appellant had been in Britain and stated that it  was  in  the
    best interests of the children of the family to remain in the  care  of
    both parents and that it would be unduly harsh to require the  children
    of the family to relocate to Zimbabwe where their father would  face  a
    real risk of harm.

12.  The judge referred to Section 117(c) of the 2002  Act  and  noted  that
    the appellant had been lawfully resident in Britain since 2002 and that
    his eldest child was now in primary school and  his  son  had  enrolled
    into nursery and the family were fully  integrated.   She  stated  that
    there would be significant obstacles to the appellant establishing  his
    life safely in Zimbabwe.

13.  She stated in paragraph 54 that:

         "I give consideration to Section 117(c)  of  the  2002  Act  as  an
         additional consideration to Article 8.  I find that  the  Exception
         over and above that which is  referred  to  in  Section  117(c)  is
         established in the appellant's case.  I note that the appellant  is
         in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner
         and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  qualifying
         children",

    She stated that she considered that the effect of  deportation  on  the
    partner and children would be unduly harsh.  She  then  turned  to  the
    provisions of Section 398(b) or (c) and set out the provisions  therein
    as well as those of paragraph 399A.


14.  The judge then referred to the difficulties which the appellant's  wife
    had had and explained that it was necessary for  her  to  move  to  her
    sister's wife to enable her to work and allow her sister to  take  care
    of the children. She referred to the difficulties the  appellant's  son
    had had in reaching  developmental  milestones.   She  stated  that  in
    accordance with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 it was in the best interests of the children for the family to
    remain in the care of both parents, the appellant and his partner.

15.  She then went  on  to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  In paragraph 60 she stated that:  "In
    view of the above conclusions, I find that the Exception applies to the
    circumstances of the appellant's wife and children and the decision  to
    deport the appellant and I therefore allow the appeal."

16.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  argued  stated  that  there
    were errors of law in that the judge had found that the  appellant  was
    credible, that she had not said what country guidance she had followed.
     It was argued and arguing that it could not have been  CM  (Zimbabwe),
    which she had followed.  Moreover, the grounds went on  to  state  that
    the judge had allowed the appeal  solely  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds and that it would appear that the judge had  allowed
    the appeal on "another basis but has failed to state  if  this  was  in
    accordance with the Rules or  outside  the  Rules"  and  that,  it  was
    argued, was an error of law.

17.  The judge had gone on to allow  the  appeal  as  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the children but then had failed to give any  reasons  for
    the finding although it was always in any event a primary consideration
    but not a sole paramount consideration to  be  balanced  against  other
    factors.

18.  With regard to further compelling factors the grounds referred  to  the
    decision in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 quoting therefrom in which it was
    said that the reference to exceptional circumstances served the purpose
    of emphasising that in the balancing exercise great  weight  should  be
    given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals  who  could
    not satisfy Rules 398 and 399 or 399A.  It was only exceptionally  that
    such foreign criminals would succeed in showing that their rights under
    Article 8 trumped the public interest in their deportation.

19.  The grounds quoted further from paragraphs 37  and  38  of  Hesham  Ali
    stating that cases not covered by the Rules in 399 and 399A should have
    been dealt with dealt with  on  the  basis  that  great  weight  should
    generally be given  to  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
    offenders but that could  be  outweighed,  applying  a  proportionality
    test, by very compelling circumstances, which would  be  in  reality  a
    very strong claim indeed.

20.  At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of  appeal.  .
    Mr Tarlow stated that it was an error  of  law  of  the  judge  not  to
    identify country guidance  on  which  she  relied  and  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for her conclusions.  Moreover, she had not dealt with
    the issue of whether or not there were compelling factors in this case,
    pointing out that the appellant had received a sentence of  51  months.
    Ms Jaquiss referred to the determination in CM and  stated  that  given
    that the appellant came from Bulawayo internal relocation was not  open
    to him.  Moreover, she argued that it was quite clear  that  there  was
    still politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe.  The  fact  that  the
    judge  had  not  identified  relevant  country   guidance   would   not
    necessarily be material. Ms Jaquiss stated that the fact that the judge
    had not referred to the determination in  CM  was  not  material.   She
    clearly had  in  mind  relevant  country  guidance  before  making  the
    decision and had reached findings  of  fact  which  were  open  to  her
    thereon.  She stated that the appellant had shown that there would be a
    real risk on return and indeed  said  that  the  judge  had  summarised
    relevant country guidance.  Moreover, the judge  had  reached  findings
    and conclusions which were fully open to her.

21.  With regard to the Article 8 issues she had placed weight on the  three
    children and the compelling circumstances which would make the  removal
    of  the  appellant  disproportionate.   The  judge   when   considering
    proportionality was entitled to take  into  account  the  situation  in
    Zimbabwe.




Discussion

22.  I have considered the record of proceedings before the  judge  and    I
    consider that it must be accepted that the judge had must clearly  have
    in  mind  that  determination   which   was   referred   to   by   both
    representatives. Moreover, it is the case  that  the  judge  considered
    that there were particular circumstances which meant that the appellant
    would be targeted over and above being a member and  supporter  of  the
    MDC. She was entitled to  place  weight  on  the  appellant's  father's
    involvement  with  ZIPRA.     It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that   the
    appellant's claim  for  asylum  had  initially  been  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State, who must therefore have  considered  that  when  he
    claimed asylum he was vulnerable because of his political activities or
    beliefs.  I consider that while the conclusion  of  the  judge  may  be
    generous it was the case that the conclusion she made was open  to  her
    and she was entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  would  face  ill-
    treatment on return to Zimbabwe.

23.  Turning to the issue of the  appellant's  rights  under  the  ECHR  the
    reality is that the judge did set out and referred to  both  the  Rules
    and Section 117C.  I consider that she clearly applied the law  as  set
    out therein. It is trite law now that when considering  the  provisions
    of Section 117C the judge has to consider  a  proportionality  exercise
    placing weight on the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals as well as the rights of an appellant's partner and children.
     I consider that it is clearly obvious that for  British  children  who
    have been born and brought up in Britain and have lived here all  their
    lives and have reached the ages of 11, 9 and even 5 it would be  unduly
    harsh to expect them to go  to  live  in  Zimbabwe  where  it  must  be
    accepted  that  conditions  are   extremely   harsh.    Similarly   the
    appellant's wife has lived here since the age of 15.   In  effect,  she
    appears to have spent around half her life and  indeed  all  her  adult
    life in this country.  It would in these circumstances  I  consider  be
    unduly harsh to expect her to leave Britain  and  return  to  Zimbabwe.
    While the judge does not state in terms, however, is  that  given  that
    the appellant has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  over
    four years there need to be very compelling circumstances to show  that
    these Article 8 considerations would outweigh the  public  interest  in
    removing the appellant. However, that is clearly  the  conclusion  that
    she reached.

24.  I bear in mind that the judge also found that the appellant would  face
    ill-treatment on return to  Zimbabwe.   I  consider  that  that  factor
    together  with  the  obviously  unduly  harsh  circumstances  for   the
    appellant's wife and children to be  expected  to  return  to  Zimbabwe
    would be considered to amount  to  very  compelling  circumstances  and
    therefore I consider that the judge did not make a  material  error  of
    law by not actually using that particular term.

25.    I note that the judge did not state in terms  that  she  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.  I consider that clearly that  is  what
    the judge intended to do.  In any event, I consider that when the judge
    referred to humanitarian grounds  she  was  actually  referring  to  an
    infringement of the appellant's rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Even if that were not the case she states in terms that she allowed the
    appeal and she could only have done so on the basis that she found  the
    grounds, which referred to the appellant's rights under the  ECHR  were
    made out.

26.   I therefore conclude that the conclusions of the judge  were  open  to
    her and that there is no material error of law therein and  I  consider
    that her decision to allow  this  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and,  by
    implication, on human rights grounds shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Judge to allow the appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   [pic]                      Date: 20 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

