
                                    [pic]
IAC-AR-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00052/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 November 2016                        |On 21st November 2016          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                               Appellant
                                    -and-

                                    M M O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms F. Allen of counsel, instructed by Warnapala &
Company


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent, who was born on 9  December  1991,  is  a  national  of
    Somalia. He and his father entered the United Kingdom on 22  June  2005
    to join his mother, who had been granted asylum and indefinite leave to
    remain here on 2 November 2000. On 23  January  2012  the  Respondent's
    application to naturalise as a British citizen was refused, as  he  had
    not submitted all the required documentation.

2.   On 15 October 2013  the  Respondent  was  convicted  on  one  count  of
    possession with intent to supply a Class A drug, namely heroin, and one
    count of possession with intent  to  supply  a  Class  A  drug,  namely
    cocaine, and also a breach of a suspended sentence  previously  imposed
    for two counts of robbery. He was sentenced  to  three  years  and  six
    months imprisonment.  On 23 January  2015  he  was  notified  that  the
    Appellant intended to deport him from  the  United  Kingdom  and  on  6
    February 2015 the Respondent's representatives submitted that he feared
    persecution in Somalia.

3.   On 15 July 2015 the Appellant decided to deport the Appellant,  refused
    his human rights claim and notified him that  his  refugee  status  had
    ceased. Then on 14 July 2015 the Appellant  made  a  deportation  order
    pursuant to section 32 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.  The  Respondent
    appealed and in a decision promulgated on 15 September 2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer allowed his appeal.  The Appellant appealed on  22
    September  2016  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  granted   him
    permission to appeal on 3 October 2016 on  the  basis  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer had not given adequate reasons for the findings he
    had made.  She found that he had not given  any  adequate  reasons  for
    finding  the  witnesses  credible  or  concluding  that  there  was  no
    significant risk of the Respondent committing further offences.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   At the error of law hearing, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  said
    that he relied on the grounds of appeal and stressed  that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have  given  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that his  reasoning  had
    been sufficient.  I address the details  of  their  submissions  in  my
    findings below.

FINDINGS

5.   It was not disputed that at the time of  his  conviction  and  sentence
    the Appellant had indefinite leave to remain on the basis that  he  had
    been a dependent of his mother, who had been  granted  refugee  status.
    Article  33(1)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  generally  prohibits  the
    expulsion of a refugee. But Article 33(2) removes this protection where
    there are reasonable grounds for regarding  him  as  a  danger  to  the
    security of the country he is in or, where having been convicted  by  a
    final judgment of a particularly serious crime, he constitutes a danger
    to the community of the protecting state.

6.   Section 72(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that:

     "A person  shall  be  presumed  to  have  been  convicted  of  a  final
    judgement of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom if -
         (a)  he is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
         (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years".

7.   In this case the Appellant had been  sentenced  to  three  and  a  half
    years  imprisonment.   However,  section  72(6)  also  states  that  "a
    presumption under (2)  that  a  person  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
    community is rebuttable by that person". The Appellant was informed  of
    these provisions in a letter from the Appellant, dated 3 June 2014  and
    made representations in response on 6 February 2015.

8.   At paragraph 61 of his decision and reasons First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Freer found that "the indicators are that the Appellant now is no  risk
    to the community, applying the relevant burden  and  threshold  to  the
    evidence as a whole. He is not shown to be, or have been at any time, a
    criminal instigator. Given my findings on the facts as a whole that  he
    is no longer a danger to the community .....I reverse  the  section  72
    certificate for the reasons given".

9.   The Appellant relies on MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT
    000641 (IAC) and Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT  00341
    (IAC). In the latter case, the Tribunal held that it was necessary  for
    first-tier tribunal judges to identify and resolve the key conflicts in
    the evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons  for
    preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand why
    they have won or lost.

10.  In her grounds of appeal, the Appellant submits that  in  paragraph  55
    of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  explain  why  he
    had concluded that the  Appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  of
    matters.  I accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  had  the
    opportunity of hearing the Respondent give oral evidence  and  that  he
    had reviewed his case, as outlined in his witness  statement  and  oral
    evidence, in paragraphs 31 to 40 of his decision and reasons.

11.  However, he also needed to address the assertion by  the  Appellant  in
    her refusal letter that his family support network had  not  previously
    prevented him from offending.  It was not sufficient for him to  simply
    say at paragraph 59 that two of  the  witnesses  have  given  plausible
    evidence that he had cut ties with the dealers he had previously worked
    for. He also failed to refer to sections of the OASys, which  may  well
    have assisted the Appellant  or  particular  parts  of  the  witnesses'
    evidence which indicated that his support network was actively  working
    to ensure that he did not re-offend. Therefore, I find that  this  part
    of the decision was not sufficiently reasoned.

12.  The Appellant also  submitted  that  no  reasons  were  given  for  his
    finding in paragraph 75(iv) of the decision and reasons.  However,  the
    Appellant had accepted that  the  Appellant  had  no  remaining  family
    members in Somalia and the Judge had found that the Appellant's  mother
    had severe mental health problems and would probably never  work  again
    and that his father was fully engaged in caring for her.  He also found
    that the family were subsisting on  benefits.   There  was  no  factual
    basis for the submission by the  Appellant  at  the  hearing  that  the
    Appellant's family would be able to  send  money  to  him  if  he  were
    deported to Somalia. Therefore, I do not find that this amounted to  an
    error of law.

13.  In her third ground of appeal the Appellant submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made a perverse or irrational finding when  she
    found in paragraph 75(v) of his decision and reasons that the Appellant
    could not be expected to work in a dusty atmosphere due to his  chronic
    asthma problem. I accept that there was no evidence  to  show  that  he
    would not be able to work there in any capacity. However, this was  the
    last of a large  number  of  factors  on  which  the  Judge  relied  in
    paragraph 75 and I find that it was not determinative  of  his  overall
    findings and did not amount to an error of law.

14.   The  second  ground  of  appeal  related  to  the  cessation  of   the
    Appellant's refugee status. She submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made a material error of law when he found in paragraph 62 of his
    decision and reasons that the cessation decision was wrong  in  law.  I
    accept that in the letter from the Appellant, dated  22  January  2015,
    and in paragraph   of the refusal letter the Appellant  relied  on  the
    fact that there had been vast improvements in the situation in  Somalia
    since he was granted refugee status as his mother's dependent. However,
    in his  decision  and  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  fully
    explored the  country  guidance  provided  in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC).  He  also  took  into
    account more recent objective  evidence  from  reputable  international
    organisations and the expert  report  by  Professor  Aguilar,  dated  2
    January 2016. They indicated that the improvements, relied upon in MOJ,
    had not been sustained and,  therefore, there was a lawful and reasoned
    basis for the Judge finding that the  cessation decision was unlawful.

15.  Furthermore, in paragraphs 63 and 64, he indicated  that  his  reliance
    on the UNHCR letter, which said that criminal convictions should not be
    used to trigger a cessation decision, was in the  alternative  and  was
    not the primary reason for finding  that  the  cessation  decision  was
    unlawful.

DECISION

16.  For these reasons I find that the  only  error  of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer's decision and reasons was  his  failure  to  give
    comprehensive reasons for finding that the Appellant  did  not  pose  a
    future risk to the community.

17.  I allow the appeal to this limited extent.

18.  I remit this appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer  in  order  for
    him to reconsider that part of his decision.

19.  His findings on other issues stand.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Nadine Finch




Signed                                  Date 17 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


