
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: RP/00062/2015
                                                               RP/00063/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th September 2016               |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            haa (first Appellant)
                           NRA (second Appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Obhi  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 4th January 2016.

 2. The first Appellant was born on 5th May 1955 and is the mother  of  the
    second Appellant born 7th June 1999.

 3. Both Appellants entered the  UK  as  visitors  in  September  2006  and
    claimed asylum.  They were subsequently granted refugee status  on  5th
    March 2007 on the basis of their Somalian nationality, and  their  fear
    of returning to Somalia.  The  second  Appellant  was  granted  refugee
    status as the dependant of the first Appellant.

 4. On 8th July 2014 the Respondent wrote to the Appellants indicating that
    consideration was being given to  the  cancellation  of  their  refugee
    status.  This was because it had been discovered  that  on  8th  August
    2006 both Appellants had  produced  Yemeni  passports  in  Dubai,  when
    applying for entry clearance as visitors.

 5. The Respondent relied upon paragraph 339A(viii)  which  states  that  a
    grant of asylum under paragraph 334 of the Immigration  Rules  will  be
    revoked or not renewed if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that
    misrepresentation or omission of facts,  including  the  use  of  false
    documents, were decisive for the grant of asylum.

 6. The Respondent was satisfied that  the  Appellants  were  not  Somalian
    nationals when they applied for asylum, and had that been  known,  they
    would not have been granted asylum.

 7. On 27th July 2015 the Respondent made a decision to cancel the  refugee
    status of  the  first  Appellant,  and  the  second  Appellant  as  her
    dependant.  The Respondent confirmed that this decision had been  taken
    because the Appellants had submitted genuine Yemeni passports in  Dubai
    when they applied for entry clearance to the UK as visitors.

 8. The Appellants appealed to the  FtT  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 9. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellants and five family members.

10. The FtT described (in paragraph 33) the evidence presented on behalf of
    the Appellants as unsatisfactory, and noted  "many  inconsistencies  in
    the Appellants' accounts".

11. The FtT found that the second Appellant was born in Yemen as  indicated
    by her passport.  The FtT found that the first Appellant was originally
    from Somalia but left there "in or about 1992" and thereafter lived  in
    Yemen where she obtained Yemeni nationality.   The  FtT  dismissed  the
    appeals on all grounds.

12. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds which are summarised below;

    Ground 1

    The FtT made material contradictory findings.  At paragraph 28 the  FtT
    accepted that the first Appellant had been a Somali  national,  and  at
    paragraph 33 accepted that the first Appellant was likely to have  been
    born in or spent some time in Somalia and clearly has significant links
    with  Somalia.   However  at  paragraph  34  the  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellants could not be returned to Somalia as they are  not  nationals
    of that country.

    It was contended that the  finding  at  paragraph  28  that  the  first
    Appellant had been  a  Somali  national,  was  contradictory  with  the
    findings  at  paragraph  34  that  the  Appellants  are  not   Somalian
    nationals.  There were no findings that the  Appellants  had  renounced
    their Somali nationality.

    Ground 2

    The FtT made a material misdirection at paragraph 30 by stating that it
    was not in dispute "that at some point the  Appellant  acquired  Yemeni
    nationality".  It was contended  that  this  was  in  dispute  as  both
    Appellants clearly disputed acquiring  Yemeni  nationality,  contending
    that they were Somali nationals, and the first  Appellant  stated  that
    Yemeni passports used in Dubai to obtain entry clearance were false.

    Ground 3

    The FtT accepted at paragraph 28 that the first Appellant  had  been  a
    Somali national.  In the light of that finding it  was  contended  that
    paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules was not satisfied as the  first
    Appellant had not made a misrepresentation which was  decisive  in  the
    grant of asylum.

    Ground 4

    The  FtT  failed  to  address  why  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules is not satisfied.  It was contended that there  would
    be very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellants'  integration  into
    either Somalia or Yemen.

    Furthermore the FtT did not adequately  consider  the  exceptional  and
    compelling  circumstances  when  considering  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, particularly in  light  of  the  Appellants'  family
    members in the United Kingdom, including other children.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler on 28th January  2016.
    Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was not  accepted  that  the  FtT  had  materially
    erred.  It was contended that the FtT directed itself appropriately and
    gave reasoned conclusions.

14. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    should be set aside by reason of error of law.

The Oral Submissions

15. Mr Sharif relied and expanded upon the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.

16. Mr Mills relied upon the rule 24 response.  In relation to Ground 1  it
    was contended that the FtT had made a  finding  that  at  the  date  of
    hearing the Appellants are Yemeni nationals.  Adequate reasons for this
    finding had been given, including  the  fact  that  they  had  produced
    Yemeni passports to obtain entry clearance in 2006.

17. In relation to the second ground Mr Mills submitted that even if it was
    incorrect to state that it was not in dispute that at  some  point  the
    Appellant acquired Yemeni nationality, it had not been demonstrated how
    this was material.

18. In relation to Ground 3 Mr Mills submitted that the FtT found that  the
    Appellants had omitted material facts when applying for asylum, by  not
    disclosing their Yemeni nationality.

19. With reference to the fourth ground,  Mr  Mills  pointed  out  that  no
    removal decision had been made, and  there  was  no  need  to  consider
    Article 8.  Even if Article 8 should  have  been  considered,  adequate
    reasons had been given by the FtT for concluding that the appeal  could
    not succeed with reference to Article 8.

20. Mr Sharif did not wish to make a response to the submissions made by Mr
    Mills.

21. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Ground 1

22. It is correct that at paragraph 28 the  FtT  accepted  that  the  first
    Appellant had at some point been a Somali national.  The FtT found that
    the first Appellant left Somalia in or about 1992.

23. It is also correct that at paragraph 33 the FtT found  that  the  first
    Appellant was originally from Somalia and that she was "likely to  have
    been born in or spent some time in Somalia".  The FtT also  found  that
    the first Appellant "clearly has significant links with Somalia".

24. There is no material contradictory finding when the  findings  referred
    to above are compared to the FtT  finding  at  paragraph  34  that  the
    "Appellants clearly cannot be returned  to  Somalia  as  they  are  not
    nationals of that country".  This is because, reading the decision as a
    whole, the FtT  found  that  neither  of  the  Appellants  were  Somali
    nationals at the date of hearing, and they were  not  Somali  nationals
    when they applied for asylum in September 2006.

25. At paragraph 33 the FtT makes a clear finding in relation to the second
    Appellant which is "that the second Appellant was born in Yemen as  her
    passport suggests, and as  her  mother  has  stated  on  at  least  one
    occasion".  In the same paragraph the FtT  makes  a  finding  that  the
    first Appellant although originally from Somalia, left "many years  ago
    and lived in Yemen where she obtained Yemeni nationality".

26. The FtT found that both Appellants had presented  Yemeni  passports  to
    the ECO in Dubai in 2006.

27. At paragraph 33 the FtT records that there are many inconsistencies  in
    the accounts given by the Appellants,  and  these  inconsistencies  are
    highlighted in paragraphs 25-35.

28. This ground discloses no material error of law.

Ground 2

29. In my view the FtT was incorrect to state at paragraph 30 that what "is
    not in dispute is that at some  point  the  Appellant  acquired  Yemeni
    nationality".  It is apparent that both Appellants were disputing this,
    but I do not see how the incorrect statement by the FtT is in  any  way
    material.  It is clear from reading the  FtT  decision,  that  the  FtT
    appreciated that there was a dispute as to  nationality,  and  the  FtT
    makes  it  clear  that  both  Appellants  were  denying  being   Yemeni
    nationals.  I conclude that this ground discloses an error in the  form
    of a misstatement, but it is not a material error.

Ground 3

30. In my view this ground is misconceived.  The challenge relates only  to
    the first Appellant who the FtT accepted at paragraph  28  had  been  a
    Somali national.   The  FtT  found  that  both  Appellants  had  Yemeni
    nationality when the asylum claim was  made.   This  was  not  declared
    which amounted to an omission of facts, which was decisive in the grant
    of asylum.  Had the Yemeni nationality been  declared,  the  Appellants
    would not have been granted asylum as Somali nationals.

Ground 4

31. I do not find any material error disclosed by this ground.  In my  view
    the FtT was not obliged to consider Article 8.  There  was  no  removal
    decision.  Section 84(3) of the 2002 Act provides that an appeal  under
    section 82(1)(c) which relates to revocation of protection status, must
    be brought either on the basis that the decision  breaches  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention,  or  breaches  the
    United Kingdom's obligations in relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a
    grant of humanitarian protection.

32. The FtT made the point at paragraph 36  that  further  information  was
    needed before the Article 8 rights of the Appellants could be  properly
    considered, and commented that  they  would  have  the  opportunity  to
    provide further information to enable the Home Office to consider their
    Article 8 claims properly, as no removal decision had been made.

33. I conclude the grounds contained within the application for  permission
    to appeal, disclose a disagreement with the conclusions reached by  the
    FtT, but they do not disclose a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the  FtT.   I  make  an  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
because the second Appellant is a minor.  Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellants are granted  anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them  or  any
member of their family.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23rd September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeals are dismissed.   There  are
no fee awards.


Signed                              Date 23rd September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
