
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: RP/00094/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 May 2017                       |On 24 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             Fahad Yusuf Salaad
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Khan of Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is brought by the respondent against the  determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson who allowed this appeal  on
         human rights grounds. To  avoid  any  confusion,  I  refer  to  the
         parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appellant is a Somali national born on [ ] 1996. His appeal was
         against the decision of the respondent on 15 July 2016  to  make  a
         deportation order against him, to cease his protection  status  and
         refuse his human  rights  claim.  He  has  been  in  the  UK  since
         September 2001.  He obtained refugee status as the dependant of his
         aunt and as a member of the Benadiri minority  clan.  In  2008  his
         mother and two sisters joined him and  were  also  granted  refugee
         status. There now seem to be  three  additional  siblings  and  his
         father is referred to as also being here. The appellant has amassed
         some eight convictions between February 2012 and February 2015; the
         conviction of September 2012 took account of some 33 offences.

      3. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  22
         February 2017. It was allowed on article 3 and  8  grounds  on  the
         basis that the appellant would have  no  support  in  Somalia,  had
         culturally  socially  integrated  into  the  UK  and  met  all  the
         requirements of paragraph 399A.

      4. The respondent sought permission to appeal and that was granted  by
         Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 24 March 2017.

    The Hearing

      5. At the hearing before me on 15 May 2017, I heard  submissions  from
         the parties.

      6. Mr Clarke argued that there had been inadequate  reasoning  by  the
         judge for his finding that there would be no  financial  assistance
         for the  appellant  in  the  short  term.  He  submitted  that  the
         appellant had a large family in the UK who could assist him and so,
         without further reasoning, the judge's finding could not stand.  He
         referred to the head notes of MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG
         [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  and  submitted  that  the  burden  on  the
         appellant had not been discharged by a  lack  of  knowledge  as  to
         whether his family would assist him. He maintained that in order to
         avoid the article 3 threshold being met, only  short  term  support
         was required as long term there was no  reason  why  the  appellant
         would be unable to find work. He relied on MOJ and  submitted  that
         returnees were viewed as having a better education  and  were  more
         attractive to employers. He submitted that in considering 399A, the
         judge had predicated his finding of very significant  obstacles  on
         the appellant's inability to enjoy a private life  in  Somalia.  Mr
         Clarke submitted that if the appellant were able to find work  then
         he could develop a private life and that finding was unsafe.

      7. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant had immersed himself in  the
         Somali community. He had been involved with a Somali  gang  and  he
         lives as part of a large Somali family. It was not credible that he
         had no ties with Somali culture and language.  He  pointed  to  the
         fact  that  the  appellant's  mother  had  to  be   assisted   with
         interpretation to understand English which meant  that  Somali  was
         spoken at home. Even if the  appellant  was  not  a  fluent  Somali
         speaker, there was an availability of menial  work  and  the  judge
         should have given more reasons for why he found that work would not
         be available to the appellant.  The determination  was  unsafe  and
         should be set aside.

      8. In response, Mr Khan submitted that the judge had addressed all the
         issues and there was nothing to suggest that he had made errors  of
         law. The judge found that the appellant only spoke English  due  to
         the length of time he had spent in this country and he was entitled
         to reach that conclusion. He had to speak to his  mother  with  his
         sister acting as interpreter.  He  had  no  employment  history  or
         qualifications any employment opportunities in Somalia  would  only
         be for the educated. He was entitled to  article  8  protection  as
         well as article 3.

      9. Mr Clarke was content to rely on his previous submissions.  He  had
         nothing further to add.

     10. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.

    Findings and conclusions

     11. The  judge  properly  identified  the  issues  to  be  resolved  at
         paragraph 36. These were whether the cessation of protection status
         was lawful, whether the appellant was  excluded  from  a  grant  of
         humanitarian protection because he  constituted  a  danger  to  the
         community and whether his human rights would  be  breached  by  his
         deportation.

     12. The judge considered the evidence from the UNHCR relied on  by  the
         appellant and he also considered  the  guidance  in  MOJ.  For  the
         reasons set out at 37-42  he  concluded  that  the  respondent  was
         entitled to cease the appellant's refugee status. There has been no
         challenge to that conclusion by the appellant  and  those  findings
         stand.

     13. The second issue was addressed at paragraphs 43-47. The judge found
         the appellant to be a prolific offender with a  propensity  to  re-
         offend and that he was therefore a danger to the community  of  the
         UK (at 47).   He concluded that the appellant  should  be  excluded
         from humanitarian protection.   The  appellant  does  not  seek  to
         challenge those findings, which stand.

     14. The judge then turned to articles 3 and 8.  He  took  note  of  MOJ
         specifically with regard to the issues of  financial  support  from
         abroad and the opportunities for employment for returnees. He found
         that the appellant's family in  the  UK  would  not  or  could  not
         support him in the event  of  his  removal  to  Mogadishu  (at  49)
         however he provides no reasons for reaching  this  conclusion.  The
         appellant has a large family  here,  parents,  siblings,  aunt  and
         cousins and his oral evidence that he did  not  know  whether  they
         would assist him does not provide a basis for a finding  that  they
         would not, particularly as they appear to have  supported  him  for
         the duration of his residence in the UK.  Mr  Clarke  is  right  to
         submit that it is a big leap from the appellant's vague evidence on
         support to a conclusion that he would have no financial assistance.
         I find that the judge's conclusion in this respect is flawed.

     15. The judge then looked at the availability of employment in Somalia.
         According to the guidance in MOJ, there is evidence that  returnees
         are taking jobs from the locals and  there  has  been  an  economic
         boom. The guidance is that it is for the person  facing  return  to
         explain why he would not be able to  access  the  arising  economic
         opportunities. The judge found that because the appellant had lived
         here since childhood, he spoke no Somali. However,  this  does  not
         take account of the fact that the appellant has always lived  in  a
         Somali family environment (apart from when he has been in  custody)
         and that he had Somali friends and indeed  was  part  of  a  Somali
         gang. Without more, the finding that he has  no  cultural  ties  to
         Somalia is unsustainable, given these facts. The appellant was also
         contradictory about whether he had no knowledge of the language  or
         whether he had some. His claim  to  live  with  a  Somali  speaking
         mother but to have to use his sister  for  interpretation  has  not
         been explored at all. The simple fact of residence in the UK  alone
         does not mean that a person only speaks English  but  that  is  the
         approach taken by the judge. It was on this basis  that  the  judge
         concluded that the appellant would be unable to find employment. As
         the judge's reasoning as to language is inadequate, his finding  on
         employment is flawed and cannot stand.

     16. The judge then considered article 8 and found that because  of  the
         findings  on  language  and  employment,  there   would   be   very
         significant obstacles to his re-integration  into  Somali  society.
         However, due to the flaws in  those  findings,  the  conclusion  on
         article 8 is unsustainable.

     17. I, therefore, conclude that the judge erred in his  conclusions  on
         articles 3 and 8. Fresh findings in that respect have to be re-made
         and a new decision must be made. In the circumstances, I remit  the
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  fact  finding  and  a  fresh
         decision to be made on human rights issues only.

    Decision

     18. The decision contain errors of law with respect to the  conclusions
         on articles 3 and 8 and is set aside to that extent. It shall be re-
         made by the First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

    Anonymity

     19. There was no request for the anonymity order to continue and I  see
         no reason why it should.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 24 May 2017
