
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00059/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2019                           |On 10 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Ferguson, Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, SK, is a citizen of Sudan, born on 4 December 1996.   By
    a decision and reasons promulgated on  23  September  2019,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley allowed his appeal against a  decision  of  the
    respondent to revoke his refugee status, dated  13  November  2017.   A
    feature of this appeal is  that  both  parties  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal applied for permission to appeal on overlapping, although  not
    identical, grounds.   The  overlap  relates  to  the  construction  and
    application of section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 2. It was the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  who  was  granted
    permission to appeal, so on that basis we will refer to the parties  as
    they were below.

Factual Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied asylum-
    seeking child in August 2013.  He was recognised as a  refugee  by  the
    respondent on 25 October 2013.  He was granted  five  years'  leave  to
    remain until 24 October 2018.   The  basis  of  his  recognition  as  a
    refugee was that he was a member of  the  particular  social  group  of
    orphaned children in Sudan and on the basis of his actual  and  imputed
    political  opinion.   His  father  had  been  killed  by  the  Sudanese
    government and the Janjaweed  militia  for  political  reasons.   As  a
    result, his own political views had been galvanised and he  would  face
    the risk of being persecuted on account of those, in addition.

 4. The appellant did not reach the end of his initial five-year  grant  of
    leave to remain because, in July 2016, he raped a  young  woman  in  an
    area  of   wasteland   in   South   London.    The   appellant   denied
    responsibility, but following a trial he was convicted by a jury on  13
    January 2017 in the Crown Court at Blackfriars.  His conviction was for
    a single count of rape of  a  female  over  the  age  of  16.   He  was
    sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.  That sentence of  imprisonment
    had the effect of engaging the automatic deportation provisions in  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. As the appellant was a person with refugee  status,  the  Secretary  of
    State decided that the presumption in section 72 of the  2002  Act  was
    engaged, namely that the appellant was a serious criminal who  posed  a
    danger to the community of the United Kingdom.  Secondly, the Secretary
    of State considered that there were grounds to revoke  the  appellant's
    refugee status in any event, pursuant to the framework set out in  Rule
    339A(v) of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered  that  the
    background materials relating to Sudan  suggested  that  the  appellant
    would no longer  be  at  risk  upon  his  return.   In  particular  she
    considered that he, by definition, can no longer be  a  member  of  the
    particular social group of orphaned children in Sudan as he is  now  an
    adult.  The respondent considered that there was no  evidence  that  he
    would have any form of political profile such that it  would  engage  a
    risk of persecution upon his return.  She considered that he  would  be
    able to relocate to Khartoum  as  a  young  man  with  the  skills  and
    linguistic abilities he has built  up  during  his  residence  in  this
    country.

 6. As such, on 13 July 2017 the Secretary of State informed the  appellant
    that she intended to revoke his refugee status.  As is required by  the
    Immigration Rules, the UNHCR was notified and, on  22  September  2017,
    the UNHCR submitted  a  series  of  observations  in  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's proposed course of action.



The Decision Below

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is in two  parts.   First,  the
    judge dealt with the presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act  (see
    paragraphs 59  to  71).   That  led  to  the  operative  conclusion  at
    paragraph 70 that the appellant had not rebutted the presumption  under
    section 72.  The appellant seeks to challenge that conclusion in  these
    proceedings.

 8. We should observe at  this  point  that,  although  the  appellant  and
    respondent had much in common in their grounds  of  appeal,  they  part
    company in a significant respect at this juncture.  As  will  be  seen,
    the judge proceeded to make findings under the  Refugee  Convention  in
    relation to the Secretary of State's decision to revoke the appellant's
    refugee status, and purported to allow the appeal on Refugee Convention
    grounds.  It was common ground before us that to do so was an error  of
    law.  The judge was required under section 72(10) of the  2002  Act  to
    dismiss the appeal insofar as it relied  on  revocation  of  protection
    grounds.

 9. The appellant contends that judge should have found that the  appellant
    had rebutted the presumption.

10. The second part of the judge's decision was that the appellant  was  to
    succeed on refugee grounds.  She considered that there had not been the
    required  fundamental  and  durable  change  in  the  circumstances  in
    connection with which refugee status was granted, with the effect  that
    the decision to revoke the appellant's refugee status was unlawful: see
    paragraphs 89 to 92.

Relevant Legal Framework

11. A foundational principle of refugee law is  that  those  recognised  as
    refugees enjoy the benefit of  the  principle  of  non-refoulment:  see
    Article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention 1951.   Article  33(2)  of  the
    Convention  excludes  certain  persons  from  the  prohibition  against
    refoulement where there are reasonable grounds for regarding them as  a
    danger to the security of the  country,  in  this  context  the  United
    Kingdom, or where they have been convicted by a  final  judgment  of  a
    particularly serious crime or constitute a danger to the  community  of
    the host country.

12. Section 72(2) of the 2002 Act establishes a rebuttable presumption that
    those who have been convicted in this country of an  offence  resulting
    in an imposition of a sentence of imprisonment for at least  two  years
    are to be regarded as having committed "a  particularly  serious  crime
    and to constitute a danger to the community  of  the  United  Kingdom".
    The provision is stated to apply specifically to aid  the  construction
    and  application  of  Article  33  of  the  Refugee  Convention.    The
    presumption is rebuttable (see subsection (6)).  Where the Secretary of
    State has issued a certificate  that  the  presumption  in  section  72
    applies, a tribunal hearing an appeal on  Refugee  Convention  grounds,
    including on revocation of protection  grounds,  must  first  determine
    whether the certificate issued by the Secretary  of  State  merits  the
    application of  the  rebuttable  presumption.   If,  having  given  the
    appellant an opportunity for rebuttal, the tribunal agrees that one  of
    the presumptions applies, the tribunal must dismiss the appeal  insofar
    as it relies on a Convention or revocation of  protection  ground  (see
    section 72(10)).

13. The duty contained in section 86(2)(a) of the 2002 Act for the tribunal
    to determine any matter raised as  a  ground  of  appeal  continues  to
    apply.  The effect is that, although a tribunal is bound to dismiss  an
    appeal on Refugee Convention or revocation of protection grounds  where
    the section 72 presumption  has  not  been  rebutted,  it  nevertheless
    remains  necessary  for  the  tribunal  to  proceed  to  consider   the
    underlying ground of appeal that was advanced by the appellant  in  the
    first place even though, having so determined that  ground  of  appeal,
    the tribunal would be prohibited from allowing the appeal on the  basis
    of it.

Revocation of protections status

14. Once a person has been recognised as  a  refugee,  the  possibility  of
    their  status  ceasing  is  dealt  with  by  Article  1C  of  the  1951
    Convention.  Significant for present purposes is Article 1C(5).  It  is
    not a provision which relates to the conduct of the refugee, but rather
    the wider circumstances in which the refugee was recognised as enjoying
    the protection of the Convention.  It states, where relevant:

         "This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling  under
         the terms of section A if:

         [...]

         (5)  He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion  with
             which he has been recognised as a refugee has ceased to exist,
             continue to refuse to avail himself of the protection  of  the
             country of his nationality ..."

    That test is reflected by paragraph 339A(v) of the Immigration Rules.

15. In MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 994 the Court of Appeal held that a cessation decision is  the
    mirror image of a decision to determine refugee status.   That  finding
    followed the judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Union  in
    Abdulla and Others (Joined cases C-175/08, C-176/08,  C-178/08  and  C-
    179/08).  At paragraph 2(1) of MA (Somalia), Lady Justice Arden, as she
    then was, said:

         "The relevant question is whether there has been a significant  and
         non-temporary change in circumstances  so  that  the  circumstances
         which caused the person to be a refugee have ceased  to  apply  and
         there is no other basis on which he would be held to be a refugee."

    The term "significant and non-temporary" may be traced back to  Article
    11(2) of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.

Discussion

16. It was common ground at the hearing before us that the judge  erred  as
    to the overall impact of section 72.  Having found that  the  appellant
    had not rebutted the presumption, it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal insofar  as  it  related  to  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to revoke the  appellant's  protection  status:  see
    section 72(10).  It was not open to the judge to purport to  allow  the
    appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  continued  to  meet   the
    requirements of the Refugee Convention, by virtue of the fact that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to demonstrate that there  had  been  the
    required significant and non-temporary change in the  circumstances  in
    Sudan.

17. Ms Ferguson on behalf of the appellant challenges the judge's  analysis
    of the non-rebuttal of the section 72 presumption.  In her  grounds  of
    appeal and in her  Rule  24  response  (prepared  in  response  to  the
    respondent's application  for  permission  to  appeal,  before  it  was
    apparent whether permission to appeal would be granted to the appellant
    or respondent before the First-tier Tribunal),  she  submits  that  the
    judge at paragraph 60 set the test for whether the presumption had been
    rebutted too high there.  The judge held:

         "it is for the appellant to show either that it  was  not  in  fact
         particularly serious, because of mitigating factors associated with
         its  commission,  or  that  because  there  is  no  danger  of  its
         repetition he does not constitute a danger to the community".

18. We find that the judge correctly directed herself as to the formulation
    and application of the test for the  rebuttable  presumption.   As  the
    judge correctly noted in that  same  paragraph,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the presumption in EN (Serbia) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 630.  It held:

         "[66] ...Under section 72, it is for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         establish that the person in  question  has  been  convicted  of  a
         relevant offence.  In practice, once the State has established that
         a person has been convicted  of  what  is  on  the  face  of  it  a
         particularly serious crime, it will be for him to show either  that
         it was not in fact  particularly  serious,  because  of  mitigating
         factors associated with its commission, or that because there is no
         danger of its repetition he does not constitute  a  danger  to  the
         community." (Emphasis added).

    We consider that in paragraph 60, the judge  formulated  the  test  for
    whether the presumption had been rebutted entirely  in  line  with  the
    approach taken by Lord Justice Stanley Burton in EN (Serbia).

19. Turning to the judge's analysis of whether the appellant had  succeeded
    in rebutting the presumption, we consider  that  the  judge  reached  a
    conclusion that was open to her on the facts.  The judge considered the
    factors before and against  whether  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the
    presumption and gave reasons for her findings that he had not.

20. In relation to the factors militating in favour of the finding that  he
    had rebutted the presumption, the judge noted  at  paragraph  67  that,
    upon his release from prison,  the  licence  conditions  to  which  the
    appellant will be subject will have the effect of providing a degree of
    protection to the community.  We have some  doubt  however  as  to  the
    extent to which the availability of  license  conditions  was  a  valid
    consideration, because, by definition, if stringent licenced conditions
    are required to mitigate risk, then it is likely  to  be  difficult  to
    find that a person is ever not a danger to the community.  If the  only
    means by which such an individual can be said not  to  present  such  a
    danger is to the imposition of such conditions, then the fact that  the
    individual presents a risk requiring such mitigative steps is itself  a
    basis for concluding that he or she presents a danger to the community.



21. Taken to its logical conclusion, that submission would  mean  that  all
    but the most dangerous of offenders, or the most risky of  individuals,
    could be managed in some way,  provided  there  were  sufficient  state
    resources.  That approach would deprive Article 33(2) of the Convention
    and section 72 of their effect.  We do not need to reach  a  considered
    view on that point  because  we  consider  that  the  factual  findings
    reached by the judge were entirely within the range of  responses  open
    to her.

22. At paragraph 68 the judge said:

         "The assessment in the 2017 pre-sentence report was that he  was  a
         high risk and continued to deny his offence.  The evidence  of  the
         appellant is that he had changed his stance on guilt shortly  after
         the report was compiled, however, he has not undertaken any offence
         related work during his 3 years in detention.  I was concerned that
         the appellant's evidence indicated significant minimalisation of  a
         terrible  crime  involving  the  forcible   detention,   rape   and
         terrorising of a foreign tourist  who  had  limited  English.   The
         appellant  further  isolated  the  victim  by  taking  her   mobile
         telephone from her and required her to give evidence at  his  trial
         as he maintained his not guilty plea."

23. Then at paragraph 70 the judge reached her global conclusion  to  which
    we have already referred in relation to why he does not present such  a
    risk.

24. Ms Ferguson submits that the appellant is in, to adopt her terminology,
    a catch-22 situation.  In  order  to  demonstrate  that  he  no  longer
    presents a serious danger to the community, it is necessary for him  to
    undertake a number of courses or other rehabilitative  work  whilst  in
    custody.  To do that he is reliant upon the  Ministry  of  Justice  and
    those who administer the prison estate to facilitate such steps, but he
    has been unable, she submits, to find any assistance of the sort  which
    would benefit him.

25. We consider that Ms Ferguson's submissions  on  this  point  amount  to
    disagreements with legitimate findings of fact reached  by  the  judge,
    rather than arguments which reveal those findings were reached upon the
    basis of some error of law or other procedural irregularity.  The judge
    noted at paragraph 68 that the appellant had not undertaken any courses
    in prison, and although the submission of Ms Ferguson was that  he  had
    been unable to do, so we do not consider the fact that she  makes  that
    submission to render the judge's findings on this point irrational.  No
    appeal on a point of fact lies to the Upper Tribunal  and  appeals  are
    restricted to points of law.

26. On that basis, we reject the submissions of Ms Ferguson that the  judge
    erred when reaching her  conclusion  concerning  the  rebuttal  of  the
    presumption and find that the judge's conclusion on this point  stands.







The Refugee Convention Issue

27. It follows that, in the light of her findings on the section 72  issue,
    by purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  substantive  revocation
    protection issue, the judge fell into error.  As will be  demonstrated,
    the judge was prohibited by statute from allowing an  appeal  on  those
    grounds; the obligation under section 72(10) was to dismiss the  appeal
    to the extent it relied on revocation of protection grounds.  It was an
    error of law for the judge to purport to allow the appeal on  the  very
    basis she was bound by statute to dismiss it.  However,  it  was  still
    necessary for her to consider the substantive,  underlying  facts.   As
    this Tribunal held in the case of Essa (Revocation of protection status
    appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244 (IAC) it  remains  necessary  for  a  judge,
    following the application of section  72,  to  make  findings  of  fact
    concerning the ground of appeal advanced to the Tribunal (see paragraph
    21 of Essa).

28. Mr Avery  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  accepted  however  that  the
    conditions in Sudan are such that the appellant would face an Article 3
    risk upon his return.  There can be no suggestion that  the  fact  that
    the Article 3 threshold is made out that there is no longer a  risk  on
    ECHR grounds arising from the risk posed by the judge  or  the  militia
    and other military forces with state connections.

29. As such, and noting the absence of any submissions  by  the  respondent
    concerning the judge's findings of  fact  on  the  substantive  Refugee
    Convention issue, we reach the following conclusions.

      a) The judge's analysis of the underlying  Refugee  Convention  issues
         was sound, even though she was bound to dismiss the appeal  insofar
         as it related to the revocation of protection issue.

      b) The judge reached conclusions that she was entitled to reach on the
         evidence before her.  Due to  the  highly  complex  nature  of  the
         section 72 framework, when taken with the statutory jurisdiction of
         the First-tier Tribunal, the judge erred when concluding  that  she
         was entitled to allow the case on Refugee Convention grounds.   She
         was not.  She was merely permitted to make findings  going  to  the
         issue raised in the grounds of appeal, Refugee Convention  criteria
         cessation of protection status had not been revoked.

      c) In light of Mr Avery's concession concerning  Article  3,  we  find
         that the appellant would face an Article 3 risk if he were returned
         to Sudan at the present time.


30. As such, we preserve all findings of fact of the judge in the First-
    tier Tribunal but set aside her decision to the extent that it was
    allowed on Refugee Convention grounds and instead remake it allowing it
    on Article 3 human rights grounds.


31. To that limited extent, this appeal is allowed.

32. In view of the risk currently faced by the appellant upon his return to
    Sudan, an anonymity order is appropriate.


NOTICE OF DECISION

Judge O'Malley's decision involved the making of an error of law.

We set it aside to the extent that it purported  to  allow  the  appellant's
appeal on Refugee Convention grounds, and remake the decision, allowing  the
appeal on Article 3 grounds.

Anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 6 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We make no fee award.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 6 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

