
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00125/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 10th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     HN
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, instructed on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.



The background:

    1. The appellant appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal promulgated on the 13th March 2019.  He  appealed
       against the decision of the respondent dated 5th June 2018 to  effect
       a cessation of his refugee status under Article 1C (5)  of  the  1951
       Refugee Convention and paragraph 339A(v) of the Immigration Rules. On
       the 7th August 2018 his protection and human rights claim was refused
       and  the  decision  to  treat  him  as  liable  to  deportation   was
       maintained.

    2. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ")  on  the
       8th  February  2019.   He  dismissed  the  appeal  in  terms  of  the
       respondent's  decision  to  cease  refugee  status  and  consequently
       concluded that the appellant was not entitled to protection under the
       Refugee Convention and/or Article 3 of the  ECHR  and  dismissed  his
       appeal on Article 8 grounds.

    3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal and Immigration  Judge
       Froom granted permission on the 1st April 2019. It is agreed  by  the
       advocates that the decision demonstrates the making of  an  error  on
       point  of  law  based  on  the  judge's  assessment  of  his   sexual
       orientation and the issues of risk on return to  Afghanistan  in  the
       light of the decisions of AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873

    4. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 (as amended),  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  required  to
       provide written reasons for its decision under paragraph 40(2)(a)  of
       the Rules, where the decision is made with the consent of the parties
       (rule 40(3)(a)), or the parties have consented to the Upper  Tribunal
       not giving written reasons (rule 40(3)(b)).

    5. The requirements of sub-paragraphs 40(3)(a) and 40(3)(b) of the Rules
       are met. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       can properly be set aside without a reasoned decision notice.

    6. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  with
       no findings of fact or credibility preserved. The  decision  in  this
       appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be
       fixed. It may be necessary to hold a case management  review  hearing
       to consider issues of further listing and whether it is necessary for
       the anonymity direction to continue.


Signed                              Date: 6 /6/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


