
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00009/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th September 2017                    |On 22nd September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SF
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Halim, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Judge Buckwell allowing the claimant's refugee status appeal
    on both homosexuality and ethnicity grounds.  The  respondent  accepted
    at the hearing that the claimant  is  a  Somali  citizen  of  Bravanese
    ethnicity, and that he  is  homosexual.   The  claimant  is  a  foreign
    criminal to whom sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 apply.

 2. In relation to ethnicity, the Secretary of State's case is  that  there
    is an internal flight option for the claimant within Somalia, and  that
    he would  have  sufficient  protection  from  clan  violence  in,  say,
    Mogadishu.

 3. In relation to homosexuality, the Secretary of State, notes that  since
    coming to the United Kingdom, the claimant's conduct  of  his  personal
    life has been so discreet that he has succeeded in keeping  his  family
    members unaware of his sexual  orientation.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considers that the appellant could do the same  in  Somalia,  and  that
    therefore he would not be at risk on return to Somalia.

    First-tier Tribunal decision

 4. There is at present no binding country  guidance  on  the  position  of
    homosexuals in Somalia, so  the  decision  on  risk  on  return  for  a
    homosexual there is entirely  fact-specific.  The  undisputed  evidence
    which the claimant gave on his reasons for discretion  if  returned  to
    Somalia is recorded at [40] in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:



         "With respect to his sexuality the [claimant] was asked whether  he
         feared that he would be killed if he was returned to  Somalia.   He
         so confirmed.  Asked whether he could keep his sexuality secret  if
         he returned to the country, the [claimant] stated that he would not
         be able to tell anyone about his orientation as he would be  killed
         if he was to be revealed as a homosexual."

    That evidence was accepted by the Secretary  of  State  without  cross-
    examination  and  I  record  for  the  purposes  of  completeness  that
    paragraphs 1 and 2 in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are no
    longer relied upon.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal decision says little  about  the  risk  to  the
    claimant as a homosexual.  At [35], the Tribunal mentioned  and  sought
    to apply the guidance of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).   At  [83]  of
    the judgment, the Tribunal identified that Somalia is a Muslim country,
    where there  are  strong  views  in  relation  to  homosexuality.   The
    decision continued:

         "83. ...  However, I am persuaded that the [claimant] would not  be
             able to live his private life in Somalia on the basis  of  his
             sexual orientation and that such circumstances would be highly
             likely to affect the whole quality of his way of life and  his
             private life if he had to return alone to Somalia and  without
             the support of his immediate family.  If he felt unable to  be
             open about his sexuality it would be because he felt unable to
             live his private life as he would wish in that respect due  to
             a real risk of persecution.  On the same basis, I find that he
             would face a risk with respect to Article 3 ECHR."

    The HJ (Iran) test

 6. The correct approach to risk on return for homosexuals and other  LGBTI
    persons was set out by Lord Rodger in HJ (Iran) & Anor v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 at [35] thus:

      "35.    This brings me to the test that should be adopted by the fact-
      finding tribunals in this country. As Lord Walker points out in  para
      98, this involves what is essentially an individual and fact-specific
      inquiry. Lord Rodger has described the approach in  para  82,  but  I
      would like to set it out in my own words. It is necessary to  proceed
      in stages.

             (a) The first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether  the
             applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of
             that orientation he will not be entitled to be  treated  as  a
             member of the particular social group. But I would regard this
             part of the test as having been satisfied if  the  applicant's
             case is that he is  at  risk  of  persecution  because  he  is
             suspected of being gay, if his past history shows that this is
             in fact the case.

             (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which
             are directed to what his situation will  be  on  return.  This
             part of the inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the
             future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of  Origin  report  will
             provide the background. There will  be  little  difficulty  in
             holding that in countries such as Iran and Cameroon gays  or
             persons who are believed to be gay  are  persecuted  and  that
             persecution is something that may reasonably  be  feared.  The
             question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will
             conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
             he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he  will
             come in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he
             conducts himself may vary from one situation to another,  with
             varying degrees of  risk.  But  he  cannot  and  must  not  be
             expected to conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he
             is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be.  The
             question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
             inquiry.

             (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
             able to do in the country of his nationality  everything  that
             he can do openly in the country whose protection he  seeks  is
             not the test. As I said earlier (see para 15), the  Convention
             was not directed to reforming  the  level  of  rights  in  the
             country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach the  issue
             on the  basis  that  the  purpose  of  the  Convention  is  to
             guarantee to an applicant who is  gay  that  he  can  live  as
             freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do
             if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the
             human rights standards  that  are  applied  by  the  receiving
             country within its own territory. The focus throughout must be
             on what will happen in the country of origin.

             (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will  in
             fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is
             to consider why he will do so.  If  this  will  simply  be  in
             response to social pressures  or  for  cultural  or  religious
             reasons of his own choosing and  not  because  of  a  fear  of
             persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the
             reason why he will resort to concealment is that he  genuinely
             fears that  otherwise  he  will  be  persecuted,  it  will  be
             necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.

             (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have  a
             well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he  has,  the
             causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2  AC  426,
             para 5 will have  been  established.  The  applicant  will  be
             entitled to asylum.

      1. It should always be remembered that the purpose of this exercise is
         to separate out those who are entitled to protection because  their
         fear of persecution is well founded from those  who  are  not.  The
         causative condition is  central  to  the  inquiry.  This  makes  it
         necessary to concentrate on what is actually likely  to  happen  to
         the applicant. As Lord Walker says  in  para  88,  the  inquiry  is
         directed to what will happen in the  future  if  the  applicant  is
         returned to his own country. An approach which disregards  what  is
         in fact likely to  occur  there  in  the  case  of  the  particular
         applicant is wrong and should not be adopted."

    The Secretary of State's policy

 7. The Secretary of State's Asylum Policy instruction "Sexual  orientation
    in asylum claims" published on 3rd August 2016, version 6,  says  this,
    at page 38 of 41:

         "How the individual has acted until now in their country of  origin
         or in the UK is immaterial.   Caseworkers  should  not  equate  any
         historic absence on the part of the claimant in  openly  expressing
         their  sexuality,  for  any  reason,  as  evidence   of   voluntary
         discretion.  The mere fact that someone may, in  their  past,  have
         been discreet, even for non-protection reasons, does not mean  that
         those reasons were either the sole reasons why they were  discreet,
         nor do they indicate how the claimant will continue  to  behave  on
         return"                                                   [Emphasis
         added]

    Discussion

 8. If the claimant's sexual orientation claim succeeds,  then  it  matters
    not whether the First-tier Tribunal made any error of fact  or  law  in
    assessing the risk to him as a Bravanese in his home area,  or  in  the
    sufficiency of protection available to him in other parts  of  Somalia,
    because he will  still  be  a  refugee  on  the  basis  of  his  sexual
    orientation.  Following the HJ sequence, the first question is  whether
    the claimant is gay.  The respondent accepts  that  he  is.   The  next
    question is whether gays are persecuted in Somalia.

 9. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  indicates  that  there  is
    legislation prohibiting homosexuality in  Somalia.   I  remind  myself,
    applying JM (homosexuality risk) Uganda CG [2008] UKAIT 00065, that  in
    order to  establish  risk,  the  appellant  must  show  not  only  that
    homosexuality is criminalised in law, but that there is a real risk  of
    persecution, either from state or non-state actors.  My  attention  has
    been drawn to the skeleton argument which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and which summarised the country  evidence,  with  particular
    reference to the country expert evidence of Dr Hammond:

             "The  country  situation  in  Somalia  for  LGBTI  persons  is
             addressed  in  Dr  Hammond's  expert  reports  [A/150(i)]  and
             [A1/21].  In summary:

             a.   Sexual preference is  a  taboo  subject  in  Somalia  and
                  cultural stigmatisation is widespread [A/150(xii)];

             b.   Homosexuality is  considered  extremely  aberrant,  often
                  seen  as  imported  through  corrupt  foreign   influences
                  [ibid];

             c.    Article  409  of  the  Penal  Code  (Decree  No  5/1962)
                  criminalises  'carnal  intercourse'  with  the  same  sex,
                  punishable - where the act  does  not  constitute  a  more
                  serious crime - with imprisonment  from  three  months  to
                  three years [ibid];

             d.   The punishment under Sharia law is more severe, including
                  flogging or other forms of physical  harm,  and  execution
                  [A/150(xiii)] - [A/150(xiv)];

             e.   Al Shabaab have carried out executions in Barawe of those
                  accusing of homosexual acts [A1/22(iii)] - [A1/22(iv)]."

10. It is clear from that summary, which Mr Kotas did  not  challenge,  and
    from the underlying evidence in the First-tier Tribunal bundle, which I
    have read and considered, that not only is  homosexuality  unlawful  in
    the predominantly Muslim country of Somalia, but that there is  a  real
    risk of persecution to those who are, or are perceived to be, gay.

11. It is accepted by the Secretary  of  State  that  this  claimant  is  a
    homosexual and it was not challenged at the hearing that the reason  he
    would be discreet on his return to Somalia, as opposed  to  the  reason
    for any discretion he has shown in the  United  Kingdom,  was  fear  of
    persecution on the basis of being gay.  Nor is it suggested by Mr Kotas
    that his fear is not genuine.

12. Given that the prohibition of homosexuality in Somalia is part  of  the
    country's criminal legislation,  internal  flight  does  not  arise  in
    relation to his homosexuality and it is also clear that some executions
    have been carried out during the Al Shabaab period.

13. The claimant's discretion while in the United Kingdom,  such  that  his
    family are not aware of his orientation, is expressly not considered to
    be predictive of his actions on return.  There was clear,  unchallenged
    evidence that the claimant would change his behaviour  on  return,  not
    out of social pressures, or for cultural reasons,  as  he  has  in  the
    United Kingdom, but because in Somalia he fears physical harm or  death
    if he is known to be gay.

14. The Upper Tribunal may only interfere with a finding  of  fact  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the limited circumstances set out in the opinion
    of Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) at [90]:  that the finding  of  fact
    is perverse, unreasonable, in the teeth of the  evidence  or  otherwise
    incomprehensible  to  the  reviewing  Judge.   There  was   more   than
    sufficient material before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  support  the
    robust  finding  at  [83]  and  any  want  of  detailed  reasoning   is
    immaterial, on this factual matrix, to the outcome of the appeal.  This
    particular finding is none of those and  accordingly,  I  am  satisfied
    that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that  the  claimant
    was at risk of persecution in Somalia by reason of his accepted  sexual
    orientation.

15. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and I uphold the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        14 September 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

