
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00096/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 23rd May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     MAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit and Ms V Lovejoy of Counsel, instructed
                    by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Somalia  born  in  1993,  who  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse his  protection  and  human
    rights claim dated 12 July 2016.  His appeal was heard and dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis in a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    October 2016, from which he was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 16 January 2017  (annexed
    to this decision), Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor found an error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect of the appeal  on  the
    grounds of Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;
    set aside the decision and directed that it be  re-made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There was no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's findings
    in relation to the  application  of  section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or paragraph 339D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and consequently, the conclusions  in  relation  to  the  Refugee
    Convention and humanitarian protection remain standing.

Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights:  Relevant  legal
background and Country Guidance

 2. So far as is relevant to this appeal, section 32 of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 states that a foreign criminal is a person who is  not  a  British
    Citizen, who is convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months.   Section
    32(5) of the Act requires the Secretary of State to make a  deportation
    order in respect of a foreign criminal unless one of the exceptions  in
    section 33 applies.  The  first  exception  is  where  removal  of  the
    foreign criminal would breach  his  or  her  rights  protected  by  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (or would place the United  Kingdom
    in breach of its obligations under the Refugee  Convention  -  although
    for the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant  is
    excluded from protection under the  Refugee  Convention  by  virtue  of
    section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

 3. In relation to the Appellant's claim that his deportation would  breach
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  the  burden  of
    proof is on the  Appellant  to  the  lower  standard  of  a  reasonable
    likelihood of serious harm.

 4. The parties are both agreed that the Country  Guidance  in  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) is  applicable
    to the present appeal and neither party seeks any  departure  from  it.
    Aside from the broad  findings  that  generally  a  person  who  is  an
    ordinary civilian would not be at risk on return to Mogadishu by reason
    of absence  abroad,  general  security  situation  there,  from  forced
    recruitment  by  Al-Shabaab  or  for  any  reason  relating   to   clan
    membership; the key  findings  for  the  purposes  of  this  appeal  as
    summarised in the headnote (taken from paragraphs 407(f) to  (h),  408,
    424  and  425  (the  last  two  specifically  dealing   with   internal
    relocation)) are as follows:

         (vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of  absence
         will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
         for  assistance  in  re-establishing   himself   and   securing   a
         livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek assistance from  his
         clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only  likely
         to be forthcoming from majority clan members, as minority clans may
         have little to offer.

         (viii)  The  significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
         changed.  Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms
         and assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
         protection function than previously.  There are no clan militias in
         Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan-based  discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members.

         (ix) If it is accepted that a person  facing  return  to  Mogadishu
         after a period of absence has no nuclear family or close  relatives
         in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
         there  will  need  to  be  a  careful   assessment   of   all   the
         circumstances.  These considerations  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to:


          . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure:
          . length of absence from Mogadishu;
          . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
          . access to financial resources;
          . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that  be  employment
            or self-employment;
          . availability of remittances from abroad;
          . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
          . why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
            enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

         (x) Put another way, it will be for the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.

         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
         support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and
         who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
         return who will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
         falling below that which is acceptable in  humanitarian  protection
         terms.

         (xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
         who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live
         in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
         facing a real risk of destitution.  On the other  hand,  relocation
         in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no  formal  links
         to the city, no access to funds and no other form of  clan,  family
         or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in the absence of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real prospect of having to live in conditions that will fall  below
         acceptable humanitarian standards.

 5. In terms of the Article 3 threshold to be applied, the parties are also
    in agreement that the present case is not a "paradigm" case as in MSS v
    Belgium & Greece 53 EHRR 28 but as confirmed by the Court of Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ  442,
    Article 3 was intended to protect  persons  from  violations  of  their
    civil and political rights, not their social and economic rights.   The
    return of a person who was  not  at  risk  of  harm  because  of  armed
    conflict or violence would not in  the  case  of  economic  deprivation
    violate Article 3 unless the circumstances were such as those in N v UK
    [2005] 2 AC 296 (as summarised by Lady Justice Arden in paragraph 34 of
    MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 994).  The main conclusion on this point in Said is at paragraph 18
    which states as follows:

         "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal  on
         article 3 grounds on the basis of suggested poverty or  deprivation
         on return which are not the responsibility of the receiving country
         or others in the sense described in para  282  of  Sufi  and  Elmi,
         whether or not the feared deprivation is contributed to by  medical
         condition, the person liable to deportation must show circumstances
         which bring him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court in  the
         D and N cases."

 6. There is some concern expressed by the Court of Appeal in  Said  as  to
    possible conflation between  factors  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    internal relocation, humanitarian protection  and  Article  3  in  MOJ,
    which need to be set out in full.  The discussion is at  paragraphs  26
    to 31 which states as follows:

         "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are directed to the issue that  arises
         under article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Sub-paragraphs
         (f) and (g) establish  the  role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
         Mogadishu, and the current absence of  risk  from  belonging  to  a
         minority clan.  Sub-paragraph (h) and paragraph 408 are  concerned,
         in broad terms, with the ability of a returning Somali national  to
         support himself.  The conclusion at the end of paragraph 408 raises
         the possibility of a person's circumstances failing below what  "is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms".  It is, with respect,
         unclear whether that is a  reference  back  to  the  definition  of
         "humanitarian  protection"  arising  from   article   15   of   the
         Qualification Directive.  These factors do not  go  to  inform  any
         question under article 15(c).   Nor  does  it  chime  with  article
         15(b), which draws on the language of article 3 of the  Convention,
         because the fact that a person might be returned to  very  deprived
         living conditions, could not (save in  extreme  cases)  lead  to  a
         conclusion that removal would violate article 3.

         ...

         28. In view of the reference in the paragraph immediately preceding
         para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras 407(h) and 408
         are likely to have been  introduced  in  connection  with  internal
         flight  or  internal  relocation  arguments,  which  was  a  factor
         identified in para 1 setting out the scope  of  the  issues  before
         UTIAC.  Whilst they may have some relevance in a search for whether
         a removal to Somalia would give rise to a violation of article 3 of
         the Convention, they cannot be understood as  a  surrogate  for  an
         examination of the circumstances to determine whether such a breach
         would occur.  I am unable to accept that if a Somali national  were
         able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he would  have
         established that his removal to Somalia would breach article  3  of
         the Convention.  Such an approach would be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and  Convention  jurisprudence  which  at  para  34  UTIAC
         expressly understood itself to be following.

         29. Having set out its guidance,  UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
         IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.   It
         recognised that  the  label  was  problematic  because  there  were
         individuals who are considered as internally displaced persons  who
         have settled in a new part of Somalia in "a reasonable standard  of
         accommodation" and with access to food, remittances from abroad  or
         an independent livelihood.   UTIAC  considered  that  the  position
         would be different for someone obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the
         conditions  of  some  of  which  "are  appalling",  para  411.   It
         continued by quoting from evidence of armed attacks on  IDP  camps,
         of  sexual  and  other  gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible
         recruitment of internally displaced children into violence,  albeit
         that it  did  not  accept  the  evidence  it  quoted.   UTIAC  also
         mentioned overcrowding, poor  health  conditions  and  (ironically)
         that  the  economic  improvements  in  Mogadishu  were  leading  to
         evictions from IDP camps in urban centres with  vulnerable  victims
         being unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         30.  It  is  immediately  apparent  that  the  discussion  of  this
         evidence, which  is  culled  from  expert  reports,  understandably
         touches on concerns about violence, which in article 3 terms  would
         be analysed by reference to the approach in MSS and Sufi  and  Elmi
         cases, and aspects of  destitution,  which  would  be  analysed  by
         reference to the approach in the N and  D  cases.   The  conflation
         continues in para 412:

             "Given what we have  seen,  and  described  above,  about  the
             extremely harsh living  conditions,  and  the  risk  of  being
             subjected to a range of human rights abuses, such a person  is
             likely to found to be living  at  a  level  that  falls  below
             acceptable humanitarian standards."

         Having further discussed the contradictory evidence about how  many
         people lived in IDP camps, UTIAC concluded that "many thousands  of
         people are reduced  to  living  in  circumstances  of  destitution"
         albeit that there was no reliable figure of how many  people  lived
         in such destitution in IDP camps.  The determination continued:

             "420. Whilst it is likely that those who  do  find  themselves
             living in inadequate makeshift accommodation in  an  IDP  camp
             will be experiencing adverse  living  conditions  such  as  to
             engage the protection of article 3 of the ECHR, we do not  see
             that it gives rise to an enhanced  Article  15(c)  risk  since
             there  is  an  insufficient  nexus  with  the   indiscriminate
             violence which, in any event, we have found not to be at  such
             a high level that all civilians face a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm.  Nor does the evidence support  the  claim  that
             there is an enhanced risk of forced recruitment to Al  Shabaab
             for those in the IDP camps or  that  such  a  person  is  more
             likely to be caught up in an Al Shabaab attack ...

             421. Other  than  those  with  no  alternative  to  living  in
             makeshift accommodation  in  an  IDP  camp,  the  humanitarian
             position in Mogadishu  has  continued  to  improve  since  the
             country guidance in AMM was published.  The famine is confined
             to  history  ...  The  "economic  boom"  has  generated   more
             opportunity for employment and ... self-employment.  For  many
             returnees remittances will be important ...

             422. The fact that we have rejected the view that there  is  a
             real risk of persecution or serious harm or ill  treatment  to
             civilian returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that  no  Somali
             national can succeed in a refugee or  humanitarian  protection
             or article 3 claim.  Each case will fall to be decided on  its
             own facts.  As we have observed,  there  will  need  to  be  a
             careful assessment of all the circumstances  of  a  particular
             individual."

         31. I entirely accept that some of the  observations  made  in  the
         course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that
         if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely to end up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3.  Yet such a stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts.  In my judgement the position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered.  An appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
          Impoverished conditions which were the direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself."

 7. The question of whether the risk of deprivation on return would lead to
    a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights was
    revisited in MA (Somalia).  Lady Justice  Arden,  being  bound  by  the
    decision in Said, confirmed that there is no violation of Article 3  by
    reason of a person being returned  to  a  country  which  for  economic
    reasons  can  not  provide  him  with  basic  living  standards.    The
    Respondent in MA contended that the situation in  Somalia  was  brought
    about by conflict, which is recognised by the European Court  of  Human
    Rights as an exception to the analysis.   Lady  Justice  Arden  however
    concluded at paragraph 63 that:

         "... It is true that there has historically been severe conflict in
         Somalia, but, on the basis of MOJ, that would  not  necessarily  be
         the cause of deprivation if the respondent were returned to Somalia
         now.  The evidence is that there is no present reason why a person,
         with support from his family and/or prospects of employment, should
         face unacceptable living standards."

 8. It is well established that in Article 3 cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual is not from treatment emanating from intentionally inflicted
    acts of the public authorities in the receiving state or from those  of
    non-State bodies in that country when the authorities there are  unable
    to afford him appropriate protection; it is only  in  very  exceptional
    circumstances that there would  be  a  violation  of  Article  3.   The
    principles are summarised by the European Court of Human Rights in N as
    follows:

         "42. Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.

         43.  The court does not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling.  However, it considers that it should maintain the high
         threshold set in D v UK ... and applied in its subsequent case law,
         which it regards as correct in principle, given that in such  cases
         the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
         or omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies, but instead
         from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.

         44...  Advances  in  medical  science,  together  with  social  and
         economic differences between countries, entail that  the  level  of
         treatment available in the Contracting State  and  the  country  of
         origin may vary considerably.  While it  is  necessary,  given  the
         fundamental importance of Article 3 in the Convention  system,  for
         the Court to retain a degree of flexibility to prevent expulsion in
         very exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an  obligation  on
         the Contracting State to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the
         provision of free and unlimited healthcare to all aliens without  a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction.  A finding to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."

 9. Separately, the Appellant contends that matters have moved  on  from  D
    and N following the Strasbourg Court's decision in Paposhvili v Belgium
    (Application no. 41738/10) as an extension of the N v UK criteria; such
    that the focus had moved to the decision to  expose  an  individual  to
    harm rather than about the blame for  the  innate  harm  which  may  be
    caused.  However, Paposhvili was in the specific context  of  expulsion
    of individuals suffering from serious illness and found that there  may
    be "other very exceptional cases" within the meaning of N v UK  raising
    an issue under Article 3 where "the removal of a seriously ill  person,
    although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face  a  real  risk,  on
    account of the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
    country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to  a
    serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy .." [paragraph 183].  This was considered by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM Zimbabwe v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA Civ 64 to intend only a modest extension of the  protection
    under Article 3 in medical cases and in  any  event,  at  present,  the
    cases of D and N  remain  binding.   For  all  of  these  reasons,  the
    decision in Paposhvili does not assist the  Appellant  in  the  present
    appeal.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

10. In relation to the Appellant's claim that his deportation would  breach
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  the  burden  of
    proof is on the Appellant to the normal civil standard of  the  balance
    of probabilities.  The requirements in relation to such a claim, in  so
    far as they are set out in the Immigration Rules  and  relate  to  this
    appeal are:


    "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
    the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, and
          a) ...
          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least  12
             months; or
          c) ...,
    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

     399. ...

    399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -


          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and
          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

11. By virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Part V of that Act applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

12. Section 117A applies to the public interest considerations in all cases
    and section 117C applies additional considerations to  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  So far as relevant to this appeal,  those  sections
    provide:


    "Section 117B.  Article 8: public interest consideration applicable  in
    all cases


      1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
         interest.
      2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English -
          a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
          b) are better able to integrate into society.
      3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons -
        (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
    ...


    117C. Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
criminals

      1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.
      4) Exception 1 applies where -
          a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,
          b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and
          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
      5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
      6) In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
      7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
         account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a  decision  to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

13. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662, the Court of Appeal held that on a proper construction of
    section 117C(3) for "medium offenders" (i.e. those  with  sentences  of
    between one and four years' imprisonment) there  should  be  added  "or
    unless there are very compelling circumstances, over  and  above  those
    described in  Exceptions  1  and  2"  at  the  end.   This  brings  the
    provisions in section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act  in  line  with  those  in  paragraph  398  and  following  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. A broad approach should apply to the analysis of a  foreign  criminal's
    integration into the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  he  be
    deported.  Lord Justice Sales held as follows in Kamara v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] 4 WLR 152, at paragraph 14:

    "The concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into the country  to
    which it is proposed that  he  be  deported,  as  set  out  in  section
    117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one.  It is not  confined  to
    the mere ability to find a job or sustain  life  while  living  in  the
    other country.  It is not appropriate to treat the  statutory  language
    as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court
    or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that  Parliament  has
    chosen to use.  The idea of "integration" calls for a broad  evaluative
    judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of  an
    insider in terms of understanding how life in the society of that other
    country is carried on and a capacity to participate in  it,  so  as  to
    have a reasonable opportunity to be  accepted  there,  to  be  able  to
    operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within  a
    reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance  to
    the individual's private or family life."

The Respondent's decision

15. In his decision letter dated 7 July 2016, the Respondent dealt  firstly
    with the  revocation  of  the  Appellant's  refugee  status,  then  his
    exclusion from Humanitarian Protection, the application of  section  72
    of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  finally
    considered the Appellant's right to  respect  for  private  and  family
    life.  The Appellant's claim that his removal to Somalia  would  be  in
    breach of Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  was
    considered within the section dealing with cessation of refugee status.



16. In reliance on  the  country  guidance  case  of  MOJ,  the  Respondent
    considered that the Appellant had the option of accessing support  from
    clan members as well as being supported by financial  remittances  from
    abroad and that there  was  no  risk  of  harm  to  him  on  return  to
    Mogadishu.  It was further considered that there  were  no  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration in Somalia, as an adult male
    in reasonable health he was able to adapt to life in the United Kingdom
    and had  sufficient  ties  to  Somalia,  including  language,  cultural
    background and social network.  The Appellant  would  be  able  to  use
    skills gained in the  United  Kingdom  to  gain  lawful  employment  in
    Somalia.

17. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    the Respondent considered the Appellant's circumstances  in  accordance
    with paragraphs 398 to 399 of the Immigration Rules and section 117A to
    117D  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The
    Appellant had not established  any  family  life  with  children  or  a
    partner in the United Kingdom such that he could not meet  any  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.

18. In relation to private life, the Respondent did  not  accept  that  the
    exception in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  was  met  because
    although the Appellant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
    for most of his life, it was not accepted  that  he  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom  due  to  his  criminal
    history.  It was also not accepted that there would be very significant
    obstacles to his integration to Somalia  because  he  could  learn  the
    culture  and  language  there,  albeit  he  would  have  retained  some
    knowledge of  his  mother  tongue  and  he  would  have  retained  some
    familiarity of with the country from his childhood.  The Appellant  was
    considered to be able to find accommodation in Mogadishu, with  support
    from family and friends in the United Kingdom  if  needed.   He  was  a
    healthy, adult male who  could  find  employment  in  Mogadishu.   With
    reliance on the detail of the Appellant's criminal history, there  were
    no very compelling circumstances to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.



The evidence

19. I had before me a large  bundle  of  specific  and  background  country
    evidence in relation to the current situation in Mogadishu as  well  as
    Somalia  more  generally,  together  with  reports  from   two   expert
    witnesses, evidence from the Appellant and  his  immediate  family  and
    substantial written  submissions  from  the  parties.   I  set  out  in
    relatively more detail below the expert evidence and  witness  evidence
    in this appeal and refer to  the  wider  background  information  where
    relevant.  I have taken into account the background  evidence  in  full
    when determining this appeal, although it is not necessary to refer  to
    each and every part of it in this decision  and  the  lack  of  express
    reference  to  it  should  not  be  taken  to  indicate  any  lack   of
    consideration of the same.

Expert evidence

20. The Appellant relies on reports from two experts, first,  Dr  S  Bekalo
    (Med, PhD), a  Research  and  Development  Education  Fellow  at  Leeds
    University who has first-hand experience of  living  and  working  with
    people of East/Horn of Africa since the 1960s and has written  articles
    and reports in particular in relation to Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia and
    the Sudan.  Secondly, Dr J Mullen (PhD) who  was  previously  a  Senior
    Lecturer in International Development and Conflict at the University of
    Manchester and who has held a number of other  academic,  director  and
    advisory posts with a particular interest and focus on Somalia over  an
    extended period of time.

21. There is a report dated 4 May 2017 and an addendum report dated  8  May
    2017 from Dr Bekalo, the latter in response  to  queries  and  comments
    from the Respondent.  In the  main  report,  Dr  Bekalo  was  asked  to
    comment on the problems the Appellant would likely face if returned  to
    Somalia with his profile, in particular his inability to  speak  Somali
    and limited ability to speak Swahili, in relation to the  prospects  of
    integration and securing access to livelihoods: being a  returnee  from
    the United Kingdom with little or no clan, family contacts  or  support
    network; and the overall issues of return or internal relocation within
    Somalia for the Appellant.

22. In relation to language, Dr Bekalo refers to Somali being the main  and
    only language across Somalia (except perhaps in  the  southern  coastal
    areas near the Bajuni Islands were similar family languages  of  Bajuni
    and Swahili are  spoken)  and  the  inability  to  speak  Somali  would
    seriously affect a person's integration into society and their  ability
    to secure livelihood opportunities.   The  Appellant's  proficiency  or
    lack of proficiency in Swahili would not have any significant value  in
    the context of Somalia  as  it  is  not  widely  used.   English  would
    potentially be useful in large cities in Somalia but is not necessarily
    vital as it is not widely used and would mostly be useful for  a  high-
    profile job or a high-profile institution, but securing such employment
    would not be solely dependent on English language ability but  also  to
    do with having the right contacts and other skills.  Dr Bekalo referred
    to the need for a person to have particular qualifications or a special
    skill  set  to  access  the  scarce  opportunities  in   the   fiercely
    competitive job markets in Somalia.  English in addition to  Somali  is
    an asset but Somali would be an essential requirement  locally  to  run
    any business  or  survive  in  the  wider  socio-economic  culture  and
    economy.

23. As to  country  conditions,  Dr  Bekalo  acknowledged  the  encouraging
    efforts in positive progress in Mogadishu referred to in MOJ but  noted
    that the government and allied forces are still  struggling  to  defend
    their own institutions and VIPs, let alone  safeguard  the  safety  and
    security of vulnerable individuals and minority groups.  He states that
    travel throughout Somalia remains extremely dangerous.   Further,  that
    despite this, well-connected Somalis from the  diaspora  have  recently
    started returning to Somalia to start a new life  but  those  returnees
    are relatively few and far between.   Of  those  who  have  managed  to
    maintain and/or establish some sort of in-country family  had  powerful
    clan connections  and  financial  backing;  and  even  those  were  not
    adequately safe and protected even in Mogadishu.  He  refers  to  other
    risks  of  mistreatment,  including  forced  recruitment,   traditional
    discrimination based on clan membership and risks on  return  from  the
    West as cultural outsiders.

24. Dr Mullen was specifically asked to comment  on  three  things  in  his
    report  dated  27  September  2017.   First,  the  Respondent's  second
    skeleton  argument  regarding  constitution  of  IDP  camps  and   clan
    affiliation; secondly, the significance of the Appellant's inability to
    speak Somali; and finally, the reach  and  influence  of  the  Benadiri
    clan.

25. Following his initial report, Dr Mullen was asked 21 questions  by  the
    Respondent, the answers to which he provided together with  an  amended
    version   of   his   original   report   incorporating   the   answers.
    Unfortunately, the questions asked have not been provided to the  Upper
    Tribunal but the answers and  the  amended  report  read  together  are
    largely self-explanatory and to a  great  extent  explain  Dr  Mullen's
    views on the reliability of other background evidence, detail as to IDP
    camps and about the Appellant's clan and sub-clan.   The  following  is
    taken from the amended composite report dated 5 November 2017.

26. Dr Mullen responded first to the Respondent's submissions  in  relation
    to the constitution of IDP camps and clan  affiliation,  detailing  the
    drivers for internal displacement, including  armed  conflict,  natural
    disasters, economic migrants and eviction.  Some migration is temporary
    and happens on a regular basis, with links to agricultural seasons  and
    post-famine returns to agricultural areas; some driven by returns  from
    the Afgoye corridor IDP camp and others due to expulsion from IDP sites
    in  the  inner  city  where  land  values  have  rocketed.   Dr  Mullen
    questioned the reliability of  some  of  the  organisations  which  the
    Respondent  relies  on  reports  from  and  consider  some  to  be   to
    statistically-based without sufficient reference to human experience or
    understanding of conditions in Mogadishu over a longer period of time.

27. In relation to the Appellant's inability to  speak  Somali,  Dr  Mullen
    states that the spoken  languages  in  Mogadishu  are  Somali,  Arabic,
    English and Italian, the latter two being  widely  spoken  by  diaspora
    returnees but the vast majority of ordinary people use  Somali  as  the
    language of day-to-day communication.  Swahili is spoken and understood
    by the Kenyan community in the city as well as Somalis  who  come  from
    Kenyan border areas.  Dr Mullen says that  language  is  a  key  social
    skill  to  summon  relationships  in  the  context  of   a   networking
    environment and a person would need to be  fluent  in  Somali  to  make
    personal contact and establish clan relations to act as a catalyst  for
    access to livelihood opportunities.  Dr Mullen considers that a lack of
    ability to speak Somali makes a person vulnerable as it would mark them
    out  as  a  foreigner  to  be  exploited,  socially  marginalised   and
    potentially at risk  of  recruitment  by  Al-Shabaab  for  his  English
    language ability.  There is  also  general  discontent  with  returning
    diaspora taking away jobs from the local population.

28. Dr Mullen refers to reported evidence that the Benadiri clan as a group
    are returning back to Mogadishu, although they are not accepted to be a
    homogenous clan as such (instead the term was used to denote groups  of
    elite  professionals  and  business  people  of  Arabian  heritage  who
    previously dominated the commercial scene in Mogadishu).  The  Benadiri
    are a family of smaller clans under the generic name of Reer Hamar with
    sub clams prominent in different districts of Mogadishu.  The Appellant
    belongs to one of the least influential Reer Hamar  sub-sub-clans,  the
    Qalmashube which only has weak scope as a social network support.   The
    segmented nature  of  subclan's,  sub-subclan's  and  sub-sub-subclan's
    means that there would be no perceived social obligation  to  assist  a
    person of the same smaller grouping.

29. A returning person may be impacted by their  criminal  history  in  the
    United Kingdom, depending on the degree to which the  social  mores  of
    the subclan in question had been infringed upon.  There is  however  no
    specific document setting out social laws or  their  hierarchy  but  Dr
    Mullen's experiences that these are equated to mainstream Sunni  Islam.
    In some cases criminal offences are an impediment to  return,  but  not
    for the voluntary repatriation of refugees from Kenya to Somalia.

30. In a postscript in the amended report from Dr Mullen, he sets  out  his
    view that since 2015 there has been a  deterioration  in  the  security
    situation  in  Mogadishu  mainly  due  to  a  resurgence  in   military
    competence     of     Al     Shabaab     and      their      increasing
    geographical/administrative  control  of  the  adjoining   regions   to
    Mogadishu which jeopardises the expected levels of security.

31. A further report dated 14 February 2018 from Dr  Mullen  was  submitted
    just prior to the appeal hearing as an addendum report on the basis  of
    significant developments since November 2017.  It  is  unclear  whether
    this was specifically requested by the Appellant  or  produced  on  the
    initiative of Dr Mullen.  This addendum report comments  first  on  the
    stability, or instability and vulnerability of a mobile IDP population.
     In particular, reference is made to  large-scale  destruction  of  IDP
    settlements on the outskirts of Mogadishu and  a  statement  about  the
    same dated 1 January 2018 from the Deputy Special Representative of the
    Secretary General, Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator  for  Somalia.
    That statement  referred  to  23  IDP  settlements  housing  over  4000
    households being destroyed on 29 and 30 December 2017  with  no  notice
    and resulting in further  displaced  persons  and  that  there  were  2
    million people displaced due to drought and  conflict,  half  of  which
    were newly displaced in 2017.

32. The  addendum  report  also  questions  continued  economic  growth  in
    Mogadishu with an unexpected major slowdown of  anticipated  growth  in
    2017 to between 1.5% and 2.5%, down from annual  growth  rates  in  the
    previous three years of 5 to 6%, albeit growth is expected to  pick  up
    in subsequent years and to grow steadily  over  the  medium  term.   Dr
    Mullen  states  that  a  drought  in  2017  and  deterioration  of  the
    humanitarian situation  in  Somalia  have  contributed  in  turn  to  a
    reduction in labour market opportunities, increased underemployment and
    unemployment and restricted opportunities for hiring  new  recruits  as
    well as creating further opportunities for recruitment  into  extremist
    movements.  Insecurity is considered to be a  relevant  factor  in  the
    slowdown.

33. Finally, Dr Mullen refers to increasing security challenges  from  both
    Al Shabaab and ISIS and a possible downplaying of the actual  state  of
    security and inability to secure that issue effectively.

34. Dr Mullen attended the hearing, adopted his written  reports  and  gave
    oral evidence in English.  He was  asked  very  detailed  questions  in
    cross examination by the Home Office Presenting Officer  in  particular
    about the evidence in relation to IDP settlements and the organisations
    involved in compiling certain  reports.   Although  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, significant concern was expressed about the reliability  of
    some of Dr Mullen's evidence and the impartiality of some of his views,
    I do not consider it necessary to set  out  the  very  detailed  points
    raised on both sides because the very specific nature of  most  of  the
    points raised  does  not  directly  affect  the  Appellant's  claim  or
    determination of this appeal, not least because there are no individual
    pieces of background evidence which are determinative and in many areas
    there was broad agreement.  For example, in general it was agreed  that
    there  were  vulnerabilities  within  IDP  households  caused  by   the
    (relatively large) number of people in a household, the fact  that  the
    majority were female-headed, that the  majority  were  illiterate;  had
    only very informal access to employment and that the  majority  of  IDP
    inhabitants were children.  Dr Mullen did however note that there  were
    different vulnerabilities for international returnees who are  forcibly
    returned although they did not fit within the general IDP profile.

35. In relation to the position of the Reer Hamar, Dr  Mullen  stated  that
    they were a numerical but not social minority  in  Mogadishu  and  that
    they were returning there to resume economic  activity  having  been  a
    successful mercantile and cultural group  before  the  Civil  War.   Dr
    Mullen emphasised the importance of the clan based in Mogadishu  for  a
    pool of available support for an individual and the  lack  of  evidence
    either way as to access to economic opportunities for a person  in  the
    Appellant's subclan.   There  was  nothing  to  suggest  discriminatory
    access to  or  preventing  employment  in  particular  occupations  for
    particular clans although culturally some jobs were not  undertaken  by
    specific subclans.

36. Dr Mullen accepted that the use  of  English  has  expanded  education,
    particularly in the tertiary sector and is the language of commerce and
    business  for  high-level  employment  although  not  necessarily   for
    vocational skills.  His view was that it was  still  essential  that  a
    person spoke Somali as well as English.

37. Dr Mullen accepted that simpler housing could be found in Mogadishu for
    $40-$80 per month.

38.  In  re-examination,  Dr  Mullen  stated  that  the  vulnerability  for
    returnees in relation to the risk of ending up in an IDP camp  was  the
    lack of social support network mechanisms which needed to be primed for
    use, for example with finances which could be used to trigger  support.
    He stated that there is a social expectation of available resources  to
    those returning from abroad and clan support was given on a  reciprocal
    basis.

39. Dr Mullen was asked how a person could identify that they were from the
    same clan as another.  He stated that one way of doing  this  would  be
    through language or dialect, otherwise skin colour and  tone  would  be
    considered although this does not always work for genetic  reasons  and
    because of previous intermarriages between clans.   The  other  way  to
    corroborate a person's claim to have a particular clan would be through
    knowledge of the earlier generations in  their  family.   The  standard
    knowledge is to go back 10 generations of the male line in  the  family
    with some being able to go back up to  30  generations  to  trace  clan
    membership.  This information can be confirmed by  other  clan  members
    and elders.

Witness evidence on behalf of the Appellant

40. In the Appellant's written statement  signed  and  dated  16  September
    2016, he stated that he was a Somali national,  who  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom at a young age with  his  family  and  was  subsequently
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  He attended primary and  secondary
    education United Kingdom and describes having  changed  since  entering
    prison, completing a number of  courses  whilst  in  detention.   These
    include carpentry, painting and decorating, a BICs cleaning  course,  a
    barber course, an alcohol awareness course, a  drugs  awareness  course
    and a victim awareness  course.   Since  his  release  from  prison  he
    describes assisting his parents who are both in ill-health.  All of the
    Appellant's family are in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  mother,  father,
    siblings as well as uncles and cousins.   He  states  that  he  has  no
    family remaining in Somalia and does not even speak  Somali  any  more.
    The Appellant is concerned that he would be a target for  Al-Shabab  on
    return to Somalia.

41. There are also a number of undated letters  from  the  Appellant  which
    refer to his criminal offending, his fear on  return  to  Somalia,  his
    family and educational background in United Kingdom.

42. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, confirmed his details, adopted
    the written statements referred to above  and  gave  oral  evidence  in
    English.   In  cross-examination  he  confirmed  the  immediate  family
    members he has in the United Kingdom as well as  probably  five  uncles
    and one aunt, although he stated that he doesn't really  keep  up  with
    his wider family as they have their own  problems  and  he  has  little
    contact with them apart from on formal family occasions.  He said  that
    his wider family did not help him in the  United  Kingdom  so  couldn't
    support him if he was overseas.  The Appellant had asked for  help  but
    they had said that the could not help him as they have their own family
    and bills to pay.  There had not been any  request  that  they  confirm
    that in writing.

43. The Appellant speaks Swahili  and  English  at  home  and  although  he
    accepted that his father spoke Somali, he did not speak this at home as
    no other family members understood  it.   The  Appellant  said  he  was
    brought up by his parents without any knowledge of his clan  or  family
    history, that his parents never mentioned this  and  he  did  not  know
    anything about it.

44. In her written  statement  signed  and  dated  27  February  2017,  the
    Appellant's mother stated that the Appellant  had  no  family  left  in
    Somalia, could not speak Somali and left the country when he was a year
    old as the family fled to Kenya.  The family are from a  minority  clan
    subject to severe  discrimination  and  persecution  in  Somalia.   The
    Appellant would not have any clan protection and would be at risk  from
    terrorists in Somalia.   In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Appellant  has
    changed since his criminal convictions and supports his  parents.   The
    Appellant's parents would  not  be  able  to  send  any  money  to  the
    Appellant in Somalia as  they  barely  make  ends  meet  on  the  state
    benefits that they receive.

45. The  Appellant's  mother  attended  the  oral  hearing,  confirmed  her
    details, adopted her written statement referred to above and gave  oral
    evidence with the assistance of a court-appointed Swahili  interpreter.
    She confirmed that she was born in Somalia in Ras Kamboni in  1970  and
    only lived in Mogadishu for  a  short  period  of  time  after  getting
    married.  Her husband was from Mogadishu but the family home was in Ras
    Kamboni.  The Appellant's mother speaks Swahili, the language spoken at
    home by her and her husband and the children.  Her husband also  speaks
    Somali and the Af-reer hamar dialect.   The  Appellant's  mother  knows
    something about her family traditions, but not going  back  as  far  as
    even five generations.  The Appellant's mother was an only  child,  her
    parents are dead, there is no family left in Somalia  and  she  has  no
    direct relatives in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's mother  stated
    that wider family members  had  been  asked  if  they  could  help  the
    Appellant, but they have their own  responsibilities  and  children  to
    support the could not do so.  She did not know that any  evidence  from
    them would be needed and her brother-in-law  had  recently  suffered  a
    bereavement so could not have come to the appeal hearing in any event.

46. In his written  statement  signed  and  dated  27  February  2017,  the
    Appellant's father stated that the Appellant travelled from Somalia  to
    the United Kingdom on 16 February 2000 and was granted indefinite leave
    to remain.   The  family  had  fled  Somalia  because  of  the  dangers
    happening  at  that  time  and  which  continue.   All  of  his  former
    connections to Somalia are either dead or have fled the  country.   The
    Appellant comes from a very small clan named Rerhamar  Khalansubb,  who
    are victimised by the larger clans and the Appellant has no contacts in
    Somalia and does not speak the language.   The  Appellant's  father  is
    concerned that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Somalia.  He
    would not be able to afford to send him any money if  he  returned  and
    the Appellant was relied upon for support to his parents.

47. The  Appellant's  father  attended  the  oral  hearing,  confirmed  his
    details, adopted his written statement referred to above and gave  oral
    evidence with the assistance of a court-appointed Swahili  interpreter.
    In cross-examination he confirmed that he was born in Mogadishu in 1963
    and remained there until fleeing from the civil war as a young man.  He
    stated that his family home  with  his  wife  was  in  Mogadishu.   The
    Appellant's father speaks Somali, the Af-reer hamar dialect and  speaks
    Swahili with his family as that is the common language he has with  his
    wife.  He learnt Swahili from involvement in business  in  Somalia  and
    travel to coastal areas where it is a common language.  When he was  in
    Mogadishu, it was common for others to speak and understand Swahili.

48. The Appellant's father knows his family to an extent, up to  his  great
    grandfather.  They are all now deceased, but he knows  where  they  are
    buried in Mogadishu.  The Appellant's father has  tried  to  teach  his
    children their clan traditions and clan/family history but stated  that
    sometimes they pay attention and sometimes not as modern  children  who
    were very western  in  their  ways.   Specifically,  he  had  told  the
    Appellant his clan some time ago  and  that  he  was  named  after  his
    father's great grandfather.  In re-examination, the Appellant's  father
    said that he told the Appellant about his clan in the  United  Kingdom,
    not when he was very young as he would be too young to  know  important
    information, but later and when he was told  he  would  listen  but  he
    couldn't be sure whether the information was retained  or  whether  the
    Appellant was interested in it.

49. In her written statement signed  and  dated  27th  February  2017,  the
    Appellant's sister set out details about  her  family  consistent  with
    what her parents had said; that she fears about the Appellant's  safety
    on return to Somalia where he has no family left and that  neither  she
    nor her parents would be able to send any money  to  the  Appellant  to
    assist him.

50. The  Appellant's  sister  attended  the  oral  hearing,  confirmed  her
    details, adopted her  written  statement  and  gave  oral  evidence  in
    English.  In cross-examination she confirmed  that  she  was  a  single
    mother in receipt of benefits and had  recently  been  made  redundant.
    She was not sure if any extended  family  members  had  been  asked  to
    financially support the Appellant and only knows of one uncle  and  one
    aunt in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's father had spoken  to  her
    about their culture and clan but she was not  specifically  told  about
    his father or grandfather.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

51. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel submitted that  for  the  following
    reasons, there was a real risk that the Appellant would  be  forced  to
    resort to living in an  IDP  camp  in  conditions  which  would  breach
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights:

    a) the Appellant has been absent from Mogadishu since the  age  of  one
       and therefore has no meaningful knowledge of life in Mogadishu or in
       fact in Somalia;

    b) all of the Appellant's family are in the United Kingdom and  he  has
       no personal family or other links  in  Mogadishu,  or  elsewhere  in
       Somalia;

    c) the Appellant will have no recourse to resources either in the  form
       of family assets left behind in Somalia by his family (because there
       are none) or from the Respondent  as  he  would  be  ineligible  for
       financial assistance under the Facilitated Return Scheme;

    d) the Appellant will have no recourse to financial support from family
       in the United Kingdom as none can reasonably afford it;

    e) the Appellant is unlikely  to  benefit  from  any  financial  social
       support from fellow clan members given his clan membership will  not
       be identifiable because he has no family links in Somalia  and  does
       not speak Somali, let alone any  dialect  or  accent  of  Somali  by
       reference to which his clan membership can be established.   In  any
       event, the Appellant is from a minority clan and a  particular  sub-
       clan and sub-sub-clan that is unlikely to be  able  to  provide  any
       assistance;

    f) the Appellant would be unlikely to access  employment  opportunities
       brought about by the economic boom in Somalia because  he  does  not
       speak the principal language of the country and his English language
       would only be a benefit in addition to that and not of itself.   The
       Appellant is also illiterate in Somali and even if  he  could  learn
       the language he would  not  be  able  to  do  so  in  the  immediate
       aftermath of deportation; and

    g)  the  Appellant  would  also  be  unable  to  access  the   economic
       opportunities brought about by the  economic  boom  because  of  his
       criminal record and continuing addictions to alcohol and drugs, both
       of which make him inherently unsuitable for employment.

52. Although it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that living  in  an
    IDP camp would not per se be a breach of Article 3 because there  is  a
    spectrum of conditions between locations, it remained  the  Appellant's
    claim that he would be forced to resort to a camp with dire  conditions
    which would reach this threshold.

53. In relation to the Appellant's claim under Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, by  reference  to  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and section 117C of the Nationality, immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, it was submitted that the Appellant had lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for most  of  his  life,  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the  United  Kingdom  and  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Somalia  such  that  his  deportation
    would be a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for
    private and family life.



Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

54. The  Respondent  submitted  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    threshold to show a breach of Article 3 by his  removal  to  Mogadishu,
    and the burden was on him  to  show  that  he  would  not  receive  any
    support, could not find employment in  Mogadishu  and  could  not  take
    advantage of the economic boom from recent years.   The  Appellant  had
    not  provided  sufficient  evidence  of  no  financial  support   being
    available from immediate or wider family in the United  Kingdom,  there
    was a lack of documentary evidence  such  as  bank  statements  and  no
    reasonable explanation why such evidence had not been  provided.   This
    is particularly important in the context of the evidence  in  MOJ  that
    the baseline for IDPs in Mogadishu was about two dollars  a  day,  such
    that even a little financial assistance from the United  Kingdom  could
    go a long way and be significant for the Appellant.

55. The Respondent's case was that the Appellant, as a  returnee  from  the
    West who spoke English  and  some  Swahili,  had  work  experience  and
    qualifications including those useful to  the  economic  conditions  in
    Mogadishu, would be able to access livelihood opportunities  and  would
    not end up in an IDP  camp  with  standards  falling  below  acceptable
    humanitarian standards.  In addition, the Appellant's clan was known to
    be a business and mercantile clan who are returning  to  Mogadishu  and
    rebuilding lives and businesses there.  Returnees are seen as  economic
    assets and there is no evidence that the Appellant would be hindered by
    his past in accessing the same.  Although the Appellant states to  have
    no knowledge about his clan or background, his father had told him this
    information and if needed the Appellant could return with knowledge  of
    his family from his father  to  help  integrate  in  Mogadishu  and  to
    identify himself within his clan.

56. In relation to  English  language,  the  Respondent  submits  that  the
    English language is in widespread use in Mogadishu,  through  education
    and from the diaspora (from Great Britain, America  and  Canada,  where
    English  would  be  a  primary  or  secondary  language).   English  is
    submitted not to be only for  high  profile  jobs  in  a  high  profile
    institution but listed as a simple skill which most employers look for.

57. In relation to employment prospects generally,  the  Respondent  relies
    upon 2016 the IOM report "Youth, Employment and Migration in Mogadishu,
    Kismayo and Baidoa".  From that the Respondent  suggest  that  although
    minority people may find it harder to obtain jobs which are  advertised
    among the more populous clans, there is no definition  of  minority  or
    whether this includes the  Benadiri.   In  any  event,  the  underlying
    reason for advertising and recruitment within a clan is security and in
    fact in some districts clan bias may assist  the  Appellant.   Further,
    clan bias is generally within the realm of highly paid  work  and  most
    employment is relatively clan neutral.

58. In terms of employment for young people (those under the age of 30)  in
    Mogadishu, more than two thirds were employed full-time and just  under
    half had a second job.  Those most likely to face unemployment or under-
    employment were those with a lack of skills or education, with a  third
    of 26 to 30-year-olds having had no  education  at  all  and  education
    provided in Somalia was  not  of  a  high  standard.   Unemployment  in
    Mogadishu was only 6% and long-term unemployment  was  rare.   Reliance
    was placed on the economic boom and  dynamism  of  Mogadishu  with  the
    average income for young workers being $360 a month.  A list of growing
    industries, including construction and hospitality were  set  out  with
    monthly earning salaries in the region of $120 per month for carpentry,
    $70 per month  for  plumbing  and  $65  per  month  as  a  barber.   In
    particular, reliance was placed on the LANDINFO report of 1 April 2016,
    "Somalia: relevant  social  and  economic  conditions  upon  return  to
    Mogadishu" which  stated  that  such  was  the  expansion  of  business
    investment in Mogadishu over the last few  years  that  employers  were
    compelled to use foreign labour in  the  building  and  hotel  services
    industries, including recruitment from  overseas  of  Bangladeshis  and
    Kenyans.

59. The same LANDINFO report refers to simpler housing such as in a dorm or
    so-called iron sheet house costing between $40 and $80 per month,  with
    more expensive three room apartments costing between $100 and $250  per
    month.

60. The Respondent submits that the Appellant would be able to rely at  the
    very least on $100 provided by UKVI at his departure and would be  more
    likely to be able to rely on 750 from the Facilitated  Returns  Scheme
    as a resettlement grant if he applied after completion of his custodial
    sentence.

61. In light of the above, the Respondent does not accept  that  on  return
    the  Appellant  would  reasonably  likely  end  up  living  in  an  IDP
    settlement, but even if he did, there is no uniform experience of  life
    in such a settlement and conditions  vary  significantly,  particularly
    between the older and newer settlements and those which contain persons
    from established Mogadishu clans.  The older settlements were far  more
    ingrained within their host communities,  and  more  secure  with  more
    established livelihood options and  include  clan  elders.   There  was
    significant evidence of the varied nature of settlements  in  Mogadishu
    from REACH in 2015/16 and further evidence from the IOM and SODMA about
    the profile of IDPs in particular settlements, showing the  significant
    majority  being  households  headed  by  women  and  the  majority   of
    inhabitants being children.  In addition, 8% of households had specific
    needs (such as disability, pregnancy, single parents,  serious  medical
    conditions,  unaccompanied  children  and   victims   of   gender-based
    violence).  The vast majority also  come  from  the  Middle  and  Lower
    Shabelle regions, with no connection to the diaspora  and  which  often
    exist as a very large household predominantly  made  up  of  women  and
    children with no urban experience or transferable work skills: as  such
    the majority are specifically vulnerable.

62. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    the Respondent relies essentially on the same  submissions  as  to  why
    there would  be  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration in Mogadishu.

Findings and reasons

Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights

 1. There is little dispute between the parties in  this  case  as  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances, save in relation to whether he would  be  in
    receipt of any financial support on return to Somalia.   The  issue  in
    this appeal is whether in the Appellant's circumstances, he would be at
    real risk of exposure to conditions in Mogadishu which would  meet  the
    very high threshold for breach of Article 3 of European  Convention  on
    Human Rights as set out above.   On  the  facts,  this  question  turns
    firstly on whether the Appellant  would  be  financially  supported  in
    Mogadishu and/or able to access livelihood opportunities there, if  so,
    Mr Muquit appeared to accept there would be  no  breach  of  Article  3
    (although of course the Appellant's case was that he would be destitute
    on return).  Secondly, even if not, whether the  likely  conditions  on
    return would breach Article 3, it being accepted by both  parties  that
    conditions in  IDP  camps  varied  significantly  and  mere  resort  to
    accommodation in an IDP camp would not per se amount  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3.

 2. The Appellant left Somalia as a baby, residing in Kenya for a number of
    years before coming to the United Kingdom as a child (around the age of
    7) and remaining here ever since.  It is not disputed that  he  has  no
    memory or knowledge of Mogadishu or Somalia more generally, having been
    absent from there from such a young age.  Little  is  known  about  the
    Appellant's family circumstances in Mogadishu (or elsewhere in  Somalia
    - there being an inconsistency in the evidence between the  Appellant's
    parents as to where their home was prior to their departure  to  Kenya)
    or how they funded their journey to Kenya  or  onwards  to  the  United
    Kingdom, but there is evidence that their  financial  position  in  the
    United Kingdom now is not a strong one, with the parents being in  ill-
    health and in receipt of  state  benefits  (including  Income  Support,
    Disability Living Allowance and Carers Allowance) and  the  Appellant's
    sister being a single mother of a very young child who  had  been  made
    redundant shortly before the last hearing in this appeal.  There is  no
    evidence  as  to  the  current  whereabouts  or  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's brother.

 3. A  limited  number  of  bank  statements  had  been  provided  for  the
    Appellant's parent's account which, other than one instance  showing  a
    withdrawal of 2000, generally show a relatively  low  balance  and  at
    times the account is overdrawn.  There is no evidence from wider family
    members in the United Kingdom (aunts, uncles or cousins)  as  to  their
    ability or inability to provide any financial support to the  Appellant
    on return to Somalia, only oral evidence from  him  and  his  immediate
    family that they would not be in a position to do so.

 4. There is little evidence from the Appellant  as  to  how  he  has  been
    supported in the United Kingdom.  It can be inferred that this  was  by
    his parents when he was a child and also by the state, at least  during
    his term of imprisonment if not at other times as well.  The  Appellant
    has some history of employment in the United Kingdom through  which  he
    may have been able to support himself for that period of time as  well.
    There is however nothing to suggest the Appellant has  any  significant
    savings or other financial resources at his  disposal  at  the  current
    time.

 5. On the evidence available I find that  the  Appellant  is  unlikely  to
    return to Somalia with any significant savings, nor  is  he  likely  to
    receive any significant or regular financial support from his immediate
    family members in the United Kingdom on return to Somalia.  I also find
    it unlikely that the Appellant would receive any financial support from
    wider family members in the United  Kingdom  given  that  there  is  no
    indication of any close relationship, current or  recent  support  from
    them.  However, I do find that it is  possible,  even  on  the  limited
    means of his family in all their circumstances, that some small  and/or
    irregular financial support could be given from his  immediate  family.
    Even small amounts  from  the  United  Kingdom  may  be  of  relatively
    significant assistance to the Appellant given the poverty line is $2  a
    day and the very different economic situation  and  much  lower  living
    costs in Somalia compared to the United Kingdom.

 6. The Respondent relies on the Appellant being given a grant by  UKVI  at
    his departure of at the very least $100  and  potentially  up  to  750
    through the Facilitated  Returns  Scheme.   There  is  little  evidence
    before me of either source of finance for the Appellant, and although I
    accept the smaller amount is likely to be available to  him,  he  would
    not be likely to satisfy the conditions for the larger grant under  the
    Facilitated  Returns  Scheme,  such  that  it  would  be  a  matter  of
    discretion by the Respondent as to whether any further support would be
    available.  The lower amount on departure is likely to be of  immediate
    benefit to the Appellant initially on arrival, but not a sufficient sum
    to sustain him for very long.

 7. The Respondent has not challenged the Appellant's evidence that he  has
    no  remaining  familial  links  in  Mogadishu,  nor  in  Somalia   more
    generally.  Although I have some concerns about the credibility of  the
    Appellant and his parents  due  to  the  number  of  discrepancies  and
    inconsistencies in their evidence (for example as to the way  in  which
    the Appellant sets out his immigration history which has  changed  over
    time and is inconsistent with his parent's account and the Respondent's
    records; as to the Appellant's knowledge of his family and clan; as  to
    where the Appellant's parent's lived in Somalia; and as to whether  any
    other members of the family had been convicted and imprisoned) there is
    nothing before me to suggest  that  the  Appellant  has  any  remaining
    family in Somalia.

 8. The Appellant has claimed that he has no clan associations to call upon
    in Mogadishu and would not be able to identify himself as a  member  of
    his clan as he does not speak Somali let alone the reer hamar  dialect.
    However, aside from skin tone, the other  means  of  identification  is
    through identification  of  family  members  going  back  a  number  of
    generations.  The Appellant's father has knowledge of this  going  back
    at least five generations and in fact the Appellant is named after  his
    great, great-grandfather.  Even if the  Appellant  claims  to  have  no
    knowledge of this (which I do not accept as I  prefer  the  Appellant's
    father's evidence that he had brought up his children with  information
    about their family and clan  which  is  more  likely  and  I  find  the
    Appellant's account to be advanced  to  deliberately  distance  himself
    further from Somalia), there is no reason why  the  Appellant  can  not
    familiarise himself with this information before departure.

 9. The background evidence  shows  that  the  Benadiri  are  returning  to
    Mogadishu and although are a minority clan in terms  of  numbers,  they
    have a more significant social and economic profile  within  the  city,
    with public appointments in at least one district.  As  such,  although
    not a majority clan, the position of the  Benadiri  are  such  that  it
    seems likely that they would have more to offer than minority clans may
    be able to.  However, there was no evidence before me either way of the
    specific position of the Appellant's sub-subclan or whether they  could
    or could not be called upon for available support.

10. I find that the  Appellant  is  likely  to  return  to  Mogadishu  with
    knowledge of his family and clan from his father and as such is  likely
    to be able to identify himself by reference to his clan and down to his
    sub-subclan with such information and without needing to be  identified
    by dialect or skin tone.  There is nothing before me  to  suggest  that
    the Appellant would  not  be  able  to  seek  the  assistance  of  clan
    associations in  Mogadishu  who  may  potentially  assist  with  social
    support and access to livelihoods on return.  However, I  put  this  no
    higher than 'may' given  the  likely  practical  difficulties  for  the
    Appellant to make contact with his clan (in  the  absence  of  speaking
    their dialect and without any existing connections) and the uncertainty
    as to whether they would  have  the  means  to  offer  any  substantive
    assistance to him in any event.

11. However, even in the absence of financial resources on return,  regular
    financial support from the United Kingdom, no family or clan support in
    Mogadishu, I find  that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  secure  a
    livelihood on return and take advantage of the  economic  opportunities
    available in Mogadishu for the following reasons.

12. The Appellant has undertaken a number of vocational  training  courses,
    including carpentry, painting and decorating, professional cleaning and
    barbering.  He also  has  some  employment  experience  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has undertaken primary and secondary education  here.   The
    Appellant has relevant skills and  experience  for  employment  in  the
    construction and hospitality sectors in Mogadishu, sectors  which  have
    contributed to significant economic growth in recent  years  (save  for
    smaller anticipated growth in 2017 which is expected to increase  again
    this year and following) and in which there was such an expansion  that
    employers had been compelled to use foreign labour in the building  and
    hotel services  industries,  including  recruitment  from  overseas  of
    Bangladeshis and Kenyans (as referred to in the LANDINFO  report  of  1
    April 2016).  In these circumstances, the Appellant is well  placed  to
    take advantage of livelihood opportunities in these sectors.

13. There are two primary reasons relied upon by the Appellant as to why he
    would not be able to  secure  a  livelihood,  by  employment  or  self-
    employment on return to Mogadishu.  First, that he is unable  to  speak
    Somali and secondly, that his criminal convictions and drug and alcohol
    addictions would make him inherently unsuitable for employment.

14. In relation to language, the Appellant speaks English and some  Swahili
    (that being the common language of his parents and a common language in
    Kenya where he spent his  early  childhood)  and  despite  his  initial
    written statements to the effect  that  he  no  longer  speaks  Somali,
    before me, the Respondent seems to accept  that  he  has  never  spoken
    Somali and certainly does not now.  The Respondent submits that English
    is widely spoken in Mogadishu and is of benefit in securing  employment
    not just in high profile jobs but as a basic skill looked for  by  most
    employers.

15. The expert evidence submitted by the Appellant is that although English
    is spoken in Mogadishu, particularly amongst  diaspora  returnees,  the
    vast majority of ordinary people use Somali as the language of  day-to-
    day communication and although Swahili is spoken and understood by  the
    Kenyan community and those from the Kenyan border areas, it is  not  of
    itself of  use  in  the  absence  of  fluency  in  Somali.   Dr  Bekalo
    considered that English would be an asset for  employment  in  a  high-
    profile job or employment within a high-profile institution but  Somali
    would be an essential  requirement  locally  to  run  any  business  or
    survive in the wider socio-economic culture and economy  in  Mogadishu.
    Dr Mullen went further to suggest that the lack  of  ability  to  speak
    Somali would make a person specifically vulnerable, but there was  lack
    of supporting evidence for this  statement  to  suggest  that  language
    could amount essentially to a risk factor on return.

16. I do not find that the Appellant's  inability  to  speak  Somali  would
    prevent him from accessing a livelihood in Mogadishu,  particularly  by
    means of employment rather than  self-employment.   English  is  widely
    spoken in Mogadishu, particularly  amongst  the  diaspora  and  is  the
    common language  of  instruction  in  much  of  the  education  system.
    English is also listed as a basic employment skill  by  employers,  not
    just a desirable skill for high profile jobs  or  within  high  profile
    institutions.  Further, either English or Swahili  must  be  sufficient
    for employment in the building and hotel services industries given  the
    recruitment and use of overseas citizens who are inherently unlikely to
    speak Somali fluently.  From the examples of  overseas  recruitment  in
    the LANDINFO report, it can be reasonably inferred that  Kenyans  would
    be most likely to speak English or Swahili and Bangladeshis more likely
    to speak English than any other language commonly spoken in  Mogadishu.
    In any event, there is nothing before me to suggest that the  Appellant
    would be unable to learn Somali and any language barrier,  for  example
    to self-employment, which I consider more likely  than  employment  for
    the reasons already given, would only likely be short-term rather  than
    long-term.

17. In relation to the  Appellant's  criminal  convictions  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it is suggested that he would be unable to  access  employment
    for this reason.  There is however nothing in  the  background  country
    material in relation to this which suggests convictions such  as  those
    which the appellant has (for theft, drugs and driving  offences)  would
    be  any  barrier  to  employment  or  self-employment  and  the  expert
    evidence, whose opinion was expressly sought on this point,  takes  the
    evidence little further.  Dr Mullen suggested  that  a  person  with  a
    criminal history in the United Kingdom may  be  impacted  by  the  same
    depending on the degree to which the social mores of their subclan  had
    been infringed, albeit there is nothing specific setting out the social
    laws or their hierarchy in relation to the Appellant's subclan  against
    which his conduct can be  assessed.   It  was  accepted  that  criminal
    offences have not been  an  impediment  to  voluntary  repatriation  of
    refugees from other countries to Somalia.  In  these  circumstances,  I
    find that it is no more than speculation based upon how society in  the
    United Kingdom views particular criminal convictions when considering a
    person for employment, that the Appellant's criminal convictions  would
    cause any impediment  to  him  accessing  livelihood  opportunities  on
    return to Mogadishu.  The Appellant has  failed  to  establish  on  the
    evidence that this would cause any specific, or in fact any  impediment
    at all to his ability to access livelihood opportunities on return.

18. There is an almost complete lack of evidence before me  as  to  whether
    the Appellant remains addicted to drugs or  alcohol  and  if  so,  none
    whatsoever as to what the impact, if any, that may have on his  ability
    to  access  livelihood  opportunities  on  return  to  Mogadishu.   The
    Appellant's evidence in September 2016 before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was that he was addicted to cannabis,  but  no  longer  drank  alcohol.
    There is nothing more recent before me as to whether  he  continues  to
    use cannabis or continues to be addicted to it.  Since  his  recall  to
    prison in 2016, the Appellant  has  undertaken  rehabilitation  courses
    regarding drugs and alcohol.  In these circumstances,  the  paucity  of
    evidence before me on this point means that I find that  the  Appellant
    has not established that there would be any impediment  or  barrier  to
    him accessing livelihood opportunities in Mogadishu for this reason.

19. In conclusion, in all the circumstances and for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, I do not find that the Appellant would be unable to re-establish
    himself in Mogadishu and, in particular, he would not face a real  risk
    of destitution as he would  likely  be  able  to  access  the  economic
    opportunities in Mogadishu for employment, or self-employment and  also
    thereby find accommodation in the city.  The Appellant would  therefore
    not be at real risk of being forced to live in makeshift  accommodation
    within an IDP camp.  The Appellant does not therefore fall  within  the
    groups of those at risk for humanitarian reasons identified in MOJ.

20. In any event, even if the Appellant, for the reasons he has  identified
    or otherwise, had no clan, family or financial  support  on  return  to
    Mogadishu and (if I am wrong in the finding above) was unable to access
    livelihood opportunities there, I would not in  any  event  have  found
    that he can meet the very high threshold for breach of Article 3 as set
    out in the cases of D and N.  It is clear from the  Court  of  Appeal's
    recent decision in MA, as in its earlier decision in Said,  that  there
    is no violation of Article 3 by reason of a person being returned to  a
    country which for economic reasons cannot provide him with basic living
    standards.  The situation in  Mogadishu  is  no  longer  one  in  which
    impoverished conditions are the direct  result  of  violent  activities
    given that the security situation has significantly improved in  recent
    years (as confirmed in MOJ)  and  the  historical  conflict  issue  was
    expressly rejected by Lady Justice Arden in MA.  There is no suggestion
    in the present  case  that  the  Appellant  would  be  subject  to  any
    particular risk factors in an  IDP  camp  (such  as  a  high  level  of
    indiscriminate violence, an enhanced risk of forced recruitment  to  Al
    Shabaab nor any gender-based violence), his  claim  is  that  he  would
    simply be destitute on return.

21.  In  these  circumstances,  it  can  only  be   in   very   exceptional
    circumstances that there would be a violation of Article  3  given  the
    very high threshold set out in the cases of D and N.  The Appellant  is
    a healthy young man  who  has  not  established  any  very  exceptional
    circumstances or compelling humanitarian grounds to show  that  removal
    to Mogadishu would even arguably reach the high threshold  required  to
    establish a real risk of breach of Article 3.  The risk of  destitution
    alone on return is not sufficient to establish a real  risk  and  there
    are no additional considerations (such as a very  serious  or  terminal
    health conditions) to be added to this.  The Appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights

22. The Appellant does not  claim  to  have  a  partner  or  any  dependent
    children in the United Kingdom and therefore relies only on the private
    life  exceptions  in  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Exception 1 in section 117C(4)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  There is no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for  most  of  his  life  (he
    arrived at the age of seven, claimed  asylum  as  a  dependent  of  his
    father and was thereafter granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  11
    November 2003)  and  therefore  satisfies  sub-paragraph  (a)  of  both
    provisions.

23. The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant  meets  sub-paragraph
    (b) on the basis that his offending history alone shows that he is  not
    socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  Although the
    Appellant's criminal history dating  back  to  2009  shows  a  flagrant
    disregard for the laws of the United Kingdom and those who live here, I
    do not find  that  this  alone  means  that  he  is  not  socially  and
    culturally integrated here.  The  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of  seven,  he  attended  primary  and  secondary
    education here, speaks fluent English, has extended family here and has
    some limited work history.  In these circumstances,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom
    and meets sub-paragraph (b).

24. The final question for the exception under  paragraph  399A(c)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  section   117C(4)(c)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  is  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  in  Somalia.
    Although the Appellant is a young, healthy, single adult male who,  for
    the reasons already given above in relation to Article 3, would be able
    to  access  livelihood  opportunities  in  Mogadishu,  I  find,  having
    undertaken the broad  evaluative  judgment  required  (as  set  out  in
    Kamara)  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
    Appellant's reintegration in Somalia.

25. First, the Appellant  left  Somalia  as  a  baby  and  other  than  his
    nationality, his main connection with and knowledge of Somalia is  from
    his family, all of whom are in the United Kingdom and  whose  knowledge
    of Mogadishu and Somalia more generally dates back to around 1994  when
    they fled the civil war.  It can not be disputed that there  have  been
    enormous changes in Mogadishu and generally in the intervening 14 or so
    years.  Secondly, the Appellant has no family or contact with anyone in
    Somalia and has not returned there since his family fled  when  he  was
    around a year old.  Thirdly, although the Appellant speaks English  and
    some Swahili, he does  not  speak  Somali  that  that  would  make  his
    reintegration more difficult (although not of itself a very significant
    obstacle to reintegration given the  use  of  English  and  Swahili  in
    Mogadishu as set out above), in particular within his clan as  he  does
    not speak the reer hamar dialect.  The Appellant could learn Somali and
    the reer hamar dialect but it  seems  unlikely  that  he  could  become
    fluent within a  reasonable  time  for  the  purposes  of  day  to  day
    interactions  and  private  life.   Fourthly,  although  it  would   be
    reasonable to  expect  the  Appellant  to  seek  to  make  contact  and
    establish relationships with his clan, there are no existing links  for
    him to use to do so and the level of support they may or may  not  give
    him is far from certain.

26. Although as above I have found that the Appellant would  be  likely  to
    access livelihood opportunities and  sustain  life  in  Mogadishu;  the
    combination of his circumstances are such that his  lack  of  knowledge
    and understanding of life in  Mogadishu  with  some  language  barriers
    means that I find that he would not have a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    establish and give substance to private life there within a  reasonable
    period of time.  I therefore allow the Appellant's appeal on Article  8
    grounds on the basis that he satisfies the  exceptions  to  deportation
    set out in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and section  117C(4)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor, the making of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  a  material
error of law in relation to Articles 3 and 8 of the European  Convention  on
Human Rights and as such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The appeal is remade in the following  terms.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 by reference to the exception  in
paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  section  117C(4)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 only) and is dismissed  on  all
other grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]             Date     21st May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00096/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2016                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     Mam
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Lovejoy, instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in 1993, who entered the  UK
    with his parents on 4 September 2000. Thereafter he was granted ILR  on
    11 November 2003  in  line  with  his  parents  (it  appears  that  the
    appellant's mother was recognised as a refugee).

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  "decision
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim", dated 12 July 2016.  On
    the same date the Secretary of State made a deportation  order  in  the
    appellant's name, this decision being founded on  criminal  convictions
    accumulated by the appellant since 2012.

 3. In summary, the appellant has been convicted of  attempted  robbery  in
    2012 for which he received a sentence of sixteen months' detention,  as
    well as fourteen drug related offences on 26 June  2014  for  which  he
    received a total of 3 years and 6 months' imprisonment.  The  appellant
    has a number of other convictions prior to 2012 but the SSHD  does  not
    seek to rely upon these. The SSHD has also not sought thus far to place
    reliance on a conviction for possession of a Class B drug  on  13  July
    2016, for which the appellant received a fine.

Discussion and Decision

 4. The appellant appealed the decision to refuse his protection and  human
    rights claims to the First-tier Tribunal.  That  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis on 27 September 2016 and  dismissed
    on all grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  12  October  2016.   The
    appellant was subsequently granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison.

 5. On the morning of the hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Ms  Lovejoy
    presented the Tribunal, and the respondent, with  a  skeleton  argument
    identifying three  discrete  grounds,  each  containing  numerous  sub-
    grounds which, Mr Armstrong submitted, did not obviously coincide  with
    the grounds upon which permission had been granted.  As a  consequence,
    Mr Armstrong objected to the admission of these grounds. I  decided  to
    hear submissions on the matters raised in the skeleton argument de bene
    esse.

 6. During the course of her  submissions  Ms  Lovejoy  took  the  Tribunal
    through her skeleton argument identifying - at least in her  submission
    - the coincidence between the grounds pleaded therein and  the  grounds
    upon which permission had been granted. Her overarching submission  was
    to the effect that: (i) the submissions in the skeleton  argument  were
    no more than a re-articulation of the grounds  originally  drafted  and
    did not incorporate any new or additional grounds: and, (ii) that  each
    ground demonstrated a clear error in the FtT's decision.

 7. Dealing with the issues in  turn.  I  am  satisfied  that  all  of  the
    submissions made in Ms Lovejoy's  skeleton  argument,  save  for  those
    found in paragraphs 16 and 17 thereof, are no more than an  elucidation
    of the grounds originally pleaded.

 8. Given the late hour of the production of the 'new' grounds  (paragraphs
    16  and  17  of  the  skeleton)  and  the  absence  of  any  reasonable
    explanation as to why: (a) these grounds were not  originally  pleaded:
    and, (b) an application to amend the grounds was not made prior to  the
    hearing, I refuse to admit such  grounds  which,  in  any  event,  have
    little merit. For reasons which will become apparent below I  need  not
    set out these grounds in any detail or refer to them again.

 9. Turning then to consider the merits of the admitted grounds.  In  their
    elucidated form these can be summarised as follows:

          i) The FtT concluded in paragraphs 80(vii) and  80  (ix)  of  its
             decision that the appellant is from a minority clan  and  that
             he has  no  family  or  clan  associations  to  call  upon  in
             Mogadishu. Nevertheless, in paragraph 80(xi) of  its  decision
             the FtT concluded that it was not satisfied that the appellant
             would not have support available from  elsewhere  in  Somalia.
             This latter finding is inadequately reasoned;

         ii) In paragraph 80(xi) of its decision the FtT concluded that the
             appellant would be in receipt of remittances from abroad  upon
             return to Somalia. The evidence before  the  FtT  was  to  the
             contrary. The FtT erred in  failing  to  provide  reasons  for
             rejecting such evidence;

        iii) The reliance by the FtT in paragraph 80(xii) of  its  decision
             on the fact that the appellant has 'former links to Mogadishu'
             is irrational, given that the appellant left  Somalia  at  the
             age of one;

         iv) The FtT failed to take account of the fact that the  appellant
             cannot speak Somali;

          v) The FtT failed to attach due  weight  to  the  length  of  the
             appellant's residence in the UK when concluding  that  he  was
             not socially and culturally integrated into the UK.

10. Grounds (i) to (iv) [as identified in the preceding paragraph] seek  to
    undermine the conclusions found  in  paragraph  80  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  It is prudent, therefore, for me to set out this,
    and other material paragraphs, in full:

         "78. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that,  if  he  is
             returned to Somalia, he will be without means  of  support  or
             the ability to establish himself with a home  and  employment,
             and will therefore be forced to seek shelter  in  one  of  the
             camps provided for internally  displaced  persons,  or  IDP's,
             where  conditions  are  generally  considered  to  amount   to
             treatment which breaches Article 3.

         79.  The starting point for consideration of current risk  of  such
             treatment is the country guidance decision reported as  MOJ  &
             Others ...  The determination was  dated  10  September  2014,
             following hearings over five days in February 2014.  It was an
             extensive  review  of  evidence,  including  expert  evidence,
             consisting of 287  pages.   I  have  summarised  its  findings
             above.  It is for the appellant to show evidence justifying  a
             departure from the country guidance.

         80.  I have considered the points discussed in the country guidance
             case and set out in the head note as follows:

              (i) I do not find  that  any  of  the  issues  raised  by  the
                  appellant in this appeal are issues which  have  not  been
                  addressed by MOJ & Others ...  because  it  has  not  been
                  submitted on behalf of the appellant that  there  are  any
                  such issues relied upon.

              (ii)     there is no evidence to show that  the  appellant  is
                  not 'an ordinary civilian' within the definition  set  out
                  therein, and therefore I am not satisfied that, by  reason
                  of returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  in  a
                  western country, he will be at risk of  harm  contrary  to
                  Article 3 or by reason of indiscriminate violence,  either
                  by the authorities or by Al Shabaab.

              (iii)    I find that the appellant has not  provided  evidence
                  to dispute the finding that the withdrawal of  Al  Shabaab
                  from Mogadishu is complete  and  that  there  is  no  real
                  prospect of a re-established presence within the city.

              (iv)     I find that the appellant has not  produced  evidence
                  to show that, by reason of the reduction in the  level  of
                  civilian casualties since 2011, the present level  amounts
                  to 'indiscriminate violence' creating a sufficient risk to
                  ordinary civilians.

              (v) the appellant has not shown by evidence that he  would  be
                  unable to  reduce  his  risk  of  'collateral  damage'  in
                  Mogadishu by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are
                  clearly identifiable as likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  nor
                  that it would not be reasonable for him to do so.

              (vi)     the appellant has not demonstrated  a  real  risk  of
                  forced recruitment to Al Shabaab.

              (vii)    I am satisfied that the appellant is a  member  of  a
                  minority clan,  because  that  fact  is  accepted  by  the
                  respondent.  I accept that he is unlikely to  be  able  to
                  access assistance from such clan members.  I  also  accept
                  that he does not have a nuclear family or close  relatives
                  in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on
                  return.

              (viii)   the appellant has provided no evidence to  show  that
                  the clans in Mogadishu do not provide, potentially, social
                  support mechanisms nor assist with access to  livelihoods.
                  He has not produced evidence to show the existence of clan
                  militias in Mogadishu, or  clan  violence,  or  clan-based
                  discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

              (ix)     based upon my findings in (vii) above,  I  have  made
                  the following findings:

                  .    he has been absent from Somalia since 1994;

                  .    he has no family or clan associations to call upon in
                      Mogadishu;

                  .    he has no access to financial resources in Mogadishu;



                  .    he has reasonable prospects of securing a livelihood,
                      either by employment or self-employment,  based  upon
                      his past working experience and trade training in the
                      United Kingdom;

                  .    he has not shown that  he  does  not  have  available
                      remittances from abroad, from his family members;

              (x) the appellant has not shown why  he  would  be  unable  to
                  access the economic opportunities that have been  produced
                  by the economic boom, especially as there is  evidence  to
                  the effect that returnees are taking jobs at  the  expense
                  of those who have never been away.

              (xi)     although the appellant has no clan or family  support
                  in Mogadishu, I am not satisfied that  he  does  not  have
                  such support available to him from elsewhere in Somalia; I
                  find that he  will  be  in  receipt  of  remittances  from
                  abroad, and that he will have a real prospect of  securing
                  access to a livelihood on return, and  therefore  he  will
                  not face the prospect of living in  circumstances  falling
                  below that which is acceptable in humanitarian  protection
                  terms.  This is because the appellant has not  only  shown
                  his ability to find work and support himself in Mogadishu,
                  but also has adapted to life in the United Kingdom, albeit
                  resorting to criminal conduct.

              (xii)    I  find  that  the  appellant  has  former  links  to
                  Mogadishu, and therefore, with access to  remittances  and
                  the ability to re-establish himself, he  is  not  at  real
                  risk of having to live within an IDP camp.

         81.  As mentioned above, I have considered the background  evidence
             relied upon by the  appellant.   I  find  that  most  of  that
             evidence predates the  consideration  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
             leading to the country guidance issued in MOJ  &  Others  ...,
             and that evidence which postdates the decision  is  outweighed
             by the evidence already  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
             Therefore, I am not persuaded that it should properly lead  me
             to any conclusions which are inconsistent  with  that  country
             guidance.

         82.  I have considered the submissions made by the UNHCR  regarding
             cessation.  I am satisfied that  the  background  evidence  to
             which it refers has been considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in
             arriving at the current country guidance, and there is nothing
             in those submissions  which  leads  me  to  depart  from  that
             guidance.

         83.  It follows from these findings that I am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant can be returned to Mogadishu, and  will  not  be  at
             risk on return  from  persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to
             Articles 2 and/or 3 ECHR, nor from indiscriminate violence."

11. I find that the FtT's decision contains numerous errors of  law  which,
    when taken cumulatively, lead me to conclude  that  it  should  be  set
    aside.

12. Whilst Mr Armstrong accepted the  existence  of  errors  in  the  FtT's
    decision, he asserted that there could only ever be one outcome to  the
    appeal on the facts presented i.e. that the appellant's  appeal  should
    be dismissed, thus, it was  said,  despite  the  errors  in  the  FtT's
    decision should not be set aside.

13. Given the acceptance by Mr Armstrong of the existence of errors in  the
    FtT's decision I need only set out in summary form the nature  of  such
    errors.

14. Broadly, the errors in the FtT's decision  relate  to  its  overarching
    conclusion that the appellant would have sufficient means of supporting
    himself upon return to Mogadishu that he would not be required to  live
    in an IDP camp and, consequently, that  his  return  would  not  breach
    Article 3.

15. There are a number of alternative mechanisms  by  which  support  could
    potentially be obtained by the appellant in Mogadishu; (i) by obtaining
    employment there as a consequence of his  skill  set;  (ii)  by  direct
    financial or social assistance from members of his clan  in  Mogadishu;
    (iii) by the receipt of  assistance  from  such  clan  members  in  his
    attempts  to  obtain  employment  in  Mogadishu;  (iv)  by  receipt  of
    assistance from family members in Somalia in the aforementioned regard;
    and/or, (v) by receipt of financial assistance from friends  or  family
    in the UK, or family members in Somalia. This list  is  not  exhaustive
    and is not tick box, neither are the aforementioned categories discreet
    from each other.

16. Moving on to an analysis of the FtT's decision. It is difficult for the
    reader of such decision to establish what part the finding in paragraph
    80(xii) of the FtT's decision, i.e. that the appellant has former links
    to Mogadishu, played in its overarching conclusion that  the  appellant
    would have the ability and means to support himself upon  return.  More
    significantly, given (a) that the appellant left Somalia  when  he  was
    one-year-old and (b) the FtT concluded in  paragraphs  80(vii),  80(ix)
    and 80(xi) of its decision that the appellant has  no  clan  or  family
    associations in Mogadishu to call upon, it  is  difficult  to  envisage
    what former links the FtT was here referring to and  relying  upon.  In
    all the circumstances it was incumbent on  the  FtT  to  identify  such
    links with much greater particularly that it did.

17. Second, the FtT concludes, without any  obvious  supporting  reasoning,
    that the appellant would have support available to him from  'elsewhere
    in Somalia'. Given that the appellant's case has always been  (a)  that
    he left Somalia when he was one-year-old, (b) that all  the  family  he
    has ever known are living in the UK, and (c)  that  he  has  no  family
    remaining in Somalia, the aforementioned conclusion of the  FtT  called
    for discreet reasoning; particular  given  its  findings  on  the  same
    evidence that the appellant would not have access  to  clan  or  family
    support in Mogadishu. The conclusion of  the  FtT  that  the  appellant
    would have support available from elsewhere in Somalia has no  apparent
    evidential foundation and is inadequately reasoned.

18. Finally, in paragraph 80(xii) of its decision the  FtT  concludes  that
    the appellant would  have  access  to  'remittances'.  By  this  it  is
    presumed that the FtT were referring to remittances from family members
    in the UK. If this is so, once again such conclusion  was  contrary  to
    all of the evidence before  the  FtT.  In  such  circumstances  it  was
    incumbent on the FtT to provide some reasons as to why it rejected  the
    evidence of the appellant's parents on this issue,  particularly  given
    that it must have accepted their evidence on other issues.

19. For the above reasons, I find that the FtT's decision contains a number
    of errors of law. Furthermore, I  do  not  accept  that  taken  at  its
    reasonable  zenith  the  appellant's   appeal   is   bound   to   fail.
    Consequently, I conclude that had the FtT not made  the  aforementioned
    errors it could rationally have come to a  different  decision  on  the
    Article 3 ground. I therefore set aside the FtT's decision.

20. I conclude that it is appropriate for the re-making of the appeal to be
    undertaken  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  That  re-making   will   include
    consideration of both the  Article  3  and  Article  8  grounds  -  the
    decision  on  the  latter  clearly   also   being   infected   by   the
    aforementioned error. There has been no challenge to the FtT's findings
    made in relation to the application of either section 72  of  the  2002
    Act or paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules and,  consequently,  its
    conclusions in relation to  the  Refugee  Convention  and  humanitarian
    protections grounds are to remain standing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is set aside.

I direct that the re-making of the decision under appeal will be  undertaken
by the Upper Tribunal on the basis identified above.


                                 DIRECTIONS

   A. The appellant is to file with the Upper Tribunal,  and  serve  on  the
      Respondent, a consolidated bundle of all of the evidence to be  relied
      upon (separately tabulating any evidence that has thus  far  not  been
      served), so that it is received no later than 21  days  prior  to  the
      date of hearing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor




