
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00069/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 11th June 2021                       |On the 28th June 2021           |
|                                            |                                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

       YUNUS SINE                                                  Appellant

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Juss
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 12 May 2021, I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons were as follows:

    1.   I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  'respondent'  and  the
    respondent as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is a male citizen of Turkey who  was
    born in 1992. He was granted leave to remain as a  refugee  in  October
    2008 as a child and indefinite leave to remain on 27 February 2014.  He
    was convicted of possession with  intent  to  supply  a  Class  A  drug
    (heroin) in July 2018 and sentenced to  3  years'  imprisonment.  By  a
    decision dated 3 June 2019, the appellant's refugee status was  revoked
    and a deportation order was  signed  on  3  July  2019.  The  appellant
    appealed on human rights and asylum grounds to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Ali) which, in a decision promulgated on 17 March 2020,  allowed
    his appeal. The Secretary of State now appeals with permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

    2.   There are  two  grounds  of  appeal.  In  the  first  ground,  the
    Secretary of State argues that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  by
    failing to determine whether section 72 of the 2002  Act  (as  amended)
    applied in this case and, in  particular,  whether  the  appellant  had
    successfully rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a  danger  to
    the community.

    3.   The appellant argues that, whilst  the  judge  did  not  in  terms
    determine the section 72 issue, it is clear from the remainder  of  the
    judge's decision that any error  is  immaterial.  Further,  relying  on
    Mugwagwa (s.72 - applying statutory presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011]  UKUT
    00338 (IAC), he asserts that the OASYS report (which  indicated  a  low
    risk of re-offending) was evidence which would inevitably have led  the
    judge to conclude that the presumption had been rebutted.

    4.   In Mugwagwa, at [35] the Upper Tribunal recorded that  the  Senior
    Presenting Officer appearing before it accepted that the  OASYS  report
    'rebutted the presumption that the  appellant  was  a  "danger  to  the
    community" created by s.72 of the 2002 Act.'  That  concession  on  the
    particular facts in the appeal cannot  be,  as  the  appellant  in  the
    instant appeal seeks to argue, of universal application. Indeed, as the
    italic words at the outset of the reported case indicate,  Mugwagwa  is
    authority for the principle that 'the First-tier Tribunal  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber)  is  required  to  apply  of  its  own  motion  the
    statutory presumptions in s.72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 to the effect that Art 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention
    will  not  prevent  refoulement  of  a  refugee   where   the   factual
    underpinning for the  application  of  s.72  is  present  even  if  the
    Secretary of State has not relied upon Art 33(2) and s.72.'   The  case
    stresses the importance of the  Tribunal  dealing  with  a  section  72
    certificate, not excusing a  failure  to  do  so  in  the  light  of  a
    particular  item  of  evidence.  Moreover,  I  reject  the  appellant's
    submission that the fact the judge had mentioned section 72 at [6]  and
    [14] is sufficient. To note that a provision arises in an appeal is not
    the same as determining any issue arising  from  the  provision.  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did err in  law  by  failing  to
    determine the section 72 issue.

    5.    The  Secretary  of  State's  second  ground  of  appeal  is  less
    persuasive.  The  respondent  argues  that  the  judge   has   provided
    inadequate reasons for finding that the appellant  would  still  be  at
    risk on return to Turkey. The UNHCR had been notified of the  Secretary
    of State's intention to revoke the appellant's asylum  status  and  had
    responded by writing a detailed response. The judge has considered this
    letter and the other evidence at [51-60]. He finds [55] that he  should
    attach 'significant weight' to the letter and the case made in  it  for
    rejecting the respondent's assertion that there have  been  fundamental
    and durable changes in Turkey such  that  the  appellant,  a  committed
    supported of Kurdish separatist politics,  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return. The  respondent's  criticisms  of  the  judge's  analysis,  for
    example that the judge attached weight to the failure of the  Secretary
    of State to follow up on the UNHCR's suggestion that she interview  the
    appellant, fail to disturb  that  analysis.  In  my  opinion,  all  the
    findings detailed by the judge at [51-60] were available to him on  the
    evidence (including the UNHCR letter) and the challenges in the grounds
    of appeal at [3] are  no  more  than  disagreements  with  the  judge's
    findings. In the passage of the CPIN Report of March  2020  upon  which
    the Secretary of State in the grounds relies, I note that, whilst being
    a member or supporter of the HDP (the successor party to the DTP  which
    the appellant had supported) is unlikely to result in persecution  'the
    risk will depend on the person's profile and activities.' [2.4.15].  It
    was plainly open to the judge,  on  a  consideration  of  the  all  the
    evidence (including the UNHCR letter), to  find  that  this  particular
    appellant maintains a profile which continues to expose him to risk.  I
    find that Ground 2 is not made out.

    6.   As regards disposal, Mr Tan, who appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State before the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the appeal  would  have
    to be returned to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is incomplete rather than  incorrect;  the  main  findings  as
    regards the revocation of the appellant's asylum status  are,  for  the
    reasons I have given, sound. Consequently, there is no reason to  remit
    the appeal to another First-tier Tribunal judge whilst returning it  to
    Judge Ali to complete the decision will also cause  unnecessary  delay.
    The section 72 certificate is a discrete issue  in  the  appeal  and  I
    consider that it can be determined in the Upper  Tribunal  following  a
    resumed hearing.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal as to risk on
    return shall stand; it follows that the appellant  is,  in  any  event,
    entitled to succeed on Article 3 ECHR grounds. As regards  asylum,  the
    Secretary of State may wish to consider her position before the resumed
    hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  Tribunal's
    findings at [48-60] shall stand. Consequently, the appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State decision is allowed on Article 3 ECHR  grounds.  The
    Upper Tribunal shall, at  a  resumed  hearing,  determine  whether  the
    appellant (who has been found to have committed a particularly  serious
    offence) has rebutted the presumption that he is constitutes  a  danger
    to the community (see section 72 of the 2002  Act  (as  amended)).  The
    parties may adduce new  evidence  provided  that  documentary  evidence
    (including witness statements) are sent to the Upper  Tribunal  and  to
    the other party no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.



    Signed                                                Date  28 April
    2021
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

 2. Section 72 (1-6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides:

    72 Serious criminal

    (1) This section applies for the purpose of the construction and
    application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention (exclusion from
    protection).

    (2) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom if he is-

    (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

    (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.

    (3) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom if-

    (a) he is convicted outside the United Kingdom of an offence,

    (b) he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years,
and

    (c) he could have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least two years had his conviction been a conviction in the United
    Kingdom of a similar offence.

    (4) A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the community of the United Kingdom if-

    (a) he is convicted of an offence specified by order of the Secretary
of State, or

    (b) he is convicted outside the United Kingdom of an offence and the
    Secretary of State certifies that in his opinion the offence is similar
    to an offence specified by order under paragraph (a).

    ....

    (6) A presumption under subsection  (2),  (3)  or  (4)  that  a  person
    constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable by that person.

 3. The appellant, therefore, falls to be considered as a serious  criminal
    on account of his conviction and 3 years sentence of  imprisonment.  He
    is able to rebut the consequent presumption that he is a danger to  the
    community. The evidence which he adduces in  support  of  his  rebuttal
    will be subject to assessment by the standard of proof of  the  balance
    of probabilities.

 4. The appellant relies upon the OASYS report produced in  2019  following
    his conviction. In each of the categories  considered  in  the  report,
    including violent and non-violent offending, the risk has been assessed
    as low. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
    resumed hearing, did not seek to challenge in submissions the assertion
    that (i) the OASYS is capable of determining the appeal in  respect  of
    section 72 (see AM (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 774); (ii) the  report  in
    the  instant  constituted  the  only  independent  assessment  of   the
    appellant's likely danger to the community.

 5. There is no evidence that the appellant has offended  again  since  his
    release from prison. I  accept  that  the  OASYS  report  unequivocally
    concludes that the appellant is at low  risk  of  reoffending  in  each
    category addressed in the report. I find that the report constitutes an
    accurate evaluation of the risks to society posed by the appellant.  On
    the basis of the evidence available to the Upper Tribunal, I find  that
    the appellant has rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger
    to the community. In the light of that finding and the  conclusions  as
    to real risk on return set out in my error of law decision, his  appeal
    against the decision to revoke his refugee status is allowed.




    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the revocation of his refugee status  is
    allowed. The appellant is entitled to protection as a refugee.


         Signed                                           Date 12 June 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

