
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               VA/00762/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 30th June 2014                     |On: 3rd July 2014        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Azhar Hussain
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering,  Counsel instructed by Carter Law
                            Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of  birth  31st  December
1967.  On the 8th January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Heynes)
allowed his appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to
refuse him entry clearance as a family visitor.  The Secretary of State
now has permission to appeal against that decision.

The Respondent had made his application  for  entry  clearance  on  the
basis that he wanted to come to the UK to  visit  his  brother  Munawar
Hussain.  The application was refused on the 19th November 2012 on  the
grounds that the Entry Clearance Officer could not  be  satisfied  that
the Respondent was a genuine visitor who intended to leave  the  UK  at
the end of his trip. The ECO did not accept  that  he  had  been  self-
employed since 1995 as he claimed. That was because there was a lack of
evidence to support his application. There was evidence of  funds  held
in a bank account but the ECO could not be satisfied, on  the  evidence
before him, that such funds had accumulated from the Respondent's self-
employment income or that it was genuinely available to him.   The  ECO
noted the assertion that the Respondent would be returning to his  wife
in Pakistan, but in the absence of any evidence about  her,  where  she
was or what her intentions were the ECO did not attach much  weight  to
that. There was no evidence to show prior compliance  with  immigration
control. In all the circumstances the ECO found the Respondent had  not
discharged the burden of proof.

Following receipt of the grounds of appeal the decision was reviewed by
an Entry Clearance Manager. In a decision dated the 17th June 2013  the
ECM states that he has conducted checks on the tax  documents  provided
and these do show the Respondent to have registered  his  business  for
tax since 2010. The ECM finds there to be no evidence that the business
has operated since  1995  as  claimed  and  asks  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal bear  in  mind  the  discrepancies  between  the  Respondent's
evidence and the records held by the Pakistani Federal Bureau  of  Tax.
The ECM maintained that there was no documentary  evidence  to  support
the Respondent's claimed level of income.

On appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  presented  with  documentary
evidence  as  to  the  Respondent's  business  that  the  determination
describes  as  "poorly  translated  and  apparently  nonsensical".   At
paragraph  19-20  the  determination  reads:  "the   quality   of   the
translations is so poor that I would not have come  to  the  conclusion
that the Appellant is in business  as  claimed  were  it  not  for  the
concession made in that respect. Given that it was made, I am satisfied
that there is sufficient incentive for the Appellant  to  return".   On
that basis the appeal was allowed.


Error of Law

The grounds of appeal appear to suggest that the First-tier Tribunal in
effect erred for failing to go behind the concession made by  the  ECM.
If the grounds were so narrowly framed there would be no merit  at  all
in this appeal.  However Ms Johnstone illustrated  in  her  submissions
that in fact the concession made by the ECM was only partial.  The  ECM
accepts that the Appellant's business has been  registered  since  2010
for payment of tax. The ECM was clearly not satisfied as to the claimed
income from the Appellant's business nor indeed whether he has actually
paid any tax.

In those circumstances the Appellant was yet to establish that  he  did
have a meaningful economic resource in the form of his  business  which
might give him an incentive to return to Pakistan at  the  end  of  his
trip to the UK. It was an error of law to allow the  appeal  simply  on
the basis of the limited concession. I  would  also  observe  that  the
refusal notice raises wider issues about the Appellant's overall social
circumstances in  Pakistan  and  the  claimed  reasons  for  the  trip.
Evaluating intention will almost always involve a rounded assessment of
all of these kinds of factors.

Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
is set aside.

Due to the extent of judicial  fact  finding  required  the  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order for it to be re-made.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              30th June 2014







