
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
VA/00016/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2018                       |  On 20 March 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                               MR MOSRUR AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Haque (the Sponsor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  His  date  of  birth  is  15
    December 1976.  Mr Ahmed made an application on  19  June  2013  for  a
    visit visa to visit his cousin ("the Sponsor") here  in  the  UK.   The
    application was refused on 11 July  2013.   He  appealed  against  this
    decision and his appeal was allowed under the Rules in  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 10 September 2015.  Judge  Andonian  allowed
    the appeal, finding the Sponsor to be a credible witness.

2.    However,  entry  clearance  was  refused  on  dated  26  January  2016
    notwithstanding Judge Andonian's decision following, according  to  the
    ECO, new information having come to light concerning the  Sponsor.  The
    Appellant appealed. His appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Robertson in a decision that was promulgated on 16 May 2017 following a
    hearing on 24 March 2017.  At that hearing Judge Robertson engaged with
    the jurisdiction issue and noted, at paragraph 8 of the  decision  that
    the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Ms  Rands,  conceded  that  the
    Tribunal had jurisdiction to, given the date of the application  on  19
    June 2013.  Judge Robertson made findings and  the  salient  paragraphs
    are 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18:

         "14. This application was considered  by  Judge  Andonian  on  10th
             September 2015.  I am bound by the case of Devaseelan to treat
             the Judge's findings as the starting point  for  my  decision.
             Judge Andonian found Mr Haque to be a  credible  witness  with
             funds to support the Appellant during their visit.  The  Judge
             accepted his evidence that previous visitors had all  returned
             within the time limit and that he was aware of  the  potential
             consequences of helping them remain illegally in the UK.


         15.  In reaching their decision the ECO refers to 'new information'
             which  cast  doubt  on  the   Sponsor's   credibility.    That
             information was not available to the Sponsor or  myself  until
             the day of the hearing.  Mr Haque  did  not  require  time  to
             consider the evidence but was prepared to proceed.


         16.  The 'new information' was a list of  applicants  for  whom  Mr
             Haque had been a Sponsor.  I noted that a  similar  point  had
             been raised before Judge Andonian who had been satisfied  with
             Mr Haque's evidence.


         17.  I found Mr Haque to be a credible witness.   He  was  able  to
             explain that the discrepancy in dates was due to the delay  in
             issuing some of the visas due to the appeal process.  I  found
             no evidence to justify going behind Judge Andonian's findings.


         18.   In  considering  proportionality  I  have  to   balance   the
             Appellant's right to family life  with  the  public  interest.
             The fact that the Immigration Rules have been met is a weighty
             factor and following Judge Andonian's findings  the  Appellant
             could reasonably have expected admission to the UK.  I do  not
             consider the decision to be necessary or proportionate."

 3.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal assert that the  judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons for  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8.
    Permission was granted to the Secretary of State by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Foudy on 17 November 2017 and thus the matter came before
    me on 19 February 2018.

4.   At the hearing the Sponsor was in attendance. Mr Tufan conceded at  the
    hearing before me that the grounds  are  misconceived  insofar  as  the
    Appellant had a statutory right of appeal against  the  decision  under
    the Immigratio1n Rules (the date of the application having been made on
    19 June 2013).  I agree.  Properly read, this is  a  decision  allowing
    the appeal under the Rules and under Article 8.  There is  no  properly
    articulated challenge to the substance of the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under the Rules.  I accept that there is merit  in  the  grounds
    insofar as Article 8 is concerned, particularly with reference  to  the
    recent cases of Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 and Onuorah v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  1757.  It  was  entirely
    open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that part  of  the  decision  is  maintained.   I
    accept that the judge materially erred in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8. That decision is set aside.   The appeal is dismissed  under
    Article 8. The  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Rules.
The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 16 March 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
