
IAC-BFD- MD


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00052/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 7th November 2014                            |On 10th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              ms maryam kousar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed, the Sponsor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Abu Dhabi,  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing Maryam Kousar's appeal against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse to grant her entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  For  the  purposes  of  this  decision  I  shall
    hereinafter refer to the Secretary  of  State  as  the  Respondent  and
    Maryam Kousar as the Appellant, reflecting their positions as they were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  1st  January  1969.  She
    applied for entry clearance as a visitor with the intention of visiting
    close family relatives in the United Kingdom, including  siblings.  The
    date of the Appellant's application to visit is 29th October 2013.

 3.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application  under   the
    provisions of paragraph 41 of the current Immigration Rules because  he
    was not satisfied that the Appellant was a genuine visitor who intended
    to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her  visit  nor  was  he
    satisfied that she could afford to pay for a return ticket to Pakistan.



 4. The original  grounds  of  appeal  set  out  various  reasons  why  the
    Appellant disagreed with the Entry Clearance Officer's decision but did
    not specifically identify an appeal  based  on  human  rights  or  race
    relations grounds.

 5. Judge Ince heard the appeal; took oral evidence from  the  Sponsor  and
    went on to allow the appeal in the following terms.

         "I have the advantage over the ECO in that I  have  heard  credible
         evidence from the sponsor who has some knowledge of the Appellant's
         personal and financial circumstances, whereas the  ECO  only  dealt
         with the matter on the documentation provided to him.

         In relation to her intentions,  I  take  account  of  the  unlikely
         scenario that the Appellant,  a  mother  of  five  children,  would
         abandon her family and remain in the UK, especially  when  she  has
         shown little interest in the past in visiting the UK (the VAF shows
         no applications for visas to any country being made in the previous
         10 years).  I bear in mind the evidence  of  the  sponsor  on  this
         point.  Accordingly,  taking  all  these  factors  into  account  I
         conclude that there is no reason not to doubt  that  the  Appellant
         has  the  appropriate  intentions   to   honour   her   immigration
         obligations and that she will return to Pakistan at the end of  her
         visit.

         As for the payment  of  the  return  air  fare,  I  note  that  the
         Appellant has more than enough money in her Post Office account  to
         pay for this.  The ECO considers that such a financial  outlay  was
         not justified but I disagree - saving up for a foreign  holiday  is
         precisely the sort of  thing  people  save  for  and  she  is  only
         spending about half of her savings.  I therefore consider that  she
         can afford to pay for the return air fare."

 6. There is no mention in Judge Ince's determination of the  changes  made
    by  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act  which  amended  Section  88A  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 removing previous rights of
    appeal in family visit visa cases. Those provisions came into force  on
    25th June 2013 and because the date of the Appellant's  application  to
    visit  is 29th October 2013, her appeal is governed by them.

 7. Accordingly I am satisfied that the determination of Judge Ince must be
    set aside for legal error and as there is no challenge to  the  factual
    matrix in this appeal I find I am in a position to decide the matter on
    the evidence before me.



Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that Judge  Ince  did  not  in
    fact have jurisdiction to hear and determine this appeal when there was
    not before him  grounds  for  concluding  that  the  Appellant  had  an
    arguable human rights and/or race relations case. It was  an  error  of
    law for him to proceed as he did.

 9. As I explained to the Sponsor who attended before me  I  have  sympathy
    with his position as at no stage was it either made clear to him or  by
    inference that there was no right of appeal in respect of his  relative
    Maryam Kousar. I am also bound to observe that  in  reality  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer seems to have  treated  the  application  as  if  the
    Appellant did have a right of appeal  under  the  past  Family  Visitor
    Regulations.

10. However an error of law was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    case in that it did not have jurisdiction in the first instance to hear
    the appeal of Maryam Kousar.

Decision

11. An error of law was made by the First-tier Tribunal in this case  which
    was material in that the First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal of this Appellant against the decision reached  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer Abu Dhabi. I therefore set aside  the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  find  that  the  Tribunal  has   no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal of this  Appellant.  The  Secretary  of
    State's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           7th November 2014



