
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00655/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 October 2016                            |On 30 November 2016           |
|Judgment given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                 MANJIT KAUR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Atcher, Solicitor, Ebrahim & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 10 April 1953.  She is a  citizen  of  India.
    She made an application on 15 October 2014 for  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor. That application was  refused  in  a  decision  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("ECO") dated 20 December 2014.

 2. In summary, the reasons given by the ECO for refusing  the  application
    were that the appellant was not genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or
    that she intended to leave the UK at the  end  of  the  period  of  the
    visit.

 3. The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pacey
    ("the FtJ") at  a  hearing  on  18  March  2016.   Ultimately  the  FtJ
    dismissed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  It  is  important  to
    recognise that the only ground of appeal available to the appellant, in
    this particular case at least, was on human rights grounds.  There  was
    no ground of appeal available to her under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal was granted refer
    to the appellant's circumstances, being a widow and wishing to  make  a
    short family visit to the UK.  It is argued  that  the  FtJ's  decision
    failed to recognise the appellant's Article 8 rights. On the merits  it
    is said that she would not want to  settle  in  the  UK,  cannot  speak
    English and is not familiar with the UK's lifestyle,  culture,  customs
    and language.

 5. In submissions on behalf of appellant before me today it was emphasised
    that decisions on Article  8  cases  in  terms  of  domestic  cases  as
    compared to foreign cases, are somewhat different.   It  was  submitted
    that the appellant  did  not  want  to  stay  in  the  UK.  She  has  a
    relationship with her son which she wants  to  pursue  by  means  of  a
    visit.  I was asked to have regard to considerations of fairness and to
    discretion overall. It was also submitted that the appeal raises  issue
    in terms of the appellant's private life.

 6. On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that there was no material
    error of law on the part of the FtJ.  I was referred to aspects of  her
    decision which were to the effect that Article 8 was not engaged.

 7. It does seem to me that there are certain  deficiencies  in  the  FtJ's
    decision. In the first place, although not highlighted by either  party
    before me, it is to be noted that at paragraph 3 the FtJ said that  she
    was able to consider  evidence  about  any  matter  which  she  thought
    relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  evidence  which
    concerned a matter arising after the date of the decision.  That is  in
    fact not correct, because although this is an appeal where only Article
    8 grounds were available, it is nevertheless the case that the FtJ  was
    still bound to consider the circumstances appertaining at the  date  of
    the decision (see AS (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] UKHL 32).

 8. That however, is not a feature of the arguments before me  and  is  not
    material in any event.

 9. The FtJ was required to consider whether Article 8 was  engaged.   Part
    of that assessment is a consideration of whether there was family  life
    at all between the appellant and her son.  Needless  to  say  they  are
    both adults.  The FtJ at  paragraph  9  referred  to  the  decision  in
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  112  (IAC)  to  the
    effect that it will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person
    other than a close relative would be able to show that the  refusal  of
    entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8, and  further  that
    it is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is  that  of
    husband and wife or other close family partners or a parent  and  minor
    child.

10. That is not to say, and the FtJ did not say,  that  there  may  not  be
    other cases where, for example between adults, there may not be  family
    life.  That could occur between a mother and her adult  son,  depending
    on the circumstances.  There is in fact  no  express  finding  on  this
    issue by the FtJ and I consider that there should have been.    Insofar
    as that constitutes an error of law however, I am not satisfied that it
    is material  because  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  FtJ  which
    indicated that the relationship between the appellant and  her  son  in
    the UK extended beyond more than normal emotional ties between  adults.
    In other words, there was a lack of evidence which indicated that there
    was family life, in law, between them although  it  was  accepted  that
    they are mother and son.

11. The FtJ did however, refer to  the  decision  in  Adjei  (visit  visas-
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 which directs Tribunals to the questions  to
    be addressed in terms of whether Article 8 is engaged  at  all.   As  I
    say, that would  have  involved  an  assessment  of  family  life.  The
    evidence before the FtJ did not establish family life at all.  Even  if
    the FtJ therefore erred in law in not  making  an  assessment  of  that
    issue, any error of law in that respect could not have been material.

12. There was also  a  requirement  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant was able to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,
    even if there was family life. As indicated at the outset, the basis of
    the refusal was the genuineness of the visit and the intention to leave
    the UK at the end of the period of that  visit.  There  is  no  express
    finding in relation to those aspects of the Immigration  Rules  by  the
    FtJ although one could say  that  in  terms  of  paragraph  15  it  was
    impliedly found that the appellant had not established that  she  would
    leave the UK at the end of the period of the visit. This is because the
    FtJ referred to the arguments in terms  of  the  appellant  finding  it
    difficult to adapt to culture and so forth and not being able to  speak
    English.  She  rejected  those  arguments,  saying  that  actually  the
    appellant and her son speak Punjabi and are able  to  communicate  with
    each other, and also that living with her son the culture  and  customs
    would be ones with which she would be familiar.

13. Impliedly  therefore,  the  judge  rejected  the  contention  that  the
    appellant would not intend to stay in the UK.  That  implied  rejection
    of the appellant's ability to meet the requirements of the Rules  would
    not in other circumstances have been sufficient. However,  any  failure
    in that respect again is not material because there was no evidence  of
    family life between the appellant and her son.

14. Furthermore, however, even if the FtJ could be said to have found  that
    there was family life, she concluded that the extent to which they have
    family  life  together  is  not   sufficiently   compromised   by   the
    respondent's  decision  so  as  to   amount   to   a   disproportionate
    interference or, this being an entry clearance case,  lack  of  respect
    for family life, because at paragraph 14 she said  that  the  appellant
    had visited India each year and therefore family life could continue in
    that way.

15. At paragraph 16 she said that the appellant is able  to  make  a  fresh
    application for a visit. I do not consider that that would  answer  the
    proportionality question, in so far  as  proportionality  arises  here.
    However, more  importantly,  the  FtJ  said  that  the  refusal  simply
    maintains the status quo; it does not adversely affect family  life  as
    it is currently enjoyed between the appellant and her family in the UK.
     In those circumstances, that being the overarching conclusion  of  the
    FtJ, any errors of law to which I have referred are not material to the
    outcome.

16. In those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek          29/11/16


