
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00723/2013
                                                             & VA/00303/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th September 2014                          |On 22nd October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                             Mr Muhammad Fayyaz
                                      &
                              Mrs Shazia Mubeen
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan Whitestones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, Mr Muhammad Fayyaz, date of birth 10th January 1969 and
    Mrs Shazia Mubeen date of birth 22nd September 1970,  are  citizens  of
    Pakistan.  Having  considered  the  facts  there  is  no  need  for  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McAll promulgated on 6th November 2013, whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated the 13th  November 2013 to refuse the appellants entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as visitors  seeking  to  visit  family
    members.

 3. By decision made on 13th December 2013  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted. The matter appears before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there was a material error of  law
    in the original determination.

 4. In granting leave the judge having dismissed all the other grounds gave
    the following as the grounds for granting permission:-

        3 However it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge applied
        to a family visit  appeal  the  more  exacting  standard  of  proof
        required in a settlement appeal and that in doing  so  he  made  an
        arguable error of law.

 5. The burden of proof in a visit appeal, as in an immigration appeal,  is
    on the appellants. The standard of proof to be applied is  the  balance
    of probabilities. There no  difference  between  the  standards  to  be
    applied.

 6. The appellants' representative had to accept that Section 85 and 85A of
    the 2002 Act applied, such that evidence had to  be  pertinent  to  the
    situation as at the date of the decision. Much  of  the  documentation,
    upon which reliance  was  placed,  was  dated  post  the  date  of  the
    decision, as noted by the judge. However such  evidence  may  be  taken
    into  account  provided  that  it  sheds  light  on  the  circumstances
    pertaining at the date of decision. [see DR (Morocco)2005 UKIAT 00038].

 7. The judge, in considering the evidence presented, has  noted  that  the
    appellants had failed to submit documentation, including tax  documents
    and returns, to substantiate their personal income. Evidence  had  been
    disclosed that the first appellant had a business  and  had  employment
    with certain benefits from the business but no evidence to substantiate
    his personal income.

 8. In submissions before me the appellants' representative sought to  give
    an explanation for the tax documents. Tax documentation as noted by the
    judge in paragraph 12 raised a number of  issues  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's tax being paid.

 9. Indeed at pages 122 and 126 documents from the Federal Board of Revenue
    indicated that the first appellant had no income and no taxable income.



10. Even after explanation there were details on the  tax  documents  which
    did not appear to be  consistent  with  the  explanation  and  did  not
    substantiate the income of the first appellant. The judge in  paragraph
    19 has identified that there is a Bank account in respect  of  Hamtetex
    Enterprises but  that  account  does  show  any  income  going  to  the
    appellant from the account. Whilst the Hamtetex Enterprises account has
    a credit balance there is nothing to indicate that the  credit  balance
    would be available to the appellant to use.  Equally  the  judge  noted
    that at times the balance in the account of Hamtetex  would  have  been
    insufficient to pay the first appellant his salary at the time  it  was
    due.

11. It has to be noted within the determination that  the  judge  has  made
    significant findings to the benefit of the  appellant.  The  judge  has
    however considered the income  of  the  first  appellant  and  was  not
    satisfied that the documentation submitted substantiated  that  income.
    The judge was entitled to make the findings that he did with regard  to
    the income of the appellants.

12. Whilst bank accounts had been produced, those  related  to  a  business
    called Hamtex Enterprises and the funds belonged to the  company.   The
    judge was entitled to find that there was no evidence  that  the  funds
    could be used by the appellants.

13. Not being satisfied as to the income of the appellants, the  judge  had
    considered the income of the sponsor. Much of the evidence  in  respect
    of the income of the sponsor was post the date of decision.  The  judge
    had carefully examined that evidence and noted that at the time of  the
    decision  the  sponsor  would  at  best  have  only  recently   started
    employment and was likely not to have been in  the  employment  at  the
    time of and prior to the decision. The judge was not satisfied that the
    sponsor was in a financial position to support  the  appellants  whilst
    the appellants were in the UK.

14. The sponsor lived with his wife and child. The  sponsor's  wife  worked
    but the income for the lady appeared only to be sufficient  to  support
    the sponsor and his family. There was no  excess  of  income  over  the
    level required on social security levels to maintain this family.

15. The documentation was considered with care by the judge.  The  findings
    of fact made were open to the  judge  on  the  evidence  submitted.  As
    identified in paragraph 6 the judge has applied the correct standard of
    proof. In the circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusions  that  he  did  and  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

16. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          24th September 2014

