
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00616/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 September 2016                          |On 14 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PARIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              KARIMA AMIROUCHE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereafter  the
    Respondent, as it was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper (the  judge),  promulgated
    on 8 March 2016,  in  which  he  allowed  the  appeal  of  Miss  Karima
    Amirouche (once again the Appellant).

 2. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought against the  decision
    of the Respondent dated 22 December 2014, refusing entry clearance as a
    family visitor.   By  an  application  made  on  7  December  2014  the
    Appellant had sought to visit her sister in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    short period.  That application was  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules  were  not
    satisfied. Given the date of that refusal the grounds of appeal open to
    the Appellant were limited to those relating to human rights.

The judge's decision

 3. There was an oral hearing before the judge on 11  February  2016.   The
    Appellant's sister attended along with another sister,  and  both  gave
    oral evidence.  There was no  Presenting  Officer  present.  The  judge
    deemed there to be a valid appeal before him given that Article  8  had
    been raised on appeal (see paragraph 7).

 4. An aspect of the oral evidence was that the  Appellant's  brother  (who
    had resided in this country) had passed away, and that  she  wished  to
    visit his grave as part of the family's grieving process.  This was  in
    addition to her spending time with her sister,  with  whom  she  had  a
    particularly close relationship.

 5. At paragraphs 23 and 24 the judge makes it  abundantly  clear  that  he
    found all of the evidence before him to be wholly credible.  The  judge
    goes on to make detailed factual findings, all supported by reasons, in
    respect of the objections taken in the Respondent's refusal notice. The
    judge then correctly goes on to identify the relevant case law relating
    to Article 8 including the case of Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC),  ZB
    (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 170.

 6. At paragraph 38 the judge finds that there was, as he described  it,  a
    significant and very close relationship between the Appellant  and  her
    sister in this country. That relationship had  strengthened  since  the
    death of their brother. There was found to be regular  contact  between
    the two sisters including  the  UK  based  sister  travelling  back  to
    Algeria to see the Appellant and spending significant periods  of  time
    with her there.

 7. At paragraph  39  the  judge  concludes  that  despite  the  close  and
    significant relationship between the two sisters he was  not  satisfied
    that there was financial or other dependency between them going  beyond
    that of most adult sibling relationships.  However, at paragraph 40 the
    judge goes on as part of his overall assessment of the case to conclude
    that the issue of  family  life  also  incorporated  the  wish  of  the
    Appellant to be with not only her sister but also to see the  grave  of
    her late brother. The judge directed himself  to  the  case  of  Abbasi
    [2015] UKUT 00463  (IAC),  and  cites  a  relevant  passage  from  that
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.

 8. At paragraph 41 the judge concludes that visiting the  brother's  grave
    was an important reason for the visit and that this reason  existed  as
    at the date of decision. He finds that as a whole the family, who  were
    found to be devout Muslims, regarded  visiting  the  grave  as  holding
    significance. As a result of this the judge finds that  Article  8  was
    engaged.

 9. He then finds that the Respondent's decision refusing  entry  clearance
    interfered with the Article 8 rights on the basis  that  the  Appellant
    was being prevented from visiting her brother's grave.  The judge  then
    moves on and appears to conclude that the Respondent was  justified  in
    not exercising his discretion in favour of the Appellant in respect  of
    the Rules. In the following paragraph he accepts that the sister  based
    in this country would be able to continue to  visit  the  Appellant  in
    Algeria.

10. In paragraph  43  the  judge  makes  reference  to  the  importance  of
    maintaining effective immigration control and in paragraph 44 he  notes
    that he has given particular weight to the fact that the family  had  a
    very good immigration record and the core purpose for  this  particular
    visit was to be a visit to the brother's grave.  In this case the judge
    found that  there  were  compelling  circumstances.   As  a  result  he
    concluded  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  a   disproportionate
    interference with Article 8 and the appeal was allowed on human  rights
    grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

11. The grounds of appeal cite a number of cases including MS [2004]  UKIAT
    00064 and Kugathas without any comment being  made  upon  the  passages
    cited. At paragraph 7 the case of Abbasi is cited.  It is asserted that
    the cases referred to in Abbasi involved people who were already  in  a
    member state.  Reference is made to the case of  SS  (Malaysia)  [2004]
    UKIAT 00091, and it is said that private life could not be  engaged  in
    entry clearance cases. The grounds then go on to say that  the  refusal
    of entry clearance in a visit case "without more" does  not  constitute
    an interference with a private or family life of an Appellant.

12. In paragraph 8 it is said that none of the case law cited supported the
    contention that Article 8 in entry clearance cases  would  protect  the
    private lives of those not already in the country.

13. Permission to appeal was granted buy First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on
    10 August 2016.

The hearing before me

14. Mr Walker accepted that this was a thorough decision by the judge.   He
    also accepted that some of the points apparently made in the grounds of
    appeal lacked a degree of merit.   It  was  not  being  suggested  that
    Abbasi was wrong in any way and Mr Walker quite  fairly  also  accepted
    that in effect the judge was finding that the relevant requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules had in  fact  been  met  by  this
    particular Appellant, having regard to the findings as a whole.  He had
    no other submissions to make.

15. The Appellant's sister who attended the hearing was not called upon  to
    make any comment.

Decision on error of law

16. I find that there  are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

17. The judge has carried out a  commendably  thorough  assessment  of  the
    evidence and issues before him. He has made detailed findings of  fact,
    all of which were entirely open to him  and  none  of  which  had  been
    challenged by the Respondent in any event.   He  has  directed  himself
    correctly in law throughout.

18. In respect of the existence of family life, one has of course  to  read
    the decision as a whole and in a sensible manner.  It is quite clear to
    me that the judge has found the relationship between the Appellant  and
    her sister to be particularly close, and whilst he has  concluded  that
    this of itself would not necessarily constitute  the  necessary  family
    life, it was part and parcel of the overall  picture  which  of  course
    included the significant finding that the brother's grave was  in  this
    country and that this formed an  important  reason  for  the  Appellant
    wishing to come here.

19. As the judge has set out in paragraph 41, the issue  of  the  brother's
    grave was of significance to the family as a whole, including of course
    the Appellant.  The issue of family life has to be seen in the  context
    of the findings as set out by the judge.  Contrary  to  what  has  been
    suggested in some parts of the grounds of appeal, the judge  there  was
    not predicating the engagement of  Article  8  upon  private  life  but
    rather upon family life. In my view that was entirely  consistent  with
    the decision in Abbasi, a case which I note was  also  an  entry  case.
    There has been no suggestion by Mr Walker  before  me  that  Abbasi  is
    wrong in any way.

20. In respect of an interference in (or more accurately a lack of  respect
    for) the family life, it is  well  settled  that  the  threshold  is  a
    relatively low one. In this case it was entirely open to the  judge  to
    find that that threshold was met.  The Appellant  was  being  prevented
    from coming to visit her brother's grave (see paragraph 41).

21. Moving through the Razgar approach (to which the  judge  had  correctly
    directed himself), the judge has in effect found that the Appellant was
    a genuine visitor for the purposes of paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration
    Rules: that clearly counted very much in the  Appellant's  favour.   He
    has correctly made reference to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control.  He has factored in  the  family's  good
    immigration history as he was entitled to do and attributed  particular
    weight to the issue of the brother's grave. Again, this was a matter to
    which he was entitled to have due regard.

22. Importantly, the judge has fully appreciated the high threshold  needed
    to cross in order to succeed on Article 8 grounds in a visit visa  case
    by referring to the compelling circumstances that he has found to exist
    in this particular case (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387).

23. It may be the case that that successful visit visa cases are  a  fairly
    rare breed in this day and age.  However such cases can and  do  exist.
    This is an example of a case in which the  judge  has  applied  himself
    conscientiously to the evidence and law and has  produced  what  in  my
    view is a thorough and fully sustainable decision.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


