
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: VA/00072/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR KHURRAN QADEER CHAUDRY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Burlas (Sponsor's husband)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, citizen of Pakistan applied to visit his sister and  her
    family. On November 17, 2014 the respondent refused the application and
    any appeal was limited the Equality Act 2010 and article 8 ECHR issues.
    The appellant appealed this decision on December 9, 2014 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Manuell on June 30, 2015 and he allowed the  appellant's  appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR on the basis there was  both  family  and  private  life
    between the appellant and his sister's children and that a refusal,  in
    circumstances where he was satisfied  the  Rules  were  met,  would  be
    disproportionate.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that  decision  on  July  8,
    2015 on the grounds the Tribunal  had  erred  in  finding  family  life
    existed.  She  also  submitted  the  proportionality   assessment   was
    inadequate.  Designated  Judge  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  McCarthy
    refused permission to appeal on September 9, 2015 finding  the  grounds
    overlooked the findings in  paragraph  [12]  of  the  decision  wherein
    Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Manuell  had  identified
    private and family life rights which engaged article 8 ECHR. Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell  was  entitled  then  to  have
    regard to the fact he  was  satisfied  the  rules  had  been  met  when
    assessing the impact for the purposes of proportionality. Permission to
    appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on September 16, 2015  and  on
    October 2, 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins found  it  was  reasonably
    arguable that the relationship argued  was  not  one  that  the  United
    Kingdom was obliged to promote under article 8 ECHR as  a  relationship
    between adult siblings had to have an element of  dependency  and  none
    had been shown.

 5. His permission at paragraphs [3] erroneously  then  refused  permission
    but I am satisfied this was a typographical error that regrettably  was
    not spotted by either Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins, the  administration
    or the parties.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 7. Mr Avery relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted there  had  been
    an error in law. He argued  that  the  before  finding  article  8  was
    engaged the Tribunal had to find that there was family life as set  out
    in the cases of the cases of Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and
    Ghising & Ors [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) and no evidence of any dependency
    had been demonstrated. The fact the Tribunal found the Rules  were  met
    and they were family did not mean article 8 was engaged.

 8. Mr Burlas reminded me that the appellant's family  had  all  previously
    been allowed to visit the United Kingdom  and  this  appellant  was  no
    different. He wished to see  his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as
    against Pakistan, and spend time with them. He argued the  relationship
    the appellant has with his sister and  her  family  shows  a  level  of
    dependency. The refusal created a stigma because all he  wanted  to  do
    was to come and visit his family and then return to Pakistan  where  he
    lives happily with his wife and runs a successful business.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

 9. As Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Manuell  correctly
    identified this appeal could only be brought on  limited  grounds.  The
    fact he was satisfied the appellant did satisfy the  Immigration  Rules
    did not mean the application must succeed under article 8 ECHR.

10. Case law such as Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 makes it clear that
    blood ties were insufficient to constitute family life because most  of
    us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit
    but on their own they would not amount to  family  life.  In  paragraph
    [12] of his  decision  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Manuell referred to the family and private life that  persons  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom enjoyed with relatives abroad. He took  the  view
    that  this  included  nephews  and  nieces  and  refusing  entry  would
    interfere with their family life.

11. Mr Avery submitted that this consideration did not go  far  enough  and
    the fact the Rules may be met was insufficient. In Mostafa  (Article  8
    in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) the Tribunal found that  in
    the case of appeals brought against refusal of  entry  clearance  under
    Article 8 ECHR, the claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules
    is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of
    being a weighty, though not determinative, factor when deciding whether
    such refusal is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
    immigration control. That case involved an application by a spouse  and
    the Tribunal found that refusing the spouse entry was  an  interference
    with their private  and  family  lives  and  the  interference  was  of
    sufficient gravity potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

12. The Tribunal in Mostafa made it  clear  that  one  of  the  factors  to
    consider in such cases was the impact of refusal on  the  relationships
    that have to be promoted. Refusal of entry clearance  will  not  always
    interfere disproportionately with such  a  relationship.  The  Tribunal
    concluded by saying-

         "We are, however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely
         to be limited to cases where the relationship is  that  of  husband
         and wife or other close life partners or a parent and  minor  child
         and even then it will not necessarily be extended to  cases  where,
         for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim or will not  add
         significantly to the time that the people involved spend  together.
         In the limited class of cases where Article 8 (1) ECHR  is  engaged
         the refusal of entry clearance must be in accordance with  the  law
         and proportionate. If  a  person's  circumstances  do  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules and they have not acted in a way that  undermines
         the system of immigration control, a refusal of entry clearance  is
         liable to infringe Article 8."

13. The facts of the case before me  differ  from  the  facts  of  Mostafa.
    Whilst the Tribunal in this case referred to the rights of families  to
    see each other and enjoy a family life I agree with Mr  Avery  although
    the Tribunal considered the principle of article 8 it did not apply the
    principles as they affect non dependant adults or relatives who are not
    close. Although nephews and nieces  previously  had  rights  of  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules they lost those rights some time  ago.  The
    fact the appellant wanted to spend time with this family did  not  mean
    this amounted family life. They enjoyed a traditional family life  that
    all relatives living in a different country enjoy but to engage article
    8 I am  satisfied  the  appellant  has  to  go  further  and  in  those
    circumstances I find the Tribunal erred in allowing this  appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR.

14. In the circumstances I set aside the decision allowing the appeal under
    article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

15. There was a material error and I set  aside  the  earlier  decision.  I
    remake the decision and dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I set aside the earlier fee award and make no fee award because I have
dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

