
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00943/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 14 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TRONG SAN VU

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Edwards instructed by Morgan Hall Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent (whom I will refer to as the "claimant") is a citizen of
    Vietnam who was born on 8 September 1954.

 2. On 29 December 2014, he applied for entry clearance in order  to  visit
    his daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren in the UK under para  41  of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).   On  5  January  2015,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer refused the claimant's application on the basis
    that he was not satisfied that the claimant was a genuine  visitor  who
    intended to leave the UK on completion of his  visit  (para  41(i)  and
    (ii)).  On 11 September 2015, the Entry Clearance Manager confirmed the
    ECO's decision, determining also that the decision did not  breach  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  As a result  of  the
    amendment to s.88A of the NIA Act 2002 by s.52 of the Crime and  Courts
    Act 2013, the claimant's appeal was limited to  human  rights  grounds,
    namely Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. Judge Paul allowed the claimant's appeal under Art 8.  He accepted that
    the claimant was a genuine  visitor  and  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was a disproportionate interference  with  his  family  life.
    Accordingly, the judge allowed the appeal under Art 8.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had erred in law in accepting that there was family life
    between the claimant and his family in the UK and  also  on  the  basis
    that the proportionality assessment was inadequate.

 6. On 30 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Saffer)  granted  the
    Entry Clearance Officer permission to appeal.

The Submissions

 7. Mr Mills, who represented the ECO, submitted that the judge had  failed
    properly to consider the issue of "family life" in accordance with  the
    case law of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising (Family Life
    - Adults - Gurkha Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  It  was,  Mr  Mills
    submitted inadequate for the judge simply to say in para 17 that "there
    are close family ties here".  That, he submitted, failed to engage with
    the issue of whether there  were  more  than  "normal  emotional  ties"
    between the claimant and his adult  daughter.   He  accepted  that,  as
    Ghising identified, family life could exist between an adult child  and
    a parent (as in Ghising where the child continued to live at home)  but
    there was nothing of that sort on the facts of  this  case.   Mr  Mills
    relied upon the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112  (IAC)  at  [24]  where  the  Tribunal
    emphasised that it would be only in "very unusual circumstances that  a
    person other than a close relative  will  be  able  to  show  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1)."

 8. Further, as regards any relationship between the claimant and  his  two
    grandchildren in the UK, Mr Mills  acknowledged  that  the  family  had
    visited the claimant in Vietnam in 2015 but there was no presumption of
    family life between a  grandparent  and  a  grandchild  and  there  was
    limited evidence of the relationships in the witness statements of  the
    claimant and his daughter.  There was, Mr Mills submitted, insufficient
    evidence to find that family life existed between the claimant and  his
    grandchildren.

 9. Secondly, Mr Mills submitted that even if family life did exist between
    the claimant and his UK family, the judge had erred in law  in  finding
    that any interference was disproportionate.

10. Mr Mills invited me to both set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and  to
    remake it dismissing the claimant's appeal under Art 8.

11. Mr Edwards submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  should  stand.   He
    submitted that the judge should be given credit  for  knowing  his  job
    and, in particular, the underlying law in cases such as Kugathas  which
    led him to find in para 17 that there were "close  family  ties  here".
    Mr Edwards submitted that the claimant's family had visited Vietnam and
    that there was family life between both  the  claimant  and  his  adult
    daughter and between the claimant and his grandchildren  who  were,  at
    the date of the judge's decision, aged around 2 and 4 years of age.  He
    pointed out that the family  visits  to  Vietnam  were  more  expensive
    because of the number who had to travel and, he  submitted,  short-term
    visits to visit family should be seen as a facet of "family life".   Mr
    Edwards submitted that the judge had not erred in law in  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal under Art 8.

12. In order to succeed under Art 8, the claimant relied, and continues  to
    rely, upon "family life" with his adult daughter in the UK and his  two
    grandchildren in the UK.   There  is  no  presumption  of  family  life
    between an adult child and parent.  There must be a sufficiently  close
    relationship in order to establish "family life" and so engage Art 8 of
    the ECHR.  Although a presumption may arise between a  grandparent  and
    grandchild, that may be rebutted on the evidence in a particular case.

13. I was referred to the Court of Appeal's decision in  Kugathas  and  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Ghising.  Those cases, together  with  the
    subsequent decisions of the Court of Appeal in R(Gurung and  others)  v
    SSHD [2013 EWCA Civ 8 and  Singh v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630,  were
    helpfully set out, and approved, by the Court of Appeal in Rai v  Entry
    Clearance Officer (New Delhi) [2017] EWCA Civ 320  at  [17]-[20]  where
    Lindblom LJ (with whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) said this:

         "17.     In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies".   Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life".  She acknowledged (at paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of family  life".   Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same country".   In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

         "18.     In Ghising (family life -  adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  the
             Upper Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)
             that the judgments  in  Kugathas  had  been  "interpreted  too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence".  It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

             "61.     Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                  reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
                  A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether
                  or not the adult child has founded a family  of  his  own.
                  If he is still single and living with his parents,  he  is
                  likely to enjoy family life with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom  (in  paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

             "49.     An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                  suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old,
                  who resides with his mother and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                  family of his own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  "family
                  life"."

         19.  Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case".  In some instances "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents".  As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all depends
             on the facts".  The court  expressly  endorsed  (at  paragraph
             46), as "useful" and as indicating "the correct approach to be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including  its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

         20.  To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

             "24.     I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                  referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
                  approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.
                  In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of  immigration
                  control, there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to
                  the existence or absence of family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
                  European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly  in
                  Kugathas   did   not   include    any    requirement    of
                  exceptionality.  It all depends on the  facts.   The  love
                  and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings
                  will not of itself justify a finding  of  a  family  life.
                  There has to be something more.  A young adult living with
                  his parents or siblings will normally have a  family  life
                  to be respected under  Article  8.   A  child  enjoying  a
                  family life with his parents does not  suddenly  cease  to
                  have a family life at midnight as he  turns  18  years  of
                  age.   On  the  other   hand,   a   young   adult   living
                  independently of his parents may well not  have  a  family
                  life for the purposes of Article 8"."

14. The case law identifies that the issue  of  whether  "family  life"  is
    established  is  "highly  fact-sensitive"  and   requires   a   careful
    consideration of all the relevant facts.  Further, the  search  is  for
    real and effective support which may  involve  emotional  or  financial
    support and ties.  The ordinary relationship between an adult child and
    parent (at least where that child has not struck out for an independent
    life, including forming his or her own family) will not usually  amount
    to "family life".

15. In the context of an Art 8 claim where entry clearance as a visitor has
    been refused, the Upper Tribunal in Mostafa pointed up the likely scope
    of any such claim (at [24):

         "It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope. We are, however, prepared  to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope  of  Article  8(1).  In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together."

16. Mr Edwards' referred me to this passage  in  para  6  of  his  skeleton
    argument.  The facts of this case do not fall within the examples given
    by the Upper Tribunal.  But, of course, they were no more than  that  -
    examples.

17. In this case, the evidence before the judge  was  that  the  claimant's
    daughter lived in the UK and is a British citizen.  She is married  and
    she and her husband have two young children.   The  claimant  lives  in
    Vietnam with his wife.  At the date of decision, he  was  60  years  of
    age.  Although the evidence was that his family in the UK would pay for
    and accommodate him when  he  visited  them,  he  was  not  financially
    supported by his daughter in the UK when he is living in Vietnam.   The
    evidence before the judge, which it would appear he accepted, was  that
    the claimant had worked for many years in a transport company  and  was
    presently in receipt of rental income from land every month.  There was
    no evidence that the claimant was other  than  healthy.   The  evidence
    before the judge was that the claimant's daughter had been  in  the  UK
    for ten years and that during that time she  had  returned  to  Vietnam
    with her husband and children on more  than  one  occasion.   The  most
    recent visit was in February 2015.  The claimant had one other daughter
    living in Vietnam.  The claimant had never been to the UK but they kept
    regular contact using Viper Social Media.

18. The judge's reasoning leading him to allow the appeal under Art 8 is at
    paras 14-19 of his determination as follows:

         "14.      The  burden  is  on  the  appellant  to  show  that   his
             application  engages  his  human  rights,  and  then  for  the
             Secretary  of  State  to  show  that   any   interference   is
             proportionate.

         15.  In this case, it appears that there  has  been  at  least  one
             previous application that has  been  refused  -  although  the
             details for that were not put  in  front  of  me.   The  Entry
             Clearance Manager said that this case fell to be considered on
             separate criteria.

         16.  The forensic exercise involved determining whether or not,  in
             truth, this was some attempt at disguised immigration because,
             of course, that is at the heart  of  the  decision  to  refuse
             entry.

         17.  Family ties are clearly important, and the appellant's sponsor
             amply demonstrated that there are close family ties here.  The
             question is whether  or  not  this  decision  interferes  with
             family life to such an extent that it is disproportionate.   I
             take into account that it is much cheaper for the appellant to
             fly to the UK than it is for the sponsor, her husband and  two
             children to make the trip the other way.   I  also  take  into
             account that the father clearly has a  wish  to  see  how  his
             daughter is fairing and  what  is  clearly  a  very  different
             culture and environment from that which exists in Vietnam.

         18.  It seems to me  that  the  balancing  exercise  here  involves
             determining  whether  or  not  the   Immigration   Provisions,
             designed to prevent people from migrating here, properly  bite
             in this case.  It is noteworthy that the application was dated
             in December 2014, and there was a photograph of the  appellant
             and his wife taken in early  2015.   It  seems  to  me  pretty
             clear, therefore, that the appellant has an established family
             life back in Vietnam, and indeed spent all  his  years  there,
             and is truly a Vietnamese citizen.

         19.  It seems to me  that,  set  against  that  backdrop,  that  to
             interfere with his right - and perhaps more  importantly,  his
             family's rights - to visit the UK is a  significant  one,  and
             there must be good grounds for showing that such  interference
             is proportionate.  On the facts of this case,  finding  (as  I
             do) that the appellant and sponsor are genuine  people,  I  am
             satisfied that this is a genuine visit visa application, and I
             am satisfied that the proposed refusal is  a  disproportionate
             one with the exercise of family life."

19. It is not difficult to see why the judge decided that the claimant  was
    a genuine visitor.  However, even though he acknowledges that it is for
    the appellant to show that his human rights are engaged (see para  14),
    his finding that Art 8 is engaged on the basis of "family life"  is  in
    my judgment unsustainable in law.

20. First, the judge failed to direct himself in accordance with  the  case
    law summarised in [17]-[20] of Rai.  Secondly, and more  significantly,
    the evidence simply did not bear out  that  the  required  relationship
    existed between the claimant and his adult  daughter.   There  were  no
    elements of financial or  emotional  dependency.   The  judge  was,  no
    doubt, entitled to find that it was a  close  family.   The  visits  to
    Vietnam and the continued contact via  the  internet  paid  witness  to
    that.  However, that was no more than an ordinary relationship  between
    a  family  split  geographically  across  the  world.   The  claimant's
    daughter had an independent life with her  own  husband  and  children.
    She had lived separately from her father and mother in Vietnam for  ten
    years.  In my judgment, the judge could not rationally conclude on  the
    evidence that the relationship  between  the  claimant  and  his  adult
    daughter amounted to "family life" within Art 8 of the ECHR.

21.  Further,  the  evidence  of  the  claimant's  relationship  with   his
    grandchildren was extremely sparse and limited.  There was no  evidence
    of the closeness of relationship identified in the case law.  In and of
    themselves, visits and, if it involved the grandchildren,  contact  via
    the internet might suffice if the evidence spoke  sufficiently  to  the
    content of the relationship.  Here, in my  judgment  it  did  not.   Mr
    Edwards was unable to  draw  my  attention  to  any  specific  evidence
    relating  to  the   relationship   between   the   claimant   and   his
    grandchildren.  It is wholly unclear from the judge's reasons  whether,
    before  the  judge,  any  reliance  was  directly  placed  upon   those
    relationships at all.  What is clear is that the evidence did not  seek
    to address those relationships in any substantial way.  To  the  extent
    any presumption arose, the total lack of evidence as to the content  of
    the relationships told heavily against there  being  'family  life'  in
    fact. Consequently, in my judgment, it  was  also  irrational  (to  the
    extent that the judge did find this) for the judge to conclude that the
    relationship between the claimant and his grandchildren engaged  Art  8
    of the ECHR.

22. As Mr Mills submitted, if that was the position, Art 8 was not  engaged
    and the First-tier Tribunal's decision must be set aside and a decision
    to dismiss the claimant's appeal under Art 8 substituted.

23. In any event, even if to some limited extent the evidence did establish
    a relationship between the  claimant  and,  perhaps  more  likely,  his
    grandchildren engaging Art 8, there is no rational basis upon which the
    judge could have found that the interference was disproportionate.

24. In reaching that conclusion I bear in mind  the  point  raised,  albeit
    very cursorily in Mr Edwards' skeleton argument (at para 13) and not at
    all in his oral submissions,  that  the  relationships  may  amount  to
    'private life' under Art 8 (see Singh at [25]).

25. First, the judge was, of course, required to give weight to his finding
    that the claimant had established that he was  a  genuine  visitor  and
    therefore met the requirements of para 41.  That, in itself, would  not
    make any decision disproportionate but would point  in  that  direction
    (see Mostafa at [23]).  As in any assessment of  proportionality  under
    Art 8.2, a 'fair balance'  between  the  individuals'  rights  and  the
    public interest must be stuck (see e.g. R(Agyarko and another)  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 at [47]).

26. Secondly, I accept that it is in the best interests of  the  claimant's
    grandchildren to see, to the extent  geographical  separation  permits,
    their grandfather and that is a primary  consideration  (see,  e.g.  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74).

27. Thirdly, however, as the  history  of  this  family  demonstrates,  the
    claimant's UK family is able to visit Vietnam where the claimant lives.
     The evidence was they had done so on more than one occasion  and  most
    recently in February 2015.  The decision does not,  therefore,  prevent
    short family visits and therefore, face-to-face  contact,  between  the
    claimant and his family in the UK.  The fact that it is more  expensive
    to visit Vietnam, because of the numbers travelling,  whilst  a  factor
    does not provide substantial support for a conclusion that the  refusal
    of entry clearance is disproportionate.

28. It is well recognised that, even in the case of spouses, Art 8 does not
    provide a right to choose where  family  life  should  be  enjoyed:   a
    fortiori where an individual seeks to make a short family visit to  the
    UK  where  the  UK  family  can  feasibly  and  reasonably  visit  that
    individual in their own country.

29. In my judgment, therefore, the judge could not rationally conclude that
    if Art 8.1 was engaged (and on my findings it was  not  in  respect  of
    'family  life')  any  interference  by  refusing  the  claimant   entry
    clearance is not disproportionate.  In my judgment, any interference is
    plainly and clearly proportionate.

30.  I  should  add  that,  of  course,  in  any  future  entry   clearance
    application, the claimant  has  the  benefit  of  the  judge's  factual
    finding that he was a genuine visitor.

Decision

31. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the claimant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of  an  error  of
    law.  That decision is set aside.

32. I remake the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal under Art 8.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 14 July 2017




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed, no fee award is payable.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 14 July 2017



