
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00225/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11th March 2015                       |On 24th March 2015                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Lagos
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        HENRIETTA IHEAKONYEN EHIABOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Sponsor in person, Mr Richard Otuorimo


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal brought  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  who  has
    permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Verity) who allowed the appeal of the Respondent against  the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer made on 17th December 2013, refusing her
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of  a  family
    visit.

 2.  Whilst  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  brings  the  application   for
    permission, I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3.  The  background  can  be  briefly  stated.   The  Appellant  made   an
    application for a family visit to stay with her sister and her brother-
    in-law on 6th December 2013.  She had travelled to the  United  Kingdom
    on two previous occasions in September 2009 and December 2010  for  the
    purposes of  a  family  visit  and  had  returned  to  Nigeria  at  the
    conclusion of those visits.  In respect of the visit made in  September
    2009, the application was originally refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer but was reversed on appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in  a
    determination promulgated on 8th June  2009  (Immigration  Judge  Mylne
    QC).

 4. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  the  basis  upon  which  the
    application had been made and the material that had  been  produced  in
    support of that application.  In a decision dated  17th  December  2013
    the Entry Clearance Officer set out the position  from  the  documents,
    noting that the Appellant had stated that she was a "new graduate  with
    no income".  The Entry Clearance Officer considered the application  on
    the basis upon which it was made and observed that he must be satisfied
    of her current circumstances in order to be satisfied of her intentions
    in the UK and that it was the  Appellant's  responsibility  to  provide
    evidence of those circumstances.  The Entry Clearance Officer took into
    account and acknowledged that she had  recently  completed  a  year  of
    National Service from November 2012 until November  2013  but  she  had
    provided no other details of her circumstances  in  Nigeria,  including
    the course that she stated she had recently completed at university and
    in support of her application she had chosen  to  submit  no  financial
    documentation at all.  The Entry Clearance Officer went on to state, "I
    am unable to assess your application in  the  full  knowledge  of  your
    circumstances."  He went on to state:-

         "Furthermore, you have failed to  demonstrate  sufficiently  strong
         ties to Nigeria to satisfy me that you intend to leave the  UK  but
         rather you have good economic reasons for not doing so.  Given your
         doubtful financial circumstances, I am not satisfied on the balance
         of probabilities that you will abide by the  employment  conditions
         of visitor entry clearance.  I have also considered that  you  have
         no previous UK travel history.  Furthermore, I also note  that  you
         have no dependants in Nigeria."

    Thus the Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  she  was  a
    genuine visitor seeking entry for the period  or  for  the  purpose  as
    stated and refused the application under paragraph  41(i),  (ii),  (vi)
    and (vii).

 5. It is also plain from that decision that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    set out that the Appellant's right to appeal that decision was  limited
    to the grounds identified  at  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That Section provides  "the  decision
    is unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
    incompatible with the Appellant's Convention rights".

 6. The Appellant issued Grounds of Appeal in which it  was  asserted  that
    the reasons given for refusal of the application were wrong in law  and
    unsustainable, that contrary to the body of the decision, the Appellant
    had visited the UK previously on two occasions being sponsored  by  the
    same family relatives and importantly that the decision  constituted  a
    breach of her family life contrary to the provisions of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  There was also a ground on the basis that the  decision  was
    "irrational and Wednesbury unreasonable".  Thus it is  plain  from  the
    Grounds of Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Appellant,
    notwithstanding a disagreement with the reasons given for refusing  the
    application under the Immigration Rules, was also relying on  what  was
    the only Ground of Appeal, namely that under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. I have referred to the decision made by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    which clearly set out the rights of appeal and it is further  right  to
    observe that the decision before the Entry Clearance Manager  reflected
    the same position and in the appeal review  which  took  place  on  1st
    April 2014 it was plainly set out that  "there  is  no  full  right  of
    appeal against this decision.  In this respect I  remind  the  Tribunal
    that they have no jurisdiction on this appeal."  In  this  context  the
    Entry Clearance Manager was referring to the grounds raised in relation
    to the Immigration Rules.  The review went on to state that  whilst  it
    was noted as part of the Grounds of Appeal  that  he  had  claimed  the
    decision breached Article 8, that the Entry Clearance Manager  did  not
    find that that had been satisfied.

 8. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Verity)  on  6th
    November 2014.  Before her, the Sponsor appeared to present the  appeal
    on behalf of  his  sister-in-law.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    represented by a Presenting Officer.  The decision records the  history
    and sets out the evidence given by the Sponsor at paragraph  5  and  at
    paragraph 6 it was noted that the Appellant's sister had attended court
    but did not give evidence as it was indicated that  there  was  nothing
    contentious in the statement and that her evidence was  accepted.   The
    judge went on to hear the submissions made from each of the parties and
    it is plain from reading those submissions that the  points  raised  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer went  to  the  issues  under  the
    Immigration Rules and similarly those submissions made on behalf of the
    Appellant made reference to the Immigration  Rules  and  the  issue  of
    whether or not she was a  genuine  visitor.   The  judge  reserved  her
    determination and at paragraph 9 set out the findings of fact.  At that
    paragraph the judge reached the conclusion that the decision reached by
    the Entry Clearance Officer did  not  fully  consider  the  Appellant's
    case.  The judge found that the Entry Clearance Officer by stating that
    there had been no previous UK travel history that this was not the case
    and made reference to the earlier decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge
    dated 7th June 2009 which allowed an appeal and that  she  had  visited
    the UK on two occasions and had returned to Nigeria.  The judge went on
    to consider new documentary evidence that had not  been  placed  before
    the Entry Clearance Officer concerning her circumstances,  namely  that
    the Appellant had been offered a job as an executive  trainee  on  17th
    December 2013 (the  date  of  the  decision),  such  appointment  being
    confirmed as permanent on 21st July 2004.

 9. The judge at paragraph 9 made reference to her  salary  and  recognised
    that whilst they were not facts which would have been before the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that if they had been submitted it was possible  that
    the Entry Clearance Manager would have reached other conclusions but as
    the information had not been provided, that  was  the  reason  for  the
    Tribunal hearing.  The judge therefore concluded  at  paragraph  9  the
    following:-

         "Taking  these  factors  into  account  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant has demonstrated that she has strong ties to Nigeria  and
         that she has sound economic  reasons  for  returning  to  her  home
         country.  I therefore allow the appeal.

    In the notice of decision the judge reflected that sentence "The appeal
    is allowed".

10. An application was made on behalf of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  for
    permission to appeal that decision.  The Grounds of Appeal  state  that
    on 25th June 2013 Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  amended
    Section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    inserted by the 2006 Act (entry  clearance)  to  remove  the  right  of
    appeal for persons visiting specified family members.  The grounds went
    on to state that, however, they were still able to bring an  appeal  on
    the residual grounds in Section 84(1)(b)  and  (c)  of  the  2002  Act,
    namely on human rights and race relations grounds.  The grounds went on
    to state that the statutory jurisdiction  could  not  be  conferred  by
    waiver or agreement or the  failure  of  the  parties  relying  on  the
    decision of Virk and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652 at paragraph  23
    and that the judge, by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules,
    had gone beyond the jurisdiction and therefore had erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  It is also made  plain  in  the
    grounds at paragraph 6 that the judge failed to make  any  findings  in
    relation to what was the only Ground of Appeal in relation  to  Article
    8.

11. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler) granted permission to
    the Entry Clearance Officer stating:-

         "The point appears not to have  been  taken  in  the  hearing;  but
         nevertheless the Appellant had a right of appeal under statute only
         on limited grounds,  essentially  human  rights.   The  judge,  who
         appears to have allowed the appeal because she was  satisfied  that
         the Appellant had strong ties to Nigeria  and  had  sound  economic
         reasons for returning,  arguably  failed  to  consider  only  those
         grounds and to make relevant findings."

12.  The  Appellant  by  way  of  reply  produced   a   document   entitled
    "Respondent's response to the Appellant's  grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal under Rule 24",  that  document  being  provided  prior  to  the
    hearing and also in a bundle of documents served  on  the  Tribunal  on
    10th March 2015.  In that document, it is said by way of reply that the
    judge did not allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules but  allowed
    the appeal "based on  the  available  facts".   It  further  states  at
    paragraph 3 that it had been raised in the Grounds of Appeal  that  the
    decision constituted an interference  with  the  Appellant's  right  to
    family life relying on Article 8 of the ECHR and further at paragraph 4
    submitted that the judge was right to have allowed the  appeal  because
    the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  irrational  and
    Wednesbury unreasonable thus the Rule 24 response made  it  plain  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was a correct one.

13. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Savage  appeared  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer and  the  Sponsor,  Mr  Otuorimo,
    appeared on behalf of the Appellant, as he did  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  As the Sponsor  was  acting  in  person,  I  endeavoured  to
    explain to him the procedure that would be adopted and ensured that  he
    had all relevant documentation and gave him the opportunity to ask  any
    questions during the course of the hearing.

14. Ms Savage relied upon her grounds  and  in  addition  provided  to  the
    Tribunal a case that had been reported very recently  that  of  Mostafa
    (Article 8 and entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and also a copy
    of Virk and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652 that had been referred to
    in the permission grounds.

15. She submitted that contrary to the Rule 24 response, the judge  plainly
    allowed the appeal by reference to the Immigration Rules.  She directed
    the Tribunal's attention to the last sentence of paragraph 9 where  the
    judge used exact terms of paragraph 41  of  the  Rules.   Thus  it  was
    stated that she had allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  but
    that the legal position was set out in the permission grounds and  that
    Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended Section 88A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so that there was no right
    of appeal except on grounds of unlawful discrimination or on Article  8
    human rights grounds.  Thus it was not open to the judge to  allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules or on the basis as suggested by  the
    Rule 24 response as not being in accordance with the law.  This  was  a
    case where the application was made on 6th December 2013 and  thus  the
    restrictions  applied.   She  submitted  that  whilst  the   issue   of
    jurisdiction does not appear to have been raised by any of the parties,
    the decision of Virk applied at paragraph 23.  In  those  circumstances
    she submitted the decision to allow the  appeal  could  not  stand  and
    should be set aside.

16. She made some submissions concerning the Article 8 grounds and that the
    relationship relied upon was not one that could acquire the  protection
    of Article 8 on the basis that the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsors  were
    adult siblings and that there was no evidence of dependency.  She  made
    reference to  the  most  recent  decision  of  Mostafa  and  sought  to
    distinguish that case from the present facts of the appeal noting  that
    the relationship here was one of adult siblings, and that at  paragraph
    24 of the decision it did not appear to fall within those relationships
    where Article 8(1) could be engaged.  In  this  appeal  also,  applying
    paragraph  21  of  Mostafa,  there  were  deficiencies  in  the  actual
    application and the evidence relied upon  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    relating to her employment had not been placed before the ECO.  In  the
    alternative  she  submitted  that  the  decision  was   justified   and
    proportionate.

17. The Sponsor, Mr Otuorimo, relied upon his  skeleton  argument  which  I
    have set out earlier.  In that skeleton argument or Rule  24  response,
    he submitted that the judge  had  not  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it on the  factual  basis  that  she  had
    heard and that the Entry Clearance  Officer  applying  the  Immigration
    Rules had failed in his duty to consider properly the history that  she
    had travelled to the UK on two previous occasions and the evidence that
    she had ties to Nigeria.  He also referred to the case  of  Mostafa  at
    paragraph 24 noting that if a person's  circumstances  do  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and that they have not acted in a way that undermines
    the system of immigration control, a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  is
    liable to infringe Article 8.  He went on to state that there  were  no
    financial issues in the application and that this was a visit  intended
    as a family visit for her to visit her family  members  in  the  UK  at
    Christmas.  He referred to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    2009 that she was a genuine visitor and that in this case there  was  a
    right to family life.  He told me that his wife had entered the  UK  in
    2014 and there had been return visits to Nigeria in 2011 and  in  2014.
    He identified certain parts of statements that related to Article 8.

18. At the conclusion of the submissions of the parties I indicated to them
    that having considered with care the written documentation and the oral
    submissions that I had heard, that I was satisfied that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal demonstrated a material error of law  and  that
    the decision could not stand and must be  set  aside.   Whilst  I  gave
    short reasons for reaching that conclusion, I indicated to the  parties
    that I would set out my reasons in writing which is what I now go on to
    do.

19.  It is entirely plain from the written documentation before me that the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer clearly stated that the  appeal
    was limited to the  grounds  identified  at  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   As  set  out  in  the
    grounds for permission that was as a result of Section 52 of the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013 which came into effect from 25th  June  2013  which
    amended Section 88A of the 2002 Act so that there is no right of appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance in family visitor  cases  except  on
    grounds of race relations and human  rights  grounds.   It  is  further
    plain that the issue of jurisdiction was raised in the Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review made on 1st April 2014.  The Grounds of Appeal, whilst
    disagreeing with  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    substance and therefore the Immigration Rules themselves, also made  it
    clear that the appeal was advanced on the basis of human  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not raise or deal with the issue of jurisdiction at all  despite  those
    matters that I have set out in the preceding paragraphs.  Thus  it  was
    not a case in which jurisdiction had not been raised but  it  is  clear
    that the issue was not considered by the parties or  the  judge  during
    the appeal.

20.  Whilst the Sponsor asserts that the judge did  not  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, that can be the  only  sensible  inference
    from a careful reading of the determination as a whole.   The  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  at  paragraph  9  made  reference  to  the
    relevant circumstances under paragraph 41 dealing with previous  travel
    to Nigeria, her ties to Nigeria in  terms  of  employment  and,  as  Ms
    Savage observed, at paragraph 9 used the words that strongly  indicated
    that she was allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules noting  as
    follows, "Taking these factors into account I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that she has strong ties to Nigeria and that
    she has sound economic reasons for returning to her  home  country.   I
    therefore allow the appeal."  Thus I am satisfied that  the  judge  did
    not allow the appeal on human rights grounds but appeared to  allow  it
    under the Immigration Rules.  Had the decision been one that  was  made
    on human rights grounds, then the decision would have to have  grappled
    with the test in Razgar and set out findings of fact as to how  Article
    8(1) was engaged and make factual  findings  consistent  with  a  human
    rights claim of this type.  As Ground 6 of the  permission  grounds  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer make plain, the judge failed  to  make  any
    findings on Article 8.  Consequently I am satisfied that the First-tier
    Tribunal had no  basis  in  law  for  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and no power to consider an appeal on those  grounds.
    As set out in Virk and Others v SSHD [2013] at paragraph 23, the First-
    tier Tribunal is a creation of statute whose jurisdiction in  the  case
    is limited by the terms of Section 8 of  the  2002  Act  and  that  the
    parties cannot agree to the Tribunal exercising a jurisdiction that had
    not been given to it by Parliament.

21.   Whilst the Rule 24 response makes reference to it being open  to  the
    judge to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was  "Wednesday
    unreasonable" or irrational, that also fails as an argument as there is
    no Ground of Appeal that the decision is "not in  accordance  with  the
    law" or "not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules".   Thus  I  set
    aside the decision.

22.  It follows therefore from my decision that the only power in law  that
    the judge should have considered was that relating to Article 8 of  the
    ECHR and whether the decision was  incompatible  with  the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8.   As  the  permission  grounds  make  clear  at
    paragraph 6, the judge failed to deal with that issue and  no  findings
    were made in relation to that even though it is plain in my judgment it
    was raised in the Grounds of Appeal.  As a result of that, I reach  the
    conclusion that that was an issue that remained  outstanding  and  thus
    the decision would either  have  to  be  remade  by  this  Tribunal  or
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider.

23.  The Sponsor has conducted the appeal  without  the  benefit  of  legal
    representation and I accept that it may not have been plain to him that
    in the event of setting aside the decision that the Tribunal  would  go
    on to remake the decision  itself.   The  Appellant's  sister  was  not
    present at court and as the First-tier Tribunal had made no findings of
    fact upon the nature of their  relationship  or  any  factual  findings
    relevant in deciding whether Article 8 was  even  engaged  that  it  is
    incumbent on a Tribunal to hear that evidence and make findings of fact
    as necessary. The sponsor submitted that the appeal should be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for those findings to be made after  hearing
    the evidence on these issues. Whilst the decision  of  Mostafa  in  its
    obiter remarks  at  paragraph  24  makes  reference  to  the  kinds  of
    relationships that attract the protection of  Article  8(1),  the  fact
    remains that there were no findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    concerning this issue and it seems to  me  that  in  the  interests  of
    justice and on the basis that this was the ground that  was  identified
    by the Appellant as one that required consideration that the  Appellant
    should be given the opportunity to provide that evidence upon which she
    would seek to rely and for those findings of fact to be made.

24.  In those circumstances, having found an error of law and set aside the
    decision but finding that I am unable to remake  the  decision  at  the
    hearing, I have reached the conclusion that the case should be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal as the sponsor requested.  The  findings  of
    fact made at paragraph 9 shall be preserved.

25. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the
    case is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a
    hearing on a date to be fixed in accordance with  Section  12(2)(b)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  and  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    practice statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).



Directions

26.  Not later than seven days before the forthcoming  hearing  the  parties
    shall serve on the Tribunal and each  other  any  documentary  evidence
    upon which it is intended to rely at the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law therefore the decision is set side. The  findings  of
    fact made at paragraph 9 shall be preserved. The case is to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a hearing on a  date  to
    be fixed as soon as reasonably  possible  in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2
    of the practice statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
