
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00201/2014
                                                             & VA/00204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Eagle Building, Glasgow     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29 May 2015                       |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


                                   Between

                          ANEEQ MAHMOOD ABBASI AND
                            ASHAN MAHMOOD ABBASI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER OF KARACHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellants:   Mr G Singh of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre
Respondent:   Ms C Johnstone, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The factual matrix of this appeal is uncontroversial.   The  Appellants
    are brothers,  both  nationals  of  Pakistan,  aged  29  and  21  years
    respectively.  They applied to the Entry Clearance Officer  of  Karachi
    (the "ECO") for a visa to enter the United Kingdom  and  remain  for  a
    period of 4 weeks.  In their applications  they  represented  that  the
    purpose of their travel was to  visit  their  grandfather's  grave  and
    mourn with family members.  Their applications were refused by the ECO,
    whose core reason for thus deciding was expressed as follows:

         "... I am not satisfied that you  have  accurately  presented  your
         circumstances or intentions in wishing to enter the UK.  This means
         that I am not satisfied that only a short visit is intended or that
         you will leave the UK at the end of the period stated."

    This was followed by a reference to paragraph 42(i)  and  (ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Appellants' mother made  a  similar  application
    which was also refused  but  was  granted  upon  review  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager.  As a result, her appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("the FtT") was not pursued.

 2. The appeal to the FtT was based on the Appellants' contention that  the
    decisions of the ECO were incompatible with their rights under  Article
    8 ECHR. The Judge noted that  the  ECO's  decisions  were  made  on  21
    November 2013.  The Appellants' grandfather had died  on  28  September
    2013 and their applications for entry clearance were  made,  tellingly,
    on 02 October 2013.  Their grandfather had been  terminally  ill.   The
    Judge rehearsed the uncontentous facts that the grandfather had  wished
    to see his daughter and grandchildren before dying and  that  they  had
    entertained the aspiration, unfulfilled, of doing so.  The  Appellants'
    mother has two, or three,  brothers  who  are  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Reunification of  all  family  members  for  the  purpose  of
    mourning was sought. The core of the FtT's reasoning in dismissing  the
    appeals is found in the following passage:

         "It is understandable that the Appellants may wish to visit  family
         members in the UK during a period of mourning for their grandfather
         but not being able to do so does not amount to a breach of right to
         family life under Article 8.  The Appellants' close family members,
         including  their  parents,  are  in  Pakistan.    The   Appellants'
         established family life is in Pakistan.  They have  family  members
         who have chosen to settle in the UK including three uncles but  the
         Appellants have not had and do not have an established family  life
         in the UK ..............

         There has not been any evidence to demonstrate that the  Appellants
         and their family members cannot maintain family ties as  before  or
         that family members in the UK cannot visit them in Pakistan."

 3. The issue of law raised  in  this  appeal  is  illuminated  by  several
    decisions  of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  ("ECtHR").   In
    Znamenskaya - v - Russia (Application number 77785/01), the  issue  was
    whether a mother could assert a right under Article  8  to  change  the
    family name on the tombstone of her still born child.  She  asserted  a
    failure  by  the  domestic  authorities  to  discharge  their  positive
    obligation to ensure effective respect for her private and family life,
    invoking the principle that "....biological and social reality  prevail
    over a legal presumption which ............. flies in the face of  both
    established facts and the wishes of those  concerned  without  actually
    benefiting anyone" [Kroon - v - The Netherlands, Series A Number 297-C,
    at 40].    The ECtHR held that the application was admissible.

 4. In Dodsbo - v - Sweden [2007] 45 EHRR 22, the  ECtHR  assumed,  without
    deciding,  that  a  refusal  to  authorise  the  transfer  of  the  urn
    containing the  Applicant's  husband's  ashes  from  one  graveyard  to
    another interfered with her rights under Article 8(1).  By  a  majority
    of 5 to 3 it was  held  that  the  reasons  proffered  by  the  Swedish
    authorities for their decision were relevant and  sufficient  and  that
    the  interference  was  not  disproportionate  in  consequence,  giving
    determinative weight in the balancing exercise to the principle of  the
    sanctity of graves.

 5. In Yildirim - v  -  Turkey  (Application  number  25327/02)  the  Court
    accepted that Article 8 was engaged in  circumstances  where  a  mother
    complained that the hospital authorities had refused her permission  to
    take the corpse of her  still  born  child  for  religious  and  burial
    purposes.  The complaint was declared inadmissible on a factual  basis,
    the Court noting the absence of any convincing evidence to counter  the
    Government's claim that the Applicant and her husband had  not  claimed
    the baby's body and were well aware that, in  such  circumstances,  the
    authorities would proceed with the burial.

 6. The decisions summarised above illustrate the versatility of Article  8
    ECHR, together with the difficulty of drawing a clear boundary  between
    its private and family life dimensions  in  certain  factual  contexts.
    While each belongs to its discrete  factual  context,  these  decisions
    nonetheless illustrate that matters relating to death, burial, mourning
    and associated rites have been held to fall within the ambit of Article
    8. Three further decisions of the ECHtR have a factual  matrix  closely
    comparable to that of the present appeals.

 7. The first is Sargsyan - v - Azerbaijan  [2011]  ECHR  2337,  where  the
    Applicant, who  had  been  forcibly  displaced  from  his  home  during
    Government military activities, complained that a failure to facilitate
    his proposed visit to  cemeteries  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  and
    maintaining the graves of deceased relatives infringed his rights under
    Article 8.  He contended that he had sufficient  and  continuous  links
    and/or concrete and persisting links with the location concerned.   The
    Grand Chamber held that his complaint was admissible.

 8. In Kochieva - v - Sweden [2012] ECHR 549 a mother  and  three  children
    were in the process of appealing against asylum refusal decisions  when
    one of the children was killed in a road accident and buried in Sweden.
     One of the contentions which they advanced was  that  their  expulsion
    from Sweden would make it impossible for  them  to  visit  the  child's
    grave there, in contravention of their rights  under  Article  8.    In
    declaring their complaint manifestly ill founded, the  ECtHR  reasoned,
    inter alia, that the Applicants would be at liberty to apply for visits
    to visit Sweden for the purpose concerned.

 9. Finally, in Sabanchiyeva - v - Russia [2014] 58 EHRR 14 the Applicants,
    invoking Article 8 ECHR, complained about a refusal to return  to  them
    the bodies of certain relatives who had died in an attack  on  military
    agencies.  The Court, having reviewed some of  its  earlier  decisions,
    including that in Dodsbo, reiterated that the concepts of private  life
    and family life are broad, not susceptible  to  exhaustive  definition.
    It held that the complaints fell within the  ambit  of  Article  8  and
    that, in 18 of the 19 cases, an interference was  established.   Having
    found that the interference was in accordance with the law and that  it
    had a legitimate aim, namely the suppression  of  terrorist  propaganda
    and the avoidance of inter- ethnic and religious tension, it turned  to
    examine the question of proportionality.  The court said the following,
    at [138]:

         "Turning to the circumstances of the present case, the Court  notes
         that .............. the Applicants were deprived of an opportunity,
         otherwise guaranteed to the close relatives of any deceased  person
         in Russia, to organise and take part in the burial of the body of a
         deceased family member and also to ascertain the  location  of  the
         grave site and to visit it subsequently.  The Court finds that  the
         interference with the Applicants' Article 8 rights  resulting  from
         the said measure was particularly  severe  in  that  it  completely
         precluded them from  any  participation  in  the  relevant  funeral
         ceremonies and involved a ban on the disclosure of the location  of
         the  grave,  thus  permanently  cutting  the  links   between   the
         Applicants and the location of the deceased's remains ......"

    The Court held that there had been  a  violation  of  Article  8  ECHR.
    Notably, it so decided  without  making  any  distinction  between  the
    private life and family life dimensions.

10. There is an interesting interplay between the decisions in  Dodsbo  and
    Sabanchiyeva (supra) and English ecclesiastical law which,  in  effect,
    operates a  presumption  against  exhumation:  see  Re  Christ  Church,
    Alsager [1999] 1ALL ER 117 and Re  Blagdon  Cemetery  [2002]  Fam.  299
    regarding the exceptional  nature  of  the  grant  of  the  faculty  of
    exhumation.  It is also noteworthy that the  tendency  in  the  English
    Consistory Court decisions has been to invoke  Article  9  ECHR  which,
    broadly, protects religious freedom, rather than Article  8:  see,  for
    example, Re Durrington Cemetery [2001] Fam 33, followed by  Re  Crawley
    Green Road Cemetery, Luton [2001] Fam 308, where the Chancellor decided
    that a refusal to grant a faculty for exhumation of the remains of  the
    deceased would infringe the Article 9 rights of the  petitioner,  widow
    of the deceased.  It is striking that Article 9 has not featured in the
    Strasbourg stream of authority to date.

11. As the decided cases of the ECtHR make clear, the FtT's  decision  that
    the Appellants' appeals did not fall within the ambit of Article 8 ECHR
    is unsustainable.  The Judge's error was  driven  by  an  impermissibly
    narrow  approach  to  the  scope  of  Article  8   protection   and   a
    concentration on the  Appellants'  family  life  in  Pakistan,  to  the
    exclusion of both their family ties  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    central purpose of their proposed visit.  The essence of the error  was
    a failure to recognise that the particular aspect of private and family
    life invoked by the Appellants was  capable  of  being  encompassed  by
    Article 8 ECHR.  The protection, or benefit, which they were  asserting
    had the potential of belonging to the ambit  of  Article  8  ECHR.  The
    first question for the Judge should have been whether, having regard to
    all relevant facts and circumstances, it did so.    The  Judge's  error
    was committed at this preliminary stage. It consisted of a  failure  to
    recognise that the Appellants were asserting a discrete facet of family
    and private  life  which  Article  8  is  capable  of  protecting.   In
    consequence of this error of law the Judge did not proceed to  consider
    any of the succeeding stages  of  the  exercise,  namely  interference,
    legitimate aim and proportionality.

    The FtT's Decision Remade

12. As we have highlighted above, the factual matrix is uncontentious.   We
    consider that we are well equipped to remake the decision.   We  do  so
    via the following analysis.  First, the Appellants' cases  fall  within
    the ambit of  Article  8  ECHR.   Second,  the  decisions  of  the  ECO
    interfere with the family and private life rights of the Appellants and
    other family members  under  Article  8  ECHR.   In  this  context,  we
    consider it appropriate to take into account the several members of the
    family unit affected by the ECO's  decisions.   Next,  we  address  the
    reach of  the  interference.  We  consider  that  the  interference  is
    substantial and profound, given that there is no other way in which the
    avowed purpose of visiting the grandfather's grave  and  grieving  with
    family members can be achieved and the  plans  and  intentions  of  the
    Appellants have been thwarted outright.

13. We turn to consider legitimate aim. The impugned decisions of  the  ECO
    do not invoke any legitimate  aim.   However,  we  recognise  that  the
    public interest in the  maintenance  of  firm  immigration  control  is
    engaged and we acknowledge that  this  has  statutory  endorsement   by
    virtue of section 117B(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  As regards the other provisions of  section  117B,  the  ECO
    expressed his satisfaction that the Appellants' uncle would be able  to
    provide them with maintenance and  accommodation  during  their  visit.
    The only negative aspect  of  the  impugned  decisions  was  the  doubt
    expressed by the ECO  about  the  Appellants'  father's  intention  and
    capacity to finance the travel of the Appellants and  their  mother  to
    the United Kingdom and back. We consider that this factor  is  at  best
    neutral since if the Appellants are not able to travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom, for whatever reason, we find  it  difficult  to  identify  any
    public interest thereby engaged.  Given the specific finding made about
    the uncle's capacity, we consider that the public interest enshrined in
    section 117B(3) is  not  engaged.   None  of  the  other  section  117B
    considerations arises.

14.  Accordingly,  the  central  question  to  be  addressed  is  that   of
    proportionality.   We  consider  that  the  avowed   purpose   of   the
    Appellants' proposed visit to the United Kingdom and the intentions  of
    all members  of  the  family  concerned,  both  immediate  and  distant
    relatives, are matters of substantial importance to them,  arising  out
    of their cultural and religious convictions. This  is  illustrated  by,
    inter alia, the speed with which they submitted their  applications  to
    the ECO  following  their  grandfather's  death.   The  visitation  and
    maintenance of the graves of family members and  the  act  of  grieving
    with others, whether ritualistic or otherwise, is an intrinsic  feature
    of civilised society throughout the world.    The proposed  sojourn  of
    the Appellants in the United Kingdom will be for a  modest  and  finite
    period. In addition, there is no suggestion in the  impugned  decisions
    that they might not return to their country of origin. The final factor
    to be considered is that what they are  proposing  viz  visiting  their
    grandfather's grave and grieving with other family  members  cannot  be
    achieved  in  any  other  way.   On  these  facts   and   given   these
    considerations, the public interest  in  maintaining  firm  immigration
    control is, in our  judgment,  less  potent  than  in  other  contexts.
    Balancing  this  public   interest   with   the   various   facts   and
    considerations  highlighted  above,  we  conclude  that  the   impugned
    decisions represent a disproportionate breach of the right  to  respect
    for both private and family life enjoyed  by  the  Appellants  and  the
    other  family  members  and  relatives  concerned.   The  appeal   must
    therefore be allowed.

15. We add the final observation that cases of this kind will inevitably be
    fact sensitive.

DECISION

16. Giving effect to the above findings and conclusions:

    (i)  We set aside the decision of the FtT.

    (ii) We remake such decision by allowing the Appellants' appeals.

    (iii)    It will now be incumbent on the ECO to make a  fresh  decision
         in each case, guided by and giving effect to this judgment.




                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                          Date: 05 June 2015
