
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00506/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 6th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS SHAHNAZ JAVED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Cooke, Counsel, for Haq Hamilton Solicitors
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th September 1962.  She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 8th December 2013
    refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom for the purpose of a
    family visit lasting  three  months.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision was upheld by the Entry Clearance  Manager.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  S  Taylor  on  6th  November
    2014.   He  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  a
    determination promulgated on 19th November 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on 9th January 2015.
     The grounds are that the judge had no jurisdiction to  deal  with  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, which is what he did, as Section 52
    of the Crime and Courts  Act  has  restricted  the  appeal  rights  for
    visitors coming to visit family members in the UK and the  restrictions
    apply to any applications made on or after 25th June 2013 which is  the
    case here.  The Appellant is however still able to bring an  appeal  on
    the residual grounds in Section 84(1)(b)  and  (c)  of  the  2002  Act,
    namely  on  human  rights  and  race  relations  grounds.  The  grounds
    therefore state that the judge has gone beyond his jurisdiction and has
    erred in law by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules and the
    judge has failed to make  any  findings  about  human  rights  or  race
    relations.

 4. The application for entry clearance was also refused by the  Respondent
    under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules as it was found that a
    false  document  was  submitted  by  the  Appellant  when  making   her
    application, being a  property  valuation  report  undertaken  by  Khan
    Engineers and Evaluators.  There was a verification report  before  the
    judge.

The Hearing

 5.  The  Respondent  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to   grasp   the
    jurisdictional point in this appeal and because of this  he  considered
    what he was unable to consider.  He submitted that the application  was
    made after the change in the Rules which removed a right of appeal  for
    family visitors.  He submitted that there is clearly an error of law in
    the determination.

 6. The Appellant's representative submitted that she accepts that there is
    an error of law.  She submitted that the appellant is objecting to  the
    finding under paragraph 320(7A) and she asked that a new appeal hearing
    be set before the First-tier Tribunal with  the  findings  of  Judge  S
    Taylor at paragraphs 9 and 10 of his determination being preserved.  In
    these paragraphs the judge found that the verification report  was  not
    sufficient to show that a false  document  had  been  lodged  with  the
    application and that the Respondent had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proof relating to this.   She  submitted  that  if  it  is  found  that
    paragraph 320(7) applies the  Appellant  faces  a  long-term  ban  from
    making further applications to visit her son, daughter and siblings  in
    the United Kingdom.   She  submitted  that  this  is  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's human  rights  and  the  proportionality  assessment.   She
    submitted that the Appellant has visited the United Kingdom before  and
    will  wish  to  visit  again  so  paragraph  320(7A)  will  have  grave
    consequences for the Appellant if it is found to apply.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  judge  had  no  jurisdiction
    relating to the Rules.  He submitted that if the case  is  remitted  to
    the First-tier the judge will then make his decision  on  all  relevant
    issues and these two paragraphs of  the  determination  should  not  be
    preserved.  He submitted that any further hearing should be before  the
    Upper Tribunal and not the First-tier.

 8. The  Appellant's  representative  submitted  that  there  has  been  no
    challenge to the judge's reasoning in paragraphs 9 and 10 and that if I
    agree to preserve these two paragraphs  perhaps  the  claim  should  be
    heard before the Upper Tribunal.

Determination

 9.  There  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the   First-tier   Judge's
    determination.  He had no jurisdiction to deal with  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.  He did not consider the appeal on the basis  of
    race relations or human rights which are  the  only  two  matters  over
    which he had jurisdiction.

10. Because of this I find that the Appellant did not have a  fair  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. I direct  that  the  appeal  should  be
    heard before the First-tier Tribunal on the two applicable  Grounds  of
    Appeal  which  are  set  out  at  Section  84(1)(b)  and  (c)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

11. The First-tier Tribunal will be dealing  with  the  appeal.  I  am  not
    prepared to preserve paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination which was
    promulgated on 19th November 2014.

Notice of Decision

12. I  find  that  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined on
    all relevant issues within its jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 6th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

