
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00296/2014
                                                               VA/00295/2014
                                                               VA/05701/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th April 2014                    |On 22nd April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MRS TERIZ ESHAK SOMAEIL GERGIS
                      MISS CLARA EMAD MICAD AZIZ BEKHIT
                   master KIROLLOS EMAD MILAD AZIZ BEKHIT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall  refer  to  Mrs  Teriz  Gergis  as  the  claimant  and  (first)
    Appellant.  She is a national of  Egypt  and  the  mother  of  the  two
    children who applied for entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom.
    Their appeal against refusal was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mailer in a decision promulgated on 7th January 2015.  The Secretary of
    State lodged grounds of application.  It was said that  the  judge  had
    materially directed himself  in law in that there was a  complete  lack
    of reasoning and evidence to say that private life existed and  in  any
    event  it  was  submitted  that  family  life  did  not   exist.    The
    proportionality  assessment  was  inadequate.   The  family  maintained
    contact with the Sponsor by Skype and the refusal of a visit  visa  did
    not interfere with the established pattern of communication.

 2. A Rule 24 notice was lodged.  Contrary to what was said in the  grounds
    the judge had set out his factual findings in relation to  family  life
    and set out well-known jurisprudence.  Most of the grounds amounted  to
    no more than a disagreement with  the  judge's  decision  and  were  an
    attempt to reargue the case.

 3. The grounds were found to be arguable and thus the matter  came  before
    me on the above date.

 4. For the Secretary of State  Ms  Savage  relied  on  her  grounds.   The
    statement at paragraph 56 of the decision that the  "appellants'  right
    to respect for their private lives is engaged"  was  unreasoned.   This
    was not a case where family  life  could  be  said  to  exist.   I  was
    referred to Mostafa (Article 8 and entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
    (IAC) which was a husband and wife case and very  fact  specific.   The
    relationship between the parties could be continued as before and  that
    would merely maintain the status quo. I was asked to set  the  decision
    aside and remake the decision dismissing the appeal.

 5. Ms Easty relied on her Rule 24 notice and also said  that  this  was  a
    case where the claimant and her family would have succeeded  under  the
    old Immigration Rules - see the findings at paragraphs 3  and  57.   In
    terms of Mostafa that was  a  weighty  factor  to  take  into  account.
    Family life was not being argued in this case - this was a private life
    case where the decision should be upheld.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. The background to this case is that the  Appellants  before  the  First
    Tier Judge were mother and  children  respectively  and  they  are  the
    Sponsor's daughter (first Appellant and  claimant)  and  grandchildren.
    The applications were to see the UK relatives.   It  is  common  ground
    between parties that the appeal rights for  visitors  coming  to  visit
    family members are now restricted and the only  ground  open  to  these
    Appellants  were  that  to  refuse  them  entry  would   breach   their
    fundamental but qualified rights under Article 8 ECHR.  The Sponsor and
    her husband are refugees being Coptic Christians.

 8. The claimant and her children were not only coming to see  the  Sponsor
    and her  husband  after  a  long  separation  but  also  to  see  other
    relatives. In particular the sponsor's daughter Tena had  been  granted
    six years leave to remain.

 9. The judge says he found the evidence of the sponsor and Tena  Giris  to
    be "straightforward and credible" (paragraph 47).  In any  event  their
    evidence was effectively unchallenged.

10. The judge considered the extensive evidence produced  relating  to  the
    medical and social problems of Mr Eshak Botros and found  that  he  was
    dependent on a daily basis upon the assistance he  received  from  Tena
    Geris;  given  that  the  judge  found  that  Mr   Botros   could   not
    realistically be in a position to visit his daughter and  grandchildren
    in a third country.  As Ms Easty pointed out, the judge noted that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer accepted there was evidence of sufficient funds
    for the visit as well as evidence of owning a property in  Egypt.   The
    judge had no reason to suppose that the intentions  of  the  Appellants
    were anything other than what they had stated and  it  was  found  that
    they had had substantial ties to Egypt and that they  would  return  at
    the end of their trip (paragraph 57).  Accordingly this is a case where
    the Appellants would have been successful under the old  Rules  because
    they would have satisfied the criteria  set  out  in  paragraph  41  in
    relation to maintenance, accommodation and intention to return.  As  is
    said in Mostafa, the claimants'  ability  to  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules is not the question to be  determined  by  the  Tribunal  but  is
    capable of  being  a  weighty  though  not  determinative  factor  when
    deciding whether such a refusal is proportionate to the legitimate  aim
    of enforcing immigration control.

11. Given the way the grounds and the response under Rule 24 were  drafted,
    it might have been thought that much of the discussion before me  would
    have been whether the relationship  between  the  parties  amounted  to
    family life, but Ms Easty was clear that there was no case being argued
    on the basis of family life but rather that this  was  a  private  life
    case - as the judge had said in paragraph 56, namely that the right  to
    respect for their private  lives  was  engaged.    This  statement  was
    attacked by the Secretary of State as being unreasoned.  However in  my
    view that is  not a fair reflection of the  decision  when  read  as  a
    whole.  It must be read in the context of the judge  finding  that  the
    detailed evidence of Ms Gadalla as well as Ms Giris was straightforward
    and credible.  That evidence is set out in detail at paragraphs 5 to 36
    inclusive and sets out the closeness of the  relationship  between  the
    parties and their strong desire to  visit  the  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   None of this evidence is challenged.  It therefore seems  to
    me that the grounds are not correct to say that  there  is  a  complete
    lack of reasoning and evidence for finding that private life existed  -
    such a statement may have been encouraged by the fact that   the  judge
    did not link up what he said in paragraph 56  with  the  clear  factual
    findings previously made.

12. What we see through those findings are that the judge did not doubt the
    intentions of the first Appellant and her children to come here  for  a
    short visit.  The judge was aware of the difficulties  of  the  parties
    meeting up in another European country. That particular finding is  not
    challenged in the grounds of application.

13. The judge then identified what was said in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27
    and in Huang (citation not given but Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]  UKSC  11).
    Before going on to  conduct  the  balancing  exercise  in  relation  to
    proportionality he took account of the fact that the intentions of  the
    Appellants were what they had stated them to be and also  took  account
    of the health and mobility considerations relating to Mr Botros as well
    as the inordinate expense that would be  required  for  the  family  to
    visit the Appellants from a third country.  These  were  factors  which
    the judge was entitled and indeed  bound  to  take  into  account  when
    assessing the proportionality of the decision to refuse the  Appellants
    entry.  Having taken all these matters into account the judge then went
    on to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

14. The Presidential panel in Mostafa did say that it would only be in very
    unusual circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be
    able to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope
    of Article 8(1) - see paragraph 24. However, although this is a private
    life case, it does involve close relatives.  It therefore seems  to  me
    that there is nothing said in Mostafa which goes  against  the  judge's
    decision and what can be taken from Mostafa in the  Appellants'  favour
    is that the ability to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  weighty
    factor in the proportionality assessment.

15. In my view the judge's approach to the case was correct.  He considered
    the case under private life.  He narrated the  factors  which  he  took
    into account when assessing the proportionality of the decision and  on
    the facts as found by him was perfectly entitled  to conclude that  the
    balance fell in favour of the Appellants.  There is no  error  in  law.
    There is no need for an anonymity order.

Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.

18. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 8th April 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
