
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd June 2016                     |On 14th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR RICHARD OTTO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. I Jarvis; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Palmer; Instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robison promulgated on 22nd October  2015  in
    which she allowed the appeal by  Mr  Richard  Otto  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's  decision  of  2nd  December  2014  to  refuse  his
    application for entry clearance to visit his mother Ms [CN].


 2. The appellant before  me  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  and  the
    respondent to this appeal is Mr Richard  Otto.   However  for  ease  of
    reference, in the course of this decision I shall  adopt  the  parties'
    status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I shall refer  to  Mr
    Richard Otto as the appellant, and the Entry Clearance Officer  as  the
    respondent.


 3. The respondent's reasons for refusing the application were set  out  in
    the refusal of entry clearance dated 2nd December 2014. The  respondent
    was not satisfied that the appellant is genuinely seeking  entry  as  a
    child visitor for the reasons set out in the refusal.  It followed that
    the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the immigration rules.


 4. The decision to  refuse  the  application  was  reviewed  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager who noted that the grounds of appeal advanced by  the
    appellant were based upon Article 8 ECHR.  The Entry Clearance  Manager
    noted that no new evidence had been provided  by  the  appellant.   The
    Entry Clearance Manager, having reviewed the matter, was satisfied that
    the decision to refuse entry clearance was correct and was  maintained.
    The Entry Clearance Manager went on to conclude that Article 8  is  not
    engaged  and  even  if  it  were,  refusal  of   entry   clearance   is
    proportionate for legitimate  reasons  of  fair  and  firm  immigration
    control, and the economic well-being of the country.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robison


 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge sets out the background to the appeal  at
    paragraphs [1] to [3] of her decision.  At paragraphs [8] to  [13]  she
    sets out the evidence received by the Tribunal.  At paragraphs [14]  to
    [22] the Judge sets out the proper approach  to  an  appeal  against  a
    refusal of entry clearance as a visitor.  The Judge notes  the  grounds
    upon which an appeal can be brought are restricted to those set out  in
    s84 of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   In  this
    appeal, the only relevant provision is that the  decision  is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act.  That  is,  the  decision  is
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR.


 6. Having recorded the evidence, the legal framework and  the  submissions
    made by the parties, the Judge sets out her findings and conclusions at
    paragraphs [31] to [48] of her decision.   The  Judge  found,  for  the
    reasons set out at paragraph [32] of her decision  that  the  appellant
    has established ties with his mother and brothers such  that  there  is
    family life within  the  terms  of  Article  8.   The  Judge  found  at
    paragraph [33] that the interference with that family life is  of  such
    gravity as potentially to  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   At
    paragraph [34] of her decision, the Judge found that  the  interference
    has a legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.  The Judge notes
    at paragraph [35] of her decision that the key question is whether  the
    means of achieving that aim, here to refuse the appellant  a  visitor's
    visa, are proportionate to that legitimate aim.  The Judge carried  out
    an assessment of proportionality at paragraphs  [36]  to  [48]  of  her
    decision, before concluding at paragraph [49] that  the  refusal  of  a
    visitor visa would be disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  being
    pursued.  In light of her findings the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.


 The grounds of appeal


 7. The respondent contends that the decision  of  the  Judge  discloses  a
    material misdirection as to the law and that the  Judge  erred  in  her
    conclusion that the decision to refuse entry  clearance  amounts  to  a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  Article  8  rights  of   the
    appellant.  The respondent contends that the Judge has failed to make a
    finding   that   there   are   exceptional   circumstances,   and   the
    proportionality assessment undertaken, is inadequate.  It is said  that
    the Judge does not explain why the refusal of a visa that  only  allows
    the  parties  to  be  together  temporarily,  is   a   disproportionate
    interference with Article 8, and furthermore, the Judge has  failed  to
    have regard to the public interest considerations that are now set  out
    in s117B of the 2002 Act.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    29th April 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether or not
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robison involved  the  making
    of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


 9. Before me, Mr Jarvis submits that the recent decisions of the  Tribunal
    all establish that there is a requirement for an appellant to show some
    compelling circumstances that weigh in favour of an  appellant  in  any
    assessment of  proportionality,  when  considered  against  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control. He submits that the
    Judge has not given sufficient reasons for finding that there  are  any
    compelling circumstances, in this case.


10. In reply, Mr Palmer submits that a  careful  reading  of  the  decision
    makes it plain that the Judge has correctly directed herself as to  the
    law at paragraphs [14] to [22] of her decision.  He  submits  that  the
    Judge found that the facts here are compelling enough, to conclude that
    the refusal of entry clearance is disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
    aim of immigration control.  He submits that it was open to  the  Judge
    to find that the appellant genuinely intends to  visit  the  UK  for  a
    short period.  The fact that the immigration rules  can  be  met  weigh
    heavily in favour of the appellant.  Mr Palmer accepts that  the  Judge
    does not refer to the public interest considerations set out  in  s117B
    of the 2002 Act, but submits  that  there  is  no  adverse  immigration
    history here, and matters such as maintenance  and  accommodation  were
    not in issue. He submits that the public  interest  considerations  are
    subsumed within the Judge's assessment of proportionality.


 Discussion


11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly identified  the  parameters  of
    the appeal before her at paragraph [14] of her decision.  She  properly
    identifies and directs herself to the legal framework for her  decision
    at paragraphs [14] to [22] of her decision.  The Judge noted that there
    is only a limited right of appeal on human rights grounds.


12. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  112  (IAC),  the
    Upper  Tribunal  held  that  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
    immigration rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal,
    but is capable of being a weighty,  though  not  determinative,  factor
    when deciding whether such refusal is proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim of enforcing immigration control.


13. The task of the judge was to determine  whether  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998.   That
    is, whether the decision was incompatible with the appellant's  Article
    8 rights.  As set out in the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Adeji
    (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC), the first question  to
    be addressed in an appeal against a refusal to grant entry clearance as
    a visitor where only human rights grounds  are  available,  is  whether
    Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If it is  not,  the  Tribunal
    has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the
    ECO under the rules and should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the
    Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which the appellant is  said
    to have failed to meet the requirements of the rule  because  that  may
    inform the proportionality balancing exercise that must follow.


14. In considering the appeal on Article 8 grounds, the Judge refers to the
    five questions identified by Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R -v- SSHD  ex
    parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, at paragraph [15] of her decision.


15. In entry clearance cases, the Tribunal is concerned with whether  there
    has been an unjustified lack of respect for private  and  family  life.
    Decisions of this  sort  are  entirely  fact  specific  and  the  Judge
    accepted that in the particular circumstances of this case, there was a
    family life between the applicant, his mother and  his  siblings.   The
    respondent does not challenge the findings made by the Judge.


16. The Judge found  that  the  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant  entry
    clearance interferes with the family life of the appellant, his  mother
    and his siblings or that the interference is of sufficient  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  The issue before the
    Judge was whether the refusal of entry clearance for the  specific  and
    limited purpose sought, interferes disproportionately with  the  family
    lives of the appellant, his mother and his siblings.


17. In refusing the application for entry  clearance  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that the appellant is genuinely seeking entry
    to the UK as a child visitor. On review, the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    maintained that decision and having  considered  Article  8,  concluded
    that the appellant has not established a family life  with  his  mother
    and siblings, or that any interference would have consequences of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


18. The Judge, having noted that the right of appeal is  limited  to  human
    rights grounds only, was satisfied that the substantive requirements of
    the immigration rules appear to  be  met.   The  Judge  considered  the
    matters that had been relied upon by the respondent in the decision  to
    refuse entry clearance and  having  heard  the  evidence  concluded  at
    paragraph [44] of her decision that the appellant can indeed  meet  the
    requirements of the rules.  That  again,  is  a  finding  that  is  not
    challenged.  Importantly, insofar as any assessment of  proportionality
    is concerned, the Judge states at paragraphs [46] to [48];


         "46. Is this then a case where a refusal of entry  clearance  could
         be said to have infringed Article 8? In this case I have  concluded
         that  the  appellant   has   established,   on   the   balance   of
         probabilities, that the purpose of his visit  is  a  short  holiday
         with his mother and younger brothers, and that it is his  intention
         to return to further his University studies. This  is  not  a  case
         where there is any evidence that the appellant has acted in  a  way
         which might undermine the system of immigration control. He has not
         previously visited the country or applied for a visa, but rather he
         has waited until his mother has discretionary leave to  remain  and
         is in a financial position to support, maintain and accommodate him
         during his stay.


         47.  In undertaking the proportionality balancing exercise, I  took
         account of the fact that the sponsor could at  some  stage  in  the
         future  visit  the  appellant  in  Cameroon,  since  she  now   has
         discretionary leave. However, I considered  on  the  evidence  that
         such visit was unlikely to take place in  the  foreseeable  future,
         given the age of the two younger brothers. I also took  account  of
         the fact that  the  appellant  was  at  liberty  to  make  a  fresh
         application, but this is not a "near miss" case  or  a  case  where
         materially different evidence would require to be lodged in support
         of the application.


         48.  There were no public interest considerations which pointed  to
         a justification for the  refusal  of  a  visitors'  visa  beyond  a
         speculative concern that he might prefer to  attend  University  in
         this country or take  up  employment  here.  On  the  contrary  the
         evidence suggested that the appellant could meet  the  requirements
         of the rules, and that the public interest factors  in  ensuring  a
         robust system of immigration control would not  be  compromised  by
         the grant of a visitors' visa in this case. "


19. Whilst not the question before the Tribunal, the underlying  merits  of
    the application and  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to  satisfy  the
    substantive requirements of the immigration rules, is capable of  being
    a weighty factor in an appeal on human rights grounds.  The  fact  that
    the appellant appears, on the findings made by the  Judge,  to  satisfy
    the requirements of the immigration rules, was in my  judgment  capable
    of tipping the balance in favour of the  appellant  in  the  particular
    facts and circumstances of this case.


20. Although the Judge does not identify them as compelling  circumstances,
    in my judgement, it is clear from the extracts of the decision  that  I
    have cited that the Judge  was  satisfied  that  there  are  individual
    interests at stake covered by Article 8 in this appeal, that are  of  a
    particularly  pressing  nature  so  as  to  give  rise  to   compelling
    circumstances that justify the grant of leave to enter as a visitor  on
    Article 8 grounds.  I accept that the Judge does not refer expressly to
    s117B of the 2002 Act in her decision, but in my judgement,  the  Judge
    plainly had regard to all relevant public interest considerations  when
    reaching her decision.


21. In my judgment it was open to the Judge in the particular circumstances
    of this case, and upon the findings made by her, to conclude  that  the
    decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance,  is  disproportionate  to   the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved and to allow the appeal.


22. It follows that the appeal before me, by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    fails and is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


23. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


24. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia       14th September 2016




FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal made a fee award. I have  dismissed  the  appeal  of
the Entry Clearance Officer and the fee award shall stand.

Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia             14th September 2016



