
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/06563/2014
                                                               VA/06564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS PINZHU CHEN
                               MR ZHENGEN LIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Lam, Counsel instructed by AP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie which  was  promulgated
    on 8 September 2015.  The matters with which  the  court  is  concerned
    relate to an application for a visit visa.  The applicants have  a  son
    who lives in the United Kingdom together with his spouse and there  are
    two children of that  relationship.  The  applicants  sought  and  were
    refused a visa  in  order  to  visit  from  China.  That  decision  was
    overturned by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and it is the reasoning and
    conclusion of this decision that the Secretary of State invites  me  to
    revisit today.

2.   It is, I confess, a rather unsatisfactory decision.  First of  all,  in
    paragraph 2 the judge properly makes reference to the leading authority
    of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) which
    demonstrate the principles which are to apply in cases such  as  these.
    There  is  no  freestanding  right  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   to
    investigate the merits of the decision of the  visa  officer.   Instead
    the best that the First-tier Tribunal can do  is  to  consider  whether
    there has been a violation of Article 8. That requires a  thorough  and
    detailed examination of the  family  right  which  is  engaged  and  in
    addition to that a nuanced proportionality test taking account  of  the
    very  substantial  public  interest  which  exists  in  upholding   the
    effectiveness of immigration control.

3.   In this instance, the judge reminded himself  in  paragraph  9  of  his
    decision, "I must also guard against the circumstance  that  an  appeal
    such as this simply becomes a disguised appeal against the merit of the
    decision."  Looking  at  the  decision  both  in  the  round  and  with
    reference to the specifics, I fear that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    fell into precisely the trap which  he  had  expressly  warned  himself
    against.  In this instance, although he made certain reference  to  the
    grandparents having some involvement with their grandchildren including
    financial responsibility for  a  period  of  some  ten  years,  and  in
    paragraph  6  to  the  fact  that  there  may  have   been   continuous
    communication by internet, social media and video messaging,  it  seems
    to me that the Article 8 consideration was at its best  flimsy  and  at
    its worst non-existent. It  is  certainly  not  compelling.   There  is
    established principle that family life  rights  cannot  be  pursued  in
    relation to parents and adult children and where consideration of minor
    grandchildren is concerned, there needs to be  proper  evidence  of  an
    enduring right which is in existence.  I do not consider that  this  is
    made out in this instance.

4.   In seeking to uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    the  appellant's   representative   sought   to   indicate   that   the
    proportionality test had been properly applied.  He made  reference  to
    certain parts of paragraph 9, paragraph 10 and of paragraph 11.   On  a
    full reading of those paragraphs there is nothing to suggest  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge properly exercised the proportionality  test,
    weighing on one  hand  the  nature  and  significance  of  the  alleged
    interference with Article 8 right and on the other hand the substantial
    public interest involved in the  enforcement  of  immigration  control.
    That being the case, the judge's decision was clearly flawed and cannot
    be upheld.

5.   The  judge  effectively  reviewed  the  matter  in  the  light  of  the
    Immigration Rules and then sought to dress that up as  a  determination
    under the principles of Article  8.  That  error  of  law  having  been
    demonstrated, this appeal must be allowed.  As  there  is  no  arguable
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, the decision of  the  visa  officer
    must be restored.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. Decision of visa officer restored.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill QC      Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

