
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00002/2014
                                                               VA/00001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2015                            |On 17 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                MRS AMBER MUHAMMAD ISMAIL (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                   MISS AYESHA ISMAIL (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   None

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondents in this case are Mrs Amber Ismail Muhammad  whose  date
    of birth is 30 December 1965 and  her  daughter,  Miss  Ayesha  Ismail,
    whose date of birth  is  10  June  1991.  They  are  both  citizens  of
    Pakistan. I shall refer to the respondents as the  appellants  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The sponsor in this case is Muhammad Ismail.  He  is  the  son  of  the
    first appellant and the sister of the second.  The appellants  made  an
    application for entry clearance as visitors on  24  November  2013  and
    their applications were refused by the ECO in Abu Dhabi in decisions of
    3 December 2013.  The applications were refused under paragraph  41  of
    the Immigration Rules.

3.   The  appellants  appealed  and  their  appeal  was  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 18 November 2014 following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 7 November 2014.  The Judge heard evidence from  the
    sponsor.  The Judge accepted the evidence of the sponsor and found that
    the appellants met all limbs of paragraph 41 of the Rules.

4.   The Secretary of State made an application  for  permission  to  appeal
    and this was granted Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  in  a
    decision of 2 January 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Grounds of Appeal

5.   The grounds of appeal argue that as a  result  of  Section  52  of  the
    Crime and Courts Act  2013  the  ground  of  appeal  available  to  the
    appellants was restricted to the Human Rights Act 1998 and  Section  29
    of the Equality Act 2010.  The Judge did not make findings in  relation
    to either and allowed the appeal under the Rules which was not open  to
    him.

Error of Law

6.   The Judge erred because he did not have jurisdiction to  determine  the
    appeal under the Rules.  He did  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  the
    appeal under Article 8. This was raised in the grounds and  the  appeal
    should have been determined under Article 8.

7.   I set aside the decision to allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2002.  I went on to re-make the appeal under Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights.  There  was  no  reason  to  go
    behind the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

8.   I gave the sponsor Mr  Ismail  the  opportunity  to  give  evidence  in
    relation to Article 8 and I have taken into consideration his  evidence
    along with the Rule 24 response which he prepared and submitted  of  14
    January 2015.

9.   Mr Ismail's evidence is that his mother and sister  intended  to  visit
    him and his family here in the UK.  The sponsor and his wife  have  two
    children. They are all British citizens.  Their eldest  son's  date  of
    birth is 3 September 2010 and their second child was born  on  12  July
    2011.  The appellants have a history of visiting  the  UK.   They  both
    visited at the birth of both of the sponsor's children and the  sponsor
    attended a wedding in Pakistan in 2013.  The sponsor has not lived with
    his mother or sister since he came to the UK in  October  2003.  It  is
    difficult for him and his family to visit Pakistan as a result  of  his
    work commitments.

10.  The appellants have a good immigration history.  The  sponsor's  mother
    has visited the UK on  six  occasions  and  his  sister  on  two.   The
    sponsor's wife has had two miscarriages in August 2013 and  June  2014.
    The appellant is not able to care for her during pregnancy  because  of
    his work commitments. According to the sponsor his wife's  miscarriages
    are as a result of family members not being able to come to the  UK  in
    order to care for her.

11.  I  must  consider  the  evidence  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   I
    appreciate the sponsor and his family's difficulty in relation  to  his
    wife's history of miscarriages and that he hopes that  his  mother  and
    sister can enter the UK in  order  to  care  for  her  to  prevent  the
    possibility of a future miscarriage.  In oral evidence  before  me  the
    sponsor confirmed that his wife was not pregnant at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  Sadly it appears from  his  evidence  that  she  suffered  a
    miscarriage in June 2014.

12.  Before I consider Lord Bingham's step by step  approach  in  Razgar,  R
    (on the application of) v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  it  is  necessary  to
    establish whether there is a private or  family  life  with  which  the
    decision would interfere.  The mere existence of a family  relationship
    or a private life is not sufficient for the  applicability  of  Article
    8(2).  Much more is needed.  I refer to paragraph 20 of Lord  Bingham's
    judgment in that case of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL.  In this case it  is
    clear  that  the  family  relationship  is  not  sufficient   for   the
    applicability of Article 8(2).  The sponsor  has  not  lived  with  his
    mother and sister since October 2003 and there is no evidence that  the
    sponsor's wife and children have ever lived with the appellants.  Their
    relationship to date has consisted of frequent  visits.   Should  I  be
    wrong about that the decision is proportionate to  the  legitimate  end
    sought to be achieved.  I must take into account Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act and the maintenance of effective  control  is  in  the  public
    interest.  I have considered the sponsor's evidence in relation to  the
    requirement of care during his wife's pregnancy, however at the date of
    the decision confirmed to me in oral evidence she was not  pregnant  at
    the date of the decision.

13.  I dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the 1950  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Joanna McWilliam                                   Date  17  February
    2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

