
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00234/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     EL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the hearing the appellant was unrepresented although his  mother-in-
    law, GH, appeared to make submissions on his behalf and  on  behalf  of
    the sponsor, ML.  Ms GH explained that  the  sponsor  was  not  present
    because she is suffering from depression.   In  these  circumstances  I
    treated Ms GH as a witness, assisting her to give evidence  based  upon
    the  written  submissions  made  to  the  Tribunal  which   have   been
    incorporated into a ring binder which is attached to the Tribunal file.



Background

 2. On  22nd  April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal E M M Smith who dismissed  the  appeal  on  the
    papers on human rights grounds against the decision of  the  respondent
    to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of paragraph 41 of HC  395  (as  amended),  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Judge Page observed that the judge had stated in  his  decision
    that he had very little information before him or evidence to show that
    the appellant was married or is the father of the children he wished to
    visit.  The grounds of application argued that evidence  was  available
    to the judge particularly that attached to the notice of  appeal  which
    included a marriage certificate and a copy  of  the  appellant's  first
    born son's birth certificate.  Both documents had been sent by Recorded
    Delivery.  However, it appeared that none of the documents had been put
    before the judge.  Judge Page therefore thought it arguable that  there
    was a defect in the proceedings which might have vitiated the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. I indicated, at the commencement of the  hearing,  that  notes  on  the
    Tribunal  file  suggested  that  no  notice  of  appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal decision of 31st December 2014 had  been  received
    prior to the hearing before Judge Smith on 20th March 2015.  The First-
    tier Tribunal had accepted the appeal on the basis of a letter  written
    by the sponsor on about 23rd January 2015 when  the  file  was  opened.
    Further, no bundle of  documents  was  ever  received  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer before the hearing or at any stage.

 4. Mr McVeety helpfully  conceded  that  it  was  possible  that  relevant
    documents had been sent to the Tribunal at its Arnhem  Centre  but  had
    not been seen by the judge before the hearing on 20th March  2015.   Ms
    GH asserted that the documents contained in the ring binder were  those
    which should have been before the judge.

 5. After considering the matter for a few moments and having regard to the
    nature of the documents said to have been submitted before the hearing,
    I announced that I was satisfied that the decision showed an error on a
    point of law arising from a  procedural  irregularity  the  results  of
    which were capable of making a material difference to the  outcome  and
    fairness of the proceedings.  My reasons for that conclusion, follows.

 6. The respondent has failed to provide a bundle of documents as  directed
    in this appeal although the decision of the First-tier Judge  does  not
    show that he made any investigation into the  absence  of  that  bundle
    which was likely to contain the documents which had been submitted with
    the application which was subsequently refused.  It is likely that,  if
    the judge had investigated that matter, then  the  whereabouts  of  the
    documentation (copies of which have now been produced) might have  been
    revealed and disposal on the papers delayed.  It is not unreasonable to
    conclude that relevant documentation about the appellant's children and
    the relationship between appellant and sponsor had  been  submitted  in
    support of  the  application  and  should  have  been  present  in  the
    respondent's bundle or attached to the notice  of  appeal.   Clearly  a
    procedural error occurred which means that the  appeal  proceeded  with
    the documents supporting the appeal either overlooked or mislaid.   The
    respondent's refusal decision of 31st December 2014 refers specifically
    to the submission of a birth certificate and marriage certificate which
    supports the appellant's claim that they should have  been  before  the
    judge.  I am therefore satisfied that there  was  an  irregularity  the
    results of which were capable of making a material  difference  to  the
    outcome or fairness of the proceedings.  This amounts to an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside and re-made.

Re-Making the Decision

 7. I proceeded to re-make the decision by taking evidence from Ms  GH  and
    hearing submissions by the respondent's representative.

 8. Ms GH referred to a skeleton  argument  which  is  in  part  C  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  In this it is explained that the sponsor now has a
    second child by her marriage to the appellant.   OL  was  born  on  8th
    March 2015.  His birth certificate records the appellant as his father.

 9. Ms GH  then  summarised  the  appellant's  family  circumstances.   She
    explained that her daughter had met the appellant in  Greece  in  about
    2012 whilst working there.  Her daughter,  the  sponsor,  then  visited
    Albania from where the appellant comes.  In 2013 the appellant and  her
    daughter became engaged.  Her daughter went to Tirana  in  Albania  for
    about three months.  This is where the appellant  lives  and  they  got
    married there on 23rd July 2013.  Both sponsor and  appellant  were  23
    years of age when they married.  Both families were in  agreement  with
    the union.

10. Ms GH says that her daughter then stayed in  Albania  for  another  six
    weeks after the wedding and then returned home to UK.  At that time she
    was pregnant.  An application was made for a visit by the appellant  in
    2013 to enable him to attend the birth of the first child but that  was
    refused.  Ms GH explained that her daughter had come back to the United
    Kingdom because she is also her carer.  Ms GH suffers from fibromyalgia
    and pulmonary difficulties.  She said that her daughter has made  about
    six visits to Albania since the marriage  and  became  pregnant  again.
    Both children were born in Albania although both are  living  with  the
    sponsor in the United Kingdom.  It is hoped that,  in  the  future,  it
    will be possible for the appellant to apply for a spouse visa.

11. As to the sponsor's state of health, Ms GH explained that her  daughter
    is reluctant to  seek  treatment  for  the  depression  for  which  she
    suffers.  However, she believed that a visit  from  her  husband  would
    improve her health and give her hope  for  the  future.   Her  daughter
    feels that she has to be in the United Kingdom to care for her  mother.
    Her depression would not receive the same level of treatment in Albania
    as in the United Kingdom.

12. Ms GH emphasised that there was  a  genuine  relationship  between  her
    daughter and the appellant.   The  appellant  is  fully  aware  of  the
    restrictions of a visit visa.

13. During cross-examination Ms GH said that the appellant was  also  aware
    of the requirement to leave the United Kingdom at the end of any  visit
    visa granted.  She confirmed that her daughter does not work  full-time
    in UK at present and understood that, without the  income  required  by
    the Immigration Rules, it would be a year before a  spouse  application
    could be made.

Submissions

14. Mr McVeety did not doubt the intentions of the parties  but  emphasised
    that the respondent's decision was not disproportionate.   Family  life
    would continue as it had  before  despite  the  refusal.   He  did  not
    question the credibility of the evidence given by Ms Higgins.

15. I allowed Ms GH to make final comment.  She said that the circumstances
    had now caused her daughter to be depressed  but  she  firmly  believed
    that if the appellant could be allowed to visit the United Kingdom  her
    condition would improve.

Conclusions

16. This appeal is limited to human rights and race  relations  grounds  by
    virtue of Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013.  My approach  to
    the appeal follows the guidance set out in Adjei (Visit visas - Article
    8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC).  The burden of proof is on the appellant and
    the standard of proof is a  balance  of  probabilities.   I  take  into
    consideration the evidence as at the date of hearing.

17. The respondent does not take  issue  with  the  circumstances  of  this
    appeal as summarised by the  sponsor's  mother  and  accepts  that  the
    appellant and sponsor and their two children have a family life for the
    purpose of Article 8 of the 1950 Human Rights Convention.  The issue is
    therefore whether or not the respondent's decision is  disproportionate
    to the public interest involved of legitimate immigration control.

18. The circumstances of the parties invoke some sympathy. That is  because
    the sponsor has strong ties to her mother for whom she is  a  carer  in
    the United Kingdom but that  creates  a  difficult  situation  for  the
    enjoyment of family life which has, I accept, aggravated or given  rise
    to the depression from which the sponsor suffers.  Further, I take into
    consideration that the parties have conceded that, at present, a spouse
    application under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules cannot  be  made
    as insufficient income is available for the maintenance of  the  family
    in the United Kingdom as required by  the  specific  provision  of  the
    Rules.

19. However, I must point out that both appellant and sponsor knew or ought
    to have known of the immigration difficulties which their  relationship
    would create  particularly  with  their  subsequent  decision  to  have
    children.  They have made the best of their  circumstances  by  use  of
    modern methods of communication and visits by the  sponsor  to  Albania
    where she chose to give birth to both of her children.   Unfortunately,
    there is no supporting evidence before me to confirm the precise nature
    of the sponsor's mental illness and she does not appear to  be  willing
    to seek treatment for this.  I therefore have  to  conclude  that  such
    illness is not so serious as to inhibit any future  visits  to  Albania
    and that suitable alternative care arrangements can  be  made  for  the
    sponsor's mother who has  evidently  survived  in  the  past  when  the
    sponsor has gone to Albania.

20. The Immigration Rules  cannot  avail  the  appellant  who  seeks  entry
    clearance.  Applying the five  stage  approach  recommended  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 I have already identified the  main  issue  as  that  of
    proportionality bearing in mind that the respondent's refusal  decision
    is in accordance with the law.  Taking into account the factors I  have
    identified in the preceding paragraph,  I  am  unable  to  conduct  the
    proportionality balancing exercise so as to favour the appellant.   The
    high threshold which has to be established in human  rights  cases  has
    not been satisfied.  The family life of the appellant  and  his  family
    members is not prejudiced in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to
    a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8 (Huang  [2007]
    UKHL 11).

21. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) cannot assist the appellant.  His relationship to the  sponsor
    and his British citizen children would only be relevant if he  were  at
    risk of removal from the United Kingdom.

22. In addition to the factors I have identified,  I  cannot  discount  the
    possibility that the appellant can make further applications  to  visit
    his family in the United Kingdom which may be  approved  if  the  other
    objections to the  application  referred  to  in  the  refusal  can  be
    overcome.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of  law
and is set aside.  I re-make the decision on human rights  grounds  only  by
dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

As this  appeal  involves  the  interests  of  young  children  I  make  the
following anonymity direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant or  his  family  members.   This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

