
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
vA/00006/2016

                                                    va/00007/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14th July 2017                          |On 04th August 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                bello hamadou
                                 imam dafdo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are Bello Hamadou, born on 1st January 1947, and his son
    Imam Dafdo born on 19th February  1986.   They  are  both  citizens  of
    Cameroon.  They applied to the  British  High  Commission,  Accra,  for
    entry  clearance  to  the  UK  to  visit  their  daughter  and   sister
    respectively, a British citizen named Safia Bello.  Those  applications
    were refused for the  reasons  given  in  Refusal  Notices  dated  12th
    November 2014.  Those decisions were subsequently confirmed by an Entry
    Clearance Manager on 5th May 2016.  The Appellants appealed, and  their
    appeals were decided without a hearing  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oxlade (the Judge) on 19th October  2016.   He  decided  to  allow  the
    appeals for the reasons given  in  his  Decision  of  that  date.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal those decisions and  such  permission
    was granted on 25th April 2017.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The appeals were decided on Article 8 ECHR grounds only  in  accordance
    with Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2014.  The Judge found that
    the Appellants had a family  life  with  the  Sponsor  which  would  be
    interfered with by the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to  such  a
    degree of gravity as to merit  the  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    human  rights.   The  Judge  also  found  that  such  interference  was
    disproportionate.  This was because the purpose of the  proposed  visit
    was genuine, and that the provisions of paragraph 41  of  HC  395  were
    satisfied in their entirety.  Those circumstances outweighed the public
    interest.

 4. At the hearing, the Sponsor appeared unrepresented but  indicated  that
    she wished the hearing to proceed nonetheless.

 5. Mrs Aboni argued that the decision of the Judge was in error of law  as
    the Judge had not made  a  finding  that  there  were  additional  ties
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor to justify a finding  of  family
    life between adults.  Further, the Judge had failed to give  sufficient
    reasons for his finding  that  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was disproportionate.  The Judge  had  failed  to  address  the
    substantive reasons given by the Entry Clearance Officer  for  refusing
    the applications and had therefore given  insufficient  weight  to  the
    public interest.

 6. In response, the Sponsor understandably did not  deal  with  the  legal
    arguments of Mrs Aboni but instead described to me the purpose  of  the
    proposed visit and assured me that the intentions were genuine and that
    the Appellants would return to their own country when  required  to  do
    so.

 7. I do find a material error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I
    therefore set aside.  The Judge accepted that there was a  family  life
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor, but as  they  are  adults,  the
    Judge was required to make a finding in accordance with the decision in
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 which he failed to do.  According to
    what the Judge wrote at paragraphs 25 to 30 inclusive of the  Decision,
    he decided the appeals purely on the  basis  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellants as to their intentions.  He therefore further erred  in  law
    in taking no account of the public interest.  Merely to state that  the
    Appellants met the requirements of the Immigration Rules as  to  family
    visits is insufficient.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Clearly this is a genuine case in many ways whereby the  Appellants  if
    properly represented might be able to show that the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.  I therefore decided to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade  in  accordance  with  paragraph
    7.2(a) and (b) of the Practice  Statements.   The  Appellants  and  the
    Sponsor would be well advised to obtain full legal  representation  for
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.




Signed                              Date   3rd August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award.  I set  aside  that  decision  in
line with my decision to set aside the decision in the appeal of the  First-
tier Tribunal.  Any new fee award can be made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
when remaking the decision in the appeal.




Signed                              Date   3rd August 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
