
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00516/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 28 April 2017                      |                                      |
|                                      |On 08 May 2017                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGLADESH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RABA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Islam, Counsel, Chambers of Aminual Islam

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Bangladesh,
   born on 10 November 1979. Her husband and son (born on 16 February 2005)
   are British citizens living in the UK. On 10 November 2014 she applied
   for entry clearance to visit the UK for four weeks. Her application was
   considered by the appellant ("the ECO") under Paragraph 41 of the
   Immigration Rules and refused on the basis that it was not accepted that
   she intended to leave the UK at the end of her visit.


2. The claimant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Shamash. In a decision promulgated on 14 October 2016, the judge
   allowed the appeal. The ECO appeals, with permission, against Judge
   Shamash's decision.


Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal


3. The judge found that the claimant is the mother of a minor child, aged
   10 at the time of the application, who had been in the UK for under a
   year when the application was made. The claimant had been her son's sole
   carer before he moved to the UK (with his father) and he now lived with
   his aunt (the claimant's sister).


4. Having directed herself that the sole ground of appeal in visit visa
   cases is whether there is a breach of Article 8 ECHR and that the
   relevance of the Immigration Rules is to inform the Article 8 decision,
   the judge applied the five stage test delineated in Razgar.

5. The judge found that Article 8 was engaged and refusing entry clearance
   interfered with the claimant's family life.


6. At paragraph 26 the judge assessed whether the interference with Article
   8 rights was in accordance with the law and stated:


         "I accept the evidence of the sponsor, Mrs Khanom, that there is
         sufficient money to meet the costs of the entire visit, to pay for
         the ticket, that the accommodation has been certified as
         suitable....There is evidence of family ties in Bangladesh and I
         accept the evidence of Ms Khanom that the [claimant] is responsible
         for caring for her mother law. I therefore find that the decision
         of the respondent is not in accordance with the law".


7. The judge then proceeded to assess the proportionality of refusing the
   claimant entry to the UK. The judge stated, at paragraph 32, that she
   weighed the concerns of the ECO that the claimant would not return to
   Bangladesh against the needs of a child to see his mother. At paragraph
   35 the judge stated that the claimant's son, as a British citizen, has
   the right to see his mother and is not in a position on his own to travel
   to see her in Bangladesh.


8. With respect to the ECO's concern about the claimant not returning to
   Bangladesh, the judge found at paragraph 36:


         "I am satisfied that the [claimant] comes from a traditional
         Bangladeshi family, that she lives currently with her mother in law
         and I find on the balance of probabilities that she intends to
         return to look after her mother in law."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9. The grounds of appeal argue that the refusal decision does not amount to
   an interference with family life as there are no reasons why the
   claimant's son's father could not take her son to Bangladesh or why her
   son could not travel alone. The grounds refer to a website for Biman
   Bangladesh Airlines and stated that it caters for unaccompanied minor
   children. The grounds also state that the decision to deny the claimant
   entry was proportionate in the interests of effective immigration
   control.


10. Before me, Mr Singh, argued that there was nothing to prevent the
   claimant's son, accompanied by his father or aunt, or travelling
   unaccompanied, visiting his mother. It was the family's choice to bring
   him to the UK and the family life between him and his mother does not
   require them to be in the same country. Mr Singh highlighted the concerns
   of the ECO about the lack of intention on the part of the claimant to
   return.


11. Mr Islam's response was that it was open to the judge to find family
   life and that the finding that the Immigration Rules were satisfied was
   an important factor in proportionality assessment under Article 8. He
   argued that the judge gave proper consideration as to whether the
   claimant's son could reasonably be expected to travel to Bangladesh.


Consideration


12. The first question for the judge to address was whether Article 8(1) of
   the ECHR was engaged. As explained in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry
   clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), this is an intensely factual and
   contextual question. Whilst it will frequently not be the case that
   Article 8 is engaged where there is a relationship between an adult child
   and his/her parent, it is not unusual for a case to come within the scope
   of Article 8(1) where the relationship in question concerns a parent and
   a young child. In Mostafa at para [24] the Tribunal stated:

           "... In practical terms this [a refusal of entry  coming  within
           the scope of Article 8(1)] is likely  to  be  limited  to  cases
           where the relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other
           close life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it
           will not necessarily be extended to cases  where,  for  example,
           the  proposed  visit  is  based  on  a  whim  or  will  not  add
           significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people  involved  spend
           together." [emphasis added]

13. The evidence before the judge was that the claimant speaks to her
   (then, 11 year old) son almost every day and that she was his sole carer
   until he moved to the UK, less than a year before the application was
   made. The evidence also showed that the claimant's sister (with whom the
   claimant's son resides) has looked into options for the son to travel to
   Bangladesh to visit his mother but does not see this as realistic in the
   foreseeable future. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge
   was entitled to find that denying the claimant entry to the UK interfered
   with her and her son's family with consequences of such gravity as to
   potentially engage Article 8. The fact that the claimant's son might be
   able to travel to Bangladesh on his own does not alter this assessment.


14. Having found Article 8 was engaged, the next question for the judge to
   consider was whether the interference was in accordance with the law. The
   judge addressed this at paragraphs 26 and 36 of the decision (cited above
   at paragraphs 6 and 8).  It was for the judge to evaluate the evidence on
   this issue, which she has done, and it was open to her to conclude that,
   on the balance of probabilities, the claimant would return to Pakistan
   and that the Immigration Rules were satisfied.


15. I also cannot discern an error in the judge's approach to the
   assessment of whether refusing the claimant entry to the UK was
   proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control. The
   judge has considered a number of factors, one of which was that the
   claimant was able to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  There was no error
   in treating this as a weighty factor (see the headnote to Mostafa). In
   the proportionality balancing exercise the judge has taken into account
   all material factors. The weight afforded to each factor was a matter for
   her and the grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with her
   conclusion.


Decision


A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 5 May 2017                    |





















