
IAC-CH-AP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th October 2014                         |17th December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                       MR DEEPAKKUMAR CHAMANLAL KAMANI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Fransman QC and Mr Sadat Sayeed, instructed by
                    Wesley Gryk Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This Kenyan Appellant, born on 3rd July 1953, appeals with  permission,
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kempton),  promulgated  on
    30th June 2014, dismissing his appeal against a  refusal  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Nairobi, dated  2nd  January  2014,  refusing  him
    leave to enter the United Kingdom as a general visitor.  The  Appellant
    had invited a paper disposal of his appeal.

 2. Judge Kempton dismissed the Appellant's appeal with  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules at Paragraph 320(7B), Articles 6 and 8 of the ECHR.

 3. Permission  was  granted  at  the  First-tier  on  the  basis  that  in
    dismissing the appeal under Rule 320  the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to the issue of dishonesty.

Background

 4. There is an immigration history. The Appellant was first issued a multi
    entry visit visa in 1996 which was valid for five years until 2004. The
    Appellant was issued with a second such visa in 2004, valid until 2009.



 5. In 2006  the  Kenyan  authorities  withdrew  the  Appellant's  passport
    facilities, in the context of an investigation into  an  allegation  of
    fraud. In 2006 the  UK  authorities  cancelled  his  multi  entry  visa
    because of this change of circumstance.

 6. On 04 July 2007  the  cancellation  of  the  Appellant's  passport  was
    ordered unlawful  following  successful  legal  action  in  Kenya.  The
    Appellant's Kenyan passport was reinstated.  In  2009  the  Appellant's
    said Kenyan passport expired. On 25th May 2010 the Appellant was issued
    with Kenyan passport number C012341 valid until 23rd May 2020.

 7. On 15 July 2010 the Appellant applied for a visa using Kenyan  passport
    no C012341. On 08 December 2010 the application for a visa was  refused
    on the basis that he had failed to mention the cancellation  of  his  5
    year multi entry visit visa in 2006. The Appellant did not  appeal.  In
    his statement for the First-tier tribunal  in  the  instant  appeal  he
    asserted he did not know his visa had been cancelled as he had  had  no
    direct notification of that position.  He could not declare what he did
    not know. He  thought  an  appeal  pointless  because,  as  the  Kenyan
    authorities  considered  him  a  flight  risk  and  had  impounded  and
    cancelled his passport, he assumed the UK authorities would not  accept
    that he genuinely only intended to visit the UK, and would not seek  to
    stay, so that even if he established that he had no  knowledge  of  the
    cancellation he would not win his appeal. The Appellant went on to  say
    that in 2011 the  investigations  into  the  allegation  of  fraudulent
    dealings had  continued  and  he  had  co  operated  and  had  attended
    interviews in Kenya. No charges have ever been forthcoming.

 8. On 11th October 2011 a second, contemporaneously valid Kenyan passport:
    C020409 was issued in Nairobi. This second passport is valid until  9th
    October 2021. The Appellant says, in his statement for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  in the instant appeal, that he was forced by the Respondent's
    failure to deal with his earlier applications in a timely manner to get
    this  second  passport,  so  that   he  would  not  be  prevented  from
    travelling  whilst  the Respondent was holding his passport to  process
    a future visit visa application.

 9. On 31 August 2012 the Appellant made a  fresh  application  on  C012341
    passport. In that application the Appellant made no  reference  to  the
    second Kenyan passport C020409.  In January 2013 the Appellant withdrew
    that application, because he says in his statement  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he needed the passport to travel.

10. In May 2013 the Appellant applied for a visa through solicitors in  the
    United Kingdom. In this application  the  Appellant  applied  with  the
    later issued valid Kenyan passport C020409, and failed to  reveal  that
    he had the earlier issued, and still valid Kenyan passport.

11. On 07 July 2013 the ECO refused the visa application with reference  to
    paragraph 320(7A). The Entry Clearance Officer had been satisfied  that
    there had been a purposeful  withholding  of  relevant  information  in
    order to obtain an immigration benefit namely  the  undisclosed  Kenyan
    passport number C012341.  On its face there was a failure to  disclose.
    The ECO found it adverse because:

      i)  The VAF form asked that all passports be listed. The answer at VAF
         21 omitted the passport.

     ii) The VAF form asked for confirmation that earlier  issued  passports
         had been cancelled and the Appellant's  answer  was  "All  previous
         passports held have now expired".

    iii) Additionally it  was notable the Appellant had, consistent  with  a
         deliberate intention not to disclose,  in the  four  page  document
         that he had attached to  his  application  listing  his  historical
         overseas travel with reference to  the  passport  used,  failed  to
         mention trips using the omitted passport  number C012341.

12.  The  refusal  notice  indicated   that   future   applications   would
    automatically be refused under paragraph 320(7B) for a  period  of  ten
    years, i.e. until 7th May  2023.  The  Appellant  did  not  appeal  the
    refusal of 07 May 2013.

13. In December 2013 the Appellant made the application the subject of this
    appeal, and in this application he  referred  to  both  passports.  The
    Appellant applied for a fifteen day visit so as to accompany  his  wife
    who already had a visa, for the purposes of  "general  visit  and  meet
    friends". On his application form VAF, at 85 and 86  he  was  asked  to
    list any friends or family in the United Kingdom, and he set  down  the
    details of one friend.

14. On 24 January 2014 the Appellant's application was  refused  under  the
    general grounds of refusal set out at HC  395  paragraph  320(7B),  the
    terms of which are  that if an  earlier  refusal  has  been  made  with
    reference to 320(7A) future applications are to be refused for a period
    of 10 years. The decision additionally  refused  the  application  with
    reference to the substantive visit visa  rules  set  out  at  paragraph
    41(i) and  (ii),  finding  that  the  adverse  disclosure  point  above
    resulted in the  Appellant  failing  to  meet  the  burden  on  him  of
    establishing on balance that  he  was  genuinely  seeking  entry  as  a
    general visitor for a limited period not exceeding six months.



Discussion

15. The first challenge to the judge's decision upon which  permission  was
    granted is that the judge fell into error on  the  application  of  the
    substantive rule. Mr Fransman submitted that once an  appeal  has  been
    brought with reference to race  relations/discrimination/human  rights,
    then all the statutory grounds, including that the decision is  not  in
    accordance with the immigration rules, are before the  judge,  so  that
    the Judge should have  considered  if  there  was  evidence  of  actual
    dishonesty, with the burden falling on the respondent.  The  judge  had
    failed to make a finding  on  the  issue  of  dishonesty,  and  so  the
    decision under the rules was flawed.

16. I find no merit in that position. By virtue of Section 88A(3)(a) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  Appellant's  grounds
    are limited to human  rights  and  race  relations  as  set  out  at  s
    84(1)(b),  (c).   The  judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  determine  the
    substantive issue as to whether or  not  the  Respondent's  refusal  of
    January 2014 was correct under the rules so as to allow  an  appeal  on
    the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the  Immigration
    Rules.

17. The next point taken for the Appellant is that the  ECHR  consideration
    is flawed for failure to appreciate the position under the rules vis  a
    vis dishonesty relevant to the 07 July 2014 refusal, and for failure to
    factor in private life in the context of  impact  of  the  decision  on
    reputation and the ability to travel to the UK, and more widely.

18. The question arises as to what if any convention  grounds  were  before
    the judge.

19. Mr Fransman in the grounds seeking permission  argues  that  there  was
    "implicit" reliance on Articles 6 and 8 of ECHR".

20. I am satisfied that there whilst  Article 6 the right to a fair hearing
    was expressly raised, no Article 8 convention point was raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

21. The Appellant's Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  were  set
    out over four pages, and in summary were:

      1) "Abridgement of my fundamental Convention rights with reference  to
         Article 2 of the UN Covenant on  Civil  and  Political  Rights  and
         Article 2 of the United  Nations  universal  declaration  of  human
         rights particularised as being a  right  to  be  presumed  innocent
         until proven guilty if charged with any offence."

      2) Bias  and  personal  discrimination  particularised  as  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer having a predisposition to refuse  the  Appellant
         because since 2010 he had been refused three visit visas and  there
         had been delay in processing his applications.

      3) Unfair hearing particularised as arising from an inability to  have
         a hearing to dispute the  dishonesty  of  the  earlier  failure  to
         disclose because all future visa applications will be automatically
         refused until 2023. The matter was explained as innocent because as
         a result of the Entry Clearance Officer keeping his  passport  from
         July 2010 until December 2010 he was forced to make an  exceptional
         application to the Kenyan authorities to be  permitted  to  have  a
         second and concurrently valid Kenyan passport. Further, as a result
         of the ECO's unfair treatment of his applications  resulting  in  a
         refusal of the July 2010 application in December 2010, a  delay  in
         processing the application made on 31st August 2012, causing him to
          withdraw it in January 2013 because of the need to  travel  abroad
         on business on a visa endorsed on the passport that he had made the
         2012  application  on,  and  the  refusal  in  July  2013  (of  the
         application made in May  2013)  for  the  failure  to  declare  the
         concurrently  valid  passport,  and  then  the   refusal   of   the
         application made on 3rd December and the subject of this appeal, he
          had been unable to  accompany  his  wife  and  daughter  on  their
         previous visits to the United Kingdom, and so had been deprived the
         opportunity of being with his daughter when she had given birth  in
         the UK.

      4) Bad faith particularised as the ECO taking against the Appellant on
         the basis that he had been investigated by the  Kenyan  authorities
         for  fraudulent  dealings,  when  the  reality   was   that   those
         investigations had resulted in no proceedings being brought against
         him.

      5) Irrelevancy, particularised as the Entry Clearance Officer actively
         looking for  reasons  to  refuse  his  application  as  opposed  to
         considering  his  position  holistically  including  the   positive
         factors of his financial and economic status and  his  having  been
         issued in January 1999 and again  in  2004  entry  clearance  visas
         valid for five years at a time.  Albeit that the second visa issued
         in 2004 had been cancelled on the basis that when conducting  their
         investigations the Kenyan authorities had initially  impounded  his
         passport, that was a change of circumstance which in the event  was
         proven irrelevant because the Kenyan authorities in 2008 reinstated
         his passport following a judicial conclusion that the impounding of
         the passport was not constitutional.  Although his entry  clearance
         endorsement had been stamped "cancelled" there had been  no  formal
         notification of that cancellation as  a  result  of  which  he  had
         failed to declare it in his first subsequent visit visa application
         which had led to the refusal of that application.

      6) Irrationality, particularised as a self-evident failure because any
         reasonable person would have  not  acted  as  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer had, because overall he was the same person as he was  when
         he had been granted his long-term visas.

22. At [9] the judge correctly identifies the  limited  grounds  of  appeal
    available to the Appellant. The Appellant had made  explicit  reference
    to the convention: that the decision infringed Article 6  ECHR  because
    the Appellant had not had a fair hearing in respect of the  refusal  of
    7th July 2013. The judge directed herself that  the  Appellant,  having
    failed to appeal the original 320(7A) decision could not argue that  he
    had not had a fair hearing in respect of that  refusal.  The  time  had
    long past for the Appellant to appeal that decision, and she  correctly
    resisted his efforts to appeal it before  her.  There  was  no  attempt
    before me to bring forward any merit from the Article  6  fair  hearing
    point.

23. I am satisfied that the judge did not think there was  any  express  or
    arguable Article 8 convention point here either.

24. No Article 8 ground is explicitly raised in the grounds of appeal.  The
    judge makes a generalised reference to the Appellant having  family  in
    the United Kingdom, and so it is said, found Article 8 engaged, so that
    a full Article 8  exercise  should  have  followed.  I  find  that  the
    submission is without merit. At [9]

         "In addition the Appellant may consider that  he  has  a  right  in
         terms of Article 8 of ECHR to family life  in  the  UK  as  he  has
         family living in the UK. However,  it  would  be  very  simple  for
         family life to continue by his family travelling to Kenya to  visit
         him there. The refusal of the  appellant  does  not  breach  family
         life. It is  not  disproportionate  to  the  need  for  immigration
         control."

25. There is no finding that the Appellant has a  family  life  in  the  UK
    which engages  the  article.  Nor  is  what  the  judge  says  above  a
    reflection of a Ground  of  Appeal,  but  merely  a  comment  that  the
    Appellant "may" consider he has family life rights engaged. The reality
    is that as at the date of decision there is no evidence of his having a
    relevant family life.  Elsewhere in the appeal grounds and  submissions
    the Appellant had complained that the absence of a visa  had  prevented
    him previously accompanying wife and daughter  on  visits  from  Kenya,
    including when his daughter had come here to have a baby, but there was
    no evidence that he had family living here, and  he  had  not  asserted
    that he had.  In his earlier applications he  had  mentioned  an  Uncle
    living here, but in this application he had said that that  he  had  no
    family living here, he had applied to travel with his wife,  herself  a
    visitor, and he only mentioned one friend here. In short  there  is  no
    evidential basis that "implicitly" established an Article 8  Ground  of
    Appeal.

26. Although not before the judge  as  a  ground  of  appeal  any  Robinson
    obvious convention points i.e. obvious on the  evidence  and  arguments
    put before the judge, and  one  capable  of  bringing  the  Appellant's
    appeal home,  need to be considered.

27. The extract above shows the judge did not find that the  Appellant  had
    any Robinson obvious Article 8 arguments.

28. The judge was not required to consider Article  8  further.  The  judge
    none the less looks at the position in the alternative,  and  considers
    the effect or interference that the decision  has  on  the  Appellant's
    family life. At [10]:

          "Notwithstanding that, I do not accept that the  appellant  has  a
         valid right of appeal  in terms of ECHR, I  have  considered  in  a
         little more detail than I  might otherwise have done the reason why
         the appeal fails on the merits, even if he had a right of appeal on
         the merits. "

29. In the context of the judge's reasoning at [9]  it  is  plain  that  at
    [10], what the judge is expressing is in the alternative. It is in that
    context that the judge comes to consider the  Appellant's  explanations
    of innocent  misrepresentation  to  the  point  that  the  failure  was
    inadvertent, the result of negligent solicitors, rather than any deceit
    on his part.  The judge then goes on to a substantive consideration  of
    the credibility of the Appellant's explanations concerning his  failure
    to disclose  the  Kenyan  passport  the  substance  of  the  July  2013
    decision.  The judge clearly did not give much weight to the assertions
    of negligence against the solicitor, and noted that in  any  event  any
    omission by the agent was  the  responsibility  of  the  Appellant  who
    signed the application. The judge found that in light of the history of
    the Appellant's applications and refusals, in particular having already
    had an application  in  2010  refused  for  a  failure  to  reveal  the
    cancellation of 2006, she would have expected  the  Appellant  to  have
    exercised extreme caution, to the point that any discretion  associated
    with inadvertence of erroneous information being put forward would  not
    be exercised in his favour.  So it is that, even if she would have been
    wrong in the carrying out of the Article 8 assessment if  it  had  been
    properly before her to say that the Appellant's explanations were  made
    too late to be considered, she does consider  them,  and  explains  why
    they do not carry weight.

30. Had the Article 8 ground been explicitly raised, or properly before her
    as a Robinson obvious point, then the correctness of the decision under
    320(7B) would  be  a  factor  relevant  at  least  to  the  context  of
    proportionality,  and  likely  to   carry   significant,   albeit   not
    necessarily  determinative,  weight.   However   any   error   in   her
    consideration in the alternative cannot result in a material  error  of
    law.   Accordingly, whatever the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  judge's
    consideration of 320(7B), and the impact that a  correct  understanding
    of the Rules may have had in  a  relevant  and  proper  proportionality
    exercise, no error can arise in the context of this appeal because such
    consideration that occurred was in the alternative,  and  on  a  proper
    consideration of  the  grounds  and  evidence,  no  such  exercise  was
    necessary.

31. For all the reasons set out above,  whilst  it  is  apparent  that  the
    judge's determination is in some respects flawed, no material error  of
    law requiring the decision to be set aside is revealed.

32. Turning to the private life challenge, Mr Fransman submitted  that,  in
    any event, a Robinson obvious point in respect of private  life  arises
    because of the inability to travel to the UK  in  the  context  of  the
    mandatory subsequent refusals, and  because  the  impact  that  a  visa
    refusal from the United Kingdom may have on other countries'  admission
    processes.  That is not  a  ground  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, and there was no evidential foundation before her  upon
    which she could have properly concluded that it was a matter which  she
    needed to deal with. It is outwith the Robinson obvious criterion,  and
    does not give rise to an error of law.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no  material  error  of
    law requiring it to be  set  aside  and  the  decision  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal stands.



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

