

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/00935/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 November 2016                      |On 30th November 2016             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between



                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                 ULKU YILMAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr A. Burrett, Counsel instructed by Ozoran
Turkan Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Entry Clearance
    Officer is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


2.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance as a family visitor. The appeal was  limited  to  human
    rights grounds.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin ("the judge") allowed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 05 July 2016. The judge heard  evidence  from
    the sponsor about her family circumstances, the  close  nature  of  her
    relationship with her aunt and their plans for the  visit  [5-7].   The
    judge made a proper self-direction in relation to the  legal  framework
    [13-15 & 17] and was clearly aware of the limited grounds on which  the
    appeal  could  be  brought  [16].  The  judge  took  into  account  the
    difficulties that the UK sponsor had faced in her family life. She  was
    satisfied that  the  sponsor's  relationship  with  the  appellant  was
    sufficiently close to show dependency beyond the normal emotional  ties
    between adult relatives [19] and concluded that it was  an  exceptional
    visit visa case in which Article 8 was engaged [19].

4.    In assessing the proportionality  of  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance the judge went on, in light of the decision in  Adjei  (visit
    visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261, to  consider  to  what  extent  the
    immigration rules might inform the assessment.  The  judge  was  in  no
    doubt that it was a genuine visit and that the appellant would  provide
    essential support and respite to the family before returning home.  She
    was satisfied that the appellant would  be  adequately  maintained  and
    accommodated during the visit  [20].  Having  taken  into  account  the
    public  interest  considerations  contained  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  the  judge
    concluded that the decision was disproportionate [21]. I note that many
    of those factors were, in any event, unlikely to be applicable  to  the
    circumstances of a visit visa appeal.

5.    The Entry Clearance Officer, represented by the  Secretary  of  State,
    sought to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

           "3. The Judge allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  At
           [19] he finds that there is 'dependency which is more than  just
           normal emotional ties [...]  the  emotional  dependency  on  the
           appellant by her niece is real and genuine particularly  in  the
           absence of her mother being available.' The basis of the finding
           is the Sponsor's need for  emotional  support  [7],  however  in
           making this finding the Judge has failed to  consider  that  the
           Sponsor's husband has parents and a sister in  the  UK  [7].  No
           reasons are given as to why the Sponsor's in-laws may not  offer
           her that support.


           4. It is submitted that as the Judge's  findings  on  additional
           dependency is based on the Sponsor's need  for  support  looking
           after  her  children,  therefore  if  alternative  support  were
           available that dependency would fall away, and with it the claim
           that family life exists between the Appellant and Sponsor."

Decision and reasons

6.    After having heard submissions from both parties I am  satisfied  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision does not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.

7.    The House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  outlined  the  core
    aspects of the right to family life under Article 8 as follows:

          "But the main importance of the case law is in  illuminating  the
          core value which article  8  exists  to  protect.  This  is  not,
          perhaps, hard to recognise. Human beings are social animals. They
          depend on others. Their family, or extended family, is the  group
          on which many people most heavily depend,  socially,  emotionally
          and often financially. There comes a point at  which,  for  some,
          prolonged and unavoidable separation from  this  group  seriously
          inhibits their ability to live full and fulfilling lives. Matters
          such as the age, health and vulnerability of the  applicant,  the
          closeness and previous history of  the  family,  the  applicant's
          dependence on the financial and emotional support of the  family,
          the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions in  the  country
          of origin and many other factors may all be relevant."

8.    This statement  of  principle  reveals  that  it  is  the  nature  and
    strength of relationships between family members that lie at the  heart
    of an Article 8 assessment. The fact that  the  sponsor's  husband  has
    relatives in the UK is not an alternative to her being  able  to  spend
    time with a member of her own family with whom she has  a  particularly
    close and emotionally dependent relationship. It is  not  a  matter  of
    casting around for alternative family members  who  could  provide  the
    sponsor with respite.

9.    The appellant has a particularly close relationship with her niece  in
    the UK and wants to visit  in  order  to  provide  a  short  period  of
    emotional and practical support. The judge was unarguably  entitled  to
    consider  the  closeness  of   that   relationship   and   assess   the
    proportionality of the decision in the context of the fact that she was
    satisfied that the  appellant  was  a  genuine  visitor  who  would  be
    adequately maintained and accommodated during her time in the  UK  i.e.
    there were no strong public policy considerations to outweigh the right
    to family life. The fact that the sponsor's  husband  has  some  family
    members in the  UK  is  immaterial  to  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her niece which was at the heart of this appeal.  In  any
    event, I note that her husband's statement made quite  clear  that  his
    parents are disabled and unable to provide support. The  ECO  disagrees
    with the decision but the judge's  failure  to  consider  other  family
    members in the UK was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

10.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision does not involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision does not involve the making of an error  on
a point of law


Signed   [pic]   Date 30 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




