
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00315/2015
                                                               VA/00316/2015
                                                               VA/00317/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mrs TAIWO [A]
                             Mr OLASUNKANMI [A]
                                    [I A]
                       (anonymity direction Not MADe)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. D. Balroop, Counsel instructed by AB Mackenzie
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S. George, promulgated on 23  February  2016,
    in which he allowed the appeals  of  Taiwo,  Olasunkanmi  and  [I]  [A]
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to  enter  as
    visitors.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the  Respondent,  and  to  Taiwo,  Olasunkanmi  and  [I]  [A]  as   the
    Appellants, reflecting their positions as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "Arguably the judge failed to identify  any  unusual  circumstances
         which justified extension of family life for article 8 purposes  to
         the relationship between two adult sisters, or further extension to
         the other two appellants,  the  brother-in-law  and  niece  of  the
         sponsor.

         Arguably also there is lack of identification of the extent of  the
         interference with family life brought about by the refusal of visit
         visas, and how this gave rise to consequences of such gravity  that
         the appellants had a right to enter the UK".

 4. The Sponsor, Mrs. [OA], attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision which I set
    out below with reasons.

Submissions

 5. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge had failed  to  engage  with  the
    issue of unusual circumstances.  He  found  that  there  was  a  "close
    relationship" between the Appellants and Sponsor, but it is  not  clear
    from the decision what the evidence was.  The  witness  statement  does
    not explain the nature of the close relationship.  I  was  referred  to
    the case of Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
    (IAC), in particular the headnote and paragraph 24.  She submitted that
    the judge had made the fact that the Appellants met  the  rules  to  be
    determinative, contrary to Mostafa.

 6. At paragraph 10 of the decision the judge stated  that  Article  8  was
    engaged without giving any reasons.  I was  referred  to  the  case  of
    Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261  (IAC),  in  particular
    the head note and paragraphs 9, 15 and 17.  The judge had  embarked  on
    an assessment of the decision under the rules and should not have  done
    so.  With regard to paragraph 15 of Adjei she submitted that it was the
    same here.  The first Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  sisters,  and  the
    evidence disclosed no aspect of  dependency.   The  Sponsor  had  often
    returned to Nigeria, e.g. in 2015.

 7. I was further referred to the case of Kaur (visit appeals - Article  8)
    [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC), paragraph 3 of the  head  note.   She  submitted
    that there was no evidence here of any individual interests which  were
    covered by Article 8.  I was referred to paragraphs 21 and 29 of  Kaur.
    The judge had considered the position wrongly here.  Even if  a  person
    met the requirements of paragraph 41 of the immigration rules that  did
    not necessarily establish that the appeal should  be  allowed.   I  was
    referred  to  paragraph  39.   The  judge  had   not   considered   the
    relationships through the prism of whether there  was  dependency  over
    and above normal emotional ties.   There  were  no  reasons  given  for
    finding that family life existed, and the judge's reasoning was not  in
    accordance with the case law.

 8. Mr. Balroop referred me to paragraph 24 of Mostafa.  In order  for  the
    court to have jurisdiction, there must be a finding that  Article  8(1)
    is engaged.  The Respondent had not submitted that the sisters were not
    close relatives.  With reference to Kaur, if Article 8(1)  was  engaged
    the judge could not look at the appeal in a vacuum, but must go to  the
    paragraph 41 of the immigration rules to determine the  proportionality
    aspect.  In relation to paragraph 39, and  the  reference  to  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31, it depended on the circumstances of  the  Appellant
    whether or not there was be family life.  Here there was  a  close-knit
    family and the judge was open to make that finding.  Article  8(1)  was
    engaged.  Therefore the judge had jurisdiction to look at paragraph  41
    and then decide whether or not the  decision  was  proportionate.   The
    Respondent had not challenged the judge's findings of fact.

 9. Even if there was an error of law, he submitted that I should take into
    account how the grounds of appeal were approached.  There would only be
    jurisdiction if there was a breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998.  He submitted that this could be by reference to  Article  13  as
    well as Article 8.  Article 13 concerned the effective remedy.   I  was
    referred to the case of MM (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ  36  which  had
    considered Article 13, in particular paragraphs 21 and 26.   The  Upper
    Tribunal needed to make findings under Article 13.  The deception was a
    ten year ban and another application could  not  be  made  until  2018.
    This was based  on  an  unappealed  finding  that  there  had  been  no
    deception.  He submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was
    bordering on abuse.  This issue had not been raised at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This was the first time that a finding had been made that no
    deception had been used in relation to the claimed deportation  of  the
    Appellant in 2009.  The issue of the claimed deportation  in  2009  was
    not being pursued by the Respondent.  There had been no valid appeal in
    2009.  If I were to find an error of  law,  the  decision  would  be  a
    breach of Article 13, and the appeal could still  be  allowed  in  this
    respect.

10. In relation to jurisdiction the judge was  only  entitled  to  look  at
    paragraph 41 if there was a breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998.  The Respondent had not submitted that Article 8 was not engaged.



11. In  response  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  appeal  rights  were
    restricted to Article 8 and/or an appeal under the Race  Relations  Act
    1976.  The Respondent had refused the decision under paragraph 320(7A),
    under the financial requirements, and with reference to the  interview.
    The ECM review had raised  Article  8.   The  appeal  rights  had  been
    restricted by the Immigration Act 2016 and the judge  should  not  have
    gone back to looking at the appeal under the old system as there was no
    legal basis to do so.  The issue of the  claimed  deportation  was  not
    being pursued by the  Respondent.   In  summary,  the  full  impact  of
    Article 8 had not been considered.  It was not clear from the  decision
    what the evidence was.  I was referred to paragraph 20  of  Kugathas  -
    the judge had to engage with the nature of the relationship.

Decision and Reasons

12. The head note to Mostafa states

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control".

13. In paragraph 24 of Mostafa it states:

         "We are, however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Article  8(1).   In  practical  terms  this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
         child and even then it will not necessarily be  extended  to  cases
         where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim  or  will
         not add significantly to the time that the  people  involved  spend
         together".

14. Paragraph 1 of the head note to Adjei states:

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the rules and should not do  so.   If  article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
         UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary position."

15. Paragraph 17 of Adjei states:

         "[....] the protection of  Article  8  does  not  extend  to  links
         between adult siblings living apart for a long  period  where  they
         were not dependent upon each other.  There is no evidence  of  such
         dependence between these siblings or step-siblings.  Further, it is
         well established that there must be more than the normal  emotional
         ties between adult relatives for  family  life  to  exist  for  the
         purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR: Kugathas v IAT [2003]  EWCA  Civ
         31".

16. I have considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge
    first finds that the applications  should  not  have  been  refused  in
    accordance with paragraph 320(7B) at paragraph 43.   In  paragraphs  44
    and 45 the judge finds that the Appellants  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the immigration rules.  In paragraph 46 he states:

         "I must now consider if refusing the appellants' entry clearance by
         refusing to give them entry clearance for the specific and  limited
         purpose sought interferes disproportionately with the family  lives
         of the appellants".

17. I find that the judge has taken an incorrect approach  to  the  appeals
    and has not followed the case law set  out  above.   Instead  of  first
    considering whether the  decision  engaged  Article  8,  he  considered
    whether the Appellants satisfied the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules.  Following the case of Adjei he was  not  entitled  to  consider
    whether the Appellants met the requirements of  the  immigration  rules
    before consideration of whether Article 8 was engaged.  I find that the
    decision involves the making of an error of law in the judge's approach
    in  first  considering  the  immigration  rules   rather   than   first
    considering whether Article 8 was engaged.

18. Further, in paragraph 46 the judge states that  he  must  now  consider
    whether the decision  interferes  disproportionately  with  the  family
    lives of the Appellants, thereby presuming that family life exists.  He
    gives no reasons in paragraph 46 for why there is family  life  between
    the Appellants and the Sponsor.  In paragraph 47 he states "I  can  see
    no justification for  the  interference  in  the  visit  between  adult
    siblings, together with Mr [A] (the brother in law of the sponsor)  and
    children cousins."  He has set out  the  nature  of  the  relationships
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor, but none of these relationships
    automatically engage Article 8.

19. The judge has given no reasons for finding that there  is  family  life
    between the  Appellants  and  the  Sponsor.   He  has  acknowledged  in
    paragraph 47 that the first Appellant and Sponsor are  adult  siblings.
    Following the case law, in particular  paragraph  17  of  Adjei,  which
    refers to Kugathas,  there  is  no  presumption  of  family  life.   An
    additional dependency must exist in order for there to be  family  life
    between adult siblings such as to engage the operation  of  Article  8.
    It was necessary for the judge to examine the relationship between  the
    Appellants and Sponsor in order  to  find  that  family  life  existed.
    However there is  no  such  analysis  of  their  relationship,  and  no
    findings as to why their relationship goes above and beyond  the  bonds
    normally to be found between adult siblings.

20. It is not clear from the decision what evidence was before the judge in
    relation  to  the  strength  of  the  relationship  between  the  first
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  In paragraph 39 the judge  states  that  he
    was "impressed by the oral evidence of the sponsor" but it appears from
    this  paragraph  this  evidence  was  in  relation  to  the   financial
    requirements.  There is no reference in this paragraph to the  evidence
    of the Sponsor which showed that her relationship with her sister  went
    above and beyond the normal emotional  ties  to  be  found  in  such  a
    relationship.  In paragraph 40 the finding is only that the Sponsor and
    the first Appellant are sisters, without more.  There are  no  findings
    as to any dependency.

21. I find that the judge has erred in law by failing to give  reasons  for
    his finding that there was  family  life  between  the  Appellants  and
    Sponsor.

22. Even if the judge had found that there was family life between them,  I
    find that he has given inadequate reasons given for  why  the  decision
    constitutes an interference in  this  family  life  with  reference  to
    paragraph 15 of  Adjei.   There  are  no  reasons  given  for  why  the
    relationships "cannot be maintained in the way that relatives who  have
    chosen to live  in  different  countries  manage  to  do".   There  was
    evidence before the judge that the Sponsor had returned to  Nigeria  as
    recently as 2015.

Remaking

23. It was agreed by Mr. Balroop that  I  would  be  able  to  re-make  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence which was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

24. In relation to Mr. Balroop's submissions relating to Article 13, I find
    that it is not quite as clear as submitted.  It is  not  disputed  that
    the reason that the decision was refused  under  paragraph  320(7B)  is
    with reference to the same reason  that  the  earlier  application  was
    refused.  Mr. Balroop submitted that the evidence had been found to  be
    inadequate, and that there was no evidence of deception  in  2009,  but
    this is not quite the case.  In paragraph 37 the judge  refers  to  the
    fact that Immigration Judge Miles had stated obiter that the Respondent
    would have "some considerable  difficulty"  in  establishing  that  the
    Appellants had each  previously  used  deception  in  relation  to  the
    application  refused  in  May  2008.   However,  for   other   reasons,
    Immigration Judge Miles concluded that there was no valid appeal before
    him.  I find that there had been no decision of the Tribunal  that  the
    evidence provided did not show that deception had been used,  but  only
    an obiter comment by Immigration Judge Miles that the Respondent  would
    have some difficulty in  establishing  that  deception  had  been  used
    "based on the evidence in  the  AIT  file".   There  was  therefore  no
    "unappealed finding" that deception had not been used as there  was  no
    valid appeal.

25. I find that the appeal before Judge S. George was the first  time  that
    the Respondent's evidence relating to paragraph 320(7A) had been  fully
    considered.  It was accepted by  Mr.  Balroop  that  it  had  not  been
    submitted in the First-tier Tribunal that  there  had  been  an  abuse.
    There was no "unappealed finding" that there had been no deception.  No
    reason was given by the Appellants for why a  further  application  had
    not been made between 2009 and the current application.

26. I find that there has been no abuse of Article 13  by  the  Respondent.
    The application was refused under paragraph 320(7B), with reference  to
    paragraph 320(7A).  Further, the Respondent was not satisfied that  the
    requirements of paragraph 41(i), (ii) and (vii) were  met.   The  judge
    has made a finding that the applications should not have  been  refused
    by reference to paragraph 320(7B).  This finding in paragraph 43 of the
    decision has not been challenged by the Respondent,  and  this  finding
    therefore stands.  This was the first time  that  the  issue  had  come
    before a Tribunal.  Contrary to the submissions, there was no  previous
    finding that deception had not been used.

27. I have considered the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.
     Following the caselaw referred to above, the first issue before me  is
    whether or there is family life between the Appellants and the  Sponsor
    such as to engage the operation of Article 8.  I find  that  the  first
    Appellant is the sister of the Sponsor.  They are both adults.  I  have
    considered the  first  Appellant's  witness  statement.   This  witness
    statement is concerned with addressing the reasons for the  refusal  of
    the application under paragraph 320(7B).  There is no reference in this
    witness statement to the nature of the first  Appellant's  relationship
    with the Sponsor.  There is no evidence in this  witness  statement  of
    the nature of the relationship between them.

28. I have considered the witness statement of the  second  Appellant,  the
    brother-in-law of the Sponsor.  This does not make any reference to the
    nature  of  his  relationship  with  the  Sponsor  or  of  his   wife's
    relationship with the Sponsor.

29. I have considered the witness statement of the Sponsor.  In paragraph 4
    she states that the  first  Appellant's  is  her  "blood  sister".   In
    paragraph 5, she states "we all grew up together as a family  unit  and
    we have a family bond that is very strong".  In paragraph 15 she states
    "as I said earlier, me and my sister are very close".  In paragraph  27
    she states that she has "strong  family  ties"  with  her  sister.   No
    further details are given.

30. There is no evidence before me to show that  the  relationship  between
    the first Appellant and the Sponsor goes above and  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties to be found between adult  siblings.   Paragraph  17  of
    Adjei states, "the protection of Article 8 does  not  extend  to  links
    between adult siblings living apart for a long period where  they  were
    not dependent upon each other.....Further, it is well established  that
    there must be  more  than  the  normal  emotional  ties  between  adult
    relatives for family life to exist for the purposes of Article 8."    I
    have no evidence of anything more than normal emotional ties.  There is
    no evidence of any financial dependence, or indeed any  other  kind  of
    dependence.  I find that the Appellants have failed to show  that  they
    have a family life with the Sponsor, or indeed any other relatives,  in
    the United Kingdom which engages the operation of Article 8.

31. I therefore find that the Appellants  have  failed  to  show  that  the
    decision engages Article 8, and I therefore find that they have  failed
    to show that the decision is a breach of their rights to a family  life
    under Article 8 ECHR, or indeed any other rights protected by the Human
    Rights Act 1998.



Decision

32. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I  set  the  decision  aside.   However,  the
    finding in paragraph 43 that  the  application  should  not  have  been
    refused in accordance with paragraph 320(7B) stands.  This finding  was
    not challenged by the Respondent.

33. I remake the decision  dismissing  the  Appellants'  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 14 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
