
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal VA/00506/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 March 2016                       |On 5 April 2016                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                SHAHNAZ JAVED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer (Abu Dhabi)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Panaawala (solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8 September, 1962.  She
      applied for entry clearance as a family visitor to visit her son,  the
      sponsor, but this application was refused on 8 December,  2013.  While
      the respondent recognised the  importance  of  family  visits  it  was
      considered  that  the  appellant  had  relied  on  a  false   property
      evaluation report and in the light of this the respondent refused  the
      appellant's application under paragraph 320 (7A) of  HC  395.  In  the
      premises the respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  a
      genuine visitor or that she would leave the UK at the end of her visit
      and referred to paragraph 41 of the rules. The respondent added this:

           "You  should  note  that  because  this  application  for  entry
           clearance has been refused  under  paragraph  320  (7A)  of  the
           immigration  rules,  any  future  applications   may   [original
           emphasis] also be  refused  under  paragraph  320  (7B)  of  the
           immigration rules  (subject  to  the  requirements  set  out  in
           paragraph 320 (7C))."

   2. The appeal was allowed under the immigration  rules  by  a  First-tier
      Judge on 19 November, 2014 but the respondent successfully  challenged
      the decision and on 6 March  2015  the  Upper  Tribunal  remitted  the
      matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, with  none
      of the  factual  findings  being  preserved,  as  the  judge  had  not
      considered the appeal on human rights or race  relations  grounds  and
      had no jurisdiction to deal with  the  matter  under  the  immigration
      rules.

   3. The appeal came before First-tier Judge Cockrill on 13 August 2015.

   4. He heard oral evidence from the sponsor. Having heard  submissions  he
      reminded himself that there was only a limited right of appeal and the
      appeal was not under the immigration rules and could only  be  brought
      in the circumstances of the case before him on human  rights  grounds.
      He considered whether article 8 was engaged  following the guidance in
      Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) 2015 UKUT 261 (IAC).

   5. The judge addressed this question by first considering  the  facts  in
      paragraphs 15 of the determination stating that:

           "What we have here is a mother, born in 1962, who wishes to see,
           in effect, her son and inevitably her daughter  and  grandchild.
           It is important, I  think,  to  look  at  the  family  situation
           overall in making that initial assessment. It does  seem  to  me
           that the  nature  of  those  relationships,  both  parental  and
           grandparental, are such that it can  sensibly  and  properly  be
           said that article 8 (1) is engaged. There is,  in  other  words,
           family life in existence between the  appellant  and  her  adult
           children and also with the grandchild."

   6. In paragraph 16 he referred  to  the  five  stage  test  in  Razgar  v
      Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27 and in paragraph 17, noting that the
      threshold was not particularly high,  concluded  that  Article  8  was
      engaged.

   7. He then turned to the  issue  of  proportionality,  dealing  with  the
      allegation of deception first. He resolved this issue in favour of the
      appellant for reasons given in paragraph 18 of the  determination.  He
      found that the appellant had not  put  forward  a  false  document  in
      support of her application for a visit visa. However he stressed  that
      this  finding  was  only  of  relevance  to   his   consideration   of
      proportionality.

   8. In paragraph 19 he stated as follows:

           "The point that I want to stress in this case, and I am  dealing
           now with proportionality, is that this particular  sponsor  from
           whom I heard can, as I see it, go out to Pakistan to  visit  the
           appellant. He has done so in the past and he confirms  that  the
           last time he visited was in 2012. He is entitled to  some  seven
           weeks holiday every year but he can only take a maximum  of  two
           weeks at a time. It is my assessment that his reluctance  to  go
           to Pakistan really  stems  from  economic  reasons  and  nothing
           really more than that. He could maintain perfectly properly  his
           relationship with his mother by going  out  to  Pakistan  on  an
           annual basis and in that way, coupled with the fact that  he  is
           regularly speaking to his mother by telephone, he maintains  his
           relationship. I accept as a fact that he telephones her three or
           four times a week, and he is in  communication  with  her  using
           Skype. In that manner there is a family relationship  maintained
           between this sponsor and his appellant mother. It seems  to  me,
           therefore, with that factual backdrop, that the decision of  the
           respondent to refuse this particular  application  is  indeed  a
           proportionate decision. I am mindful that  in  the  decision  in
           Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  2015  UKUT  112  (IAC)
           compliance with  the  rules  is  capable  of  being  a  weighty,
           although  not  determinative   factor   in   the   decision   on
           proportionality. That seems  to  me  to  be  applicable  to  the
           circumstances of this case. What I need to  look  at  and  focus
           upon is proportionality, that is the crux of the case. It  seems
           to me for all  the  reasons  that  I  have  expressed  that  the
           decision  of  the  respondent  is  a  proportionate   one.   The
           relationship between this adult child and his  mother  is  being
           maintained at the moment by  telephone  and  Skype  and  can  be
           perfectly well maintained by regular visits by  the  sponsor  to
           the appellant in Pakistan. In effect the same  argument  can  be
           presented for his sister who, I am told, has also visited  their
           mother and she did so in 2013. The same point can  be  made  for
           other relatives."

   9. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

  10. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal which  was  refused.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King,  however,
      granted permission to appeal on 20  January  2016  expressing  concern
      that a refusal under paragraph 320(7A) could be maintained. He  added:
      "however the grounds of appeal are limited to  human  rights  and  the
      issue may be one only resolved by judicial review." It might  be  that
      unfairness was something affecting proportionality in a  human  rights
      claim.

  11. At the hearing before us Mr Panaawala relied on his skeleton  argument
      and the grounds and the positive findings of fact that had  been  made
      in both the first and the second determination. Both judges had  found
      there had been no deception and a direction should have been issued to
      that effect. The decision was unfair. The decision had been  based  on
      deception and the judges had found that there had  been  no  deception
      and should have so declared. The appellant needed to clear  his  name.
      He would need  to  bring  judicial  review  proceedings  and  a  fresh
      application would be unsuccessful.

  12. Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the judge had found that  there  was  no
      deception and that  there  had  been  no  cross-appeal  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer but as stated in the rule 24 response the  applicant
      could make a fresh application or apply for judicial review. The first
      Tribunal's decision had been set aside. Any fresh application would be
      judged on its merits. He referred to the cases of Kaur (Visit appeals;
      Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC) and  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.
      While the judge had erred in the light of  Kugathas  in  finding  that
      there was family life between the appellant  and  his  mother  he  was
      correct to dismiss the appeal. He referred to  Mostafa  and  what  was
      said in paragraph 24 of that case:

           "It is  the  very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
           fundamental values that have to be considered  in  all  relevant
           cases.  It would therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be
           prescriptive,  given  the  intensely  factual   and   contextual
           sensitivity of every case. Thus we refrain from suggesting that,
           in this type of case, any particular kind of relationship  would
           always attract the protection of  Article  8(1)  or  that  other
           kinds of relationship would never come  within  its  scope.   We
           are, however, prepared to say that  it  will  only  be  in  very
           unusual circumstances that a person other than a close  relative
           will be able to show that the refusal of entry  clearance  comes
           within the scope of Article 8(1). In  practical  terms  this  is
           likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is that  of
           husband and wife or other close life partners or  a  parent  and
           minor child and even then it will not necessarily be extended to
           cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a  whim
           or will not add  significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people
           involved spend together. In the limited  class  of  cases  where
           Article 8 (1) ECHR is engaged the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
           must be in accordance with  the  law  and  proportionate.  If  a
           person's circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they
           have  not  acted  in  a  way  that  undermines  the  system   of
           immigration control, a refusal of entry clearance is  liable  to
           infringe Article 8."


  13. At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our decision. It does
      seem clear to us that the judge's jurisdiction was limited as is  said
      in the cases of Mostafa and Adjei. While on the authorities it may  be
      that the judge was generous in finding that Article 8 was  engaged  we
      cannot agree that he materially erred in law in dismissing the  appeal
      for  the  reasons  he  gave   in   paragraph   19   when   considering
      proportionality which we have set out above.

  14. The problem for the appellant in this case is that as Mr Whitwell  put
      it the issue under paragraph 320 (7B) has been "left in the  air".  Mr
      Panaawala suggested some declaration should be made by the Tribunal to
      the effect that the deception allegation had been dealt with.

  15. We cannot see what that would achieve. Clear findings have  been  made
      by the judge in favour of the appellant on the deception issue. As  is
      acknowledged by  Mr  Whitwell  there  has  been  no  cross-appeal.  Mr
      Panaawala was concerned that a fresh aplication for an entry clearance
      would inevitably face refusal. We find that concern  to  be  unfounded
      for three reasons. Firstly  that  was  not  how  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer put the matter when refusing the application - see the extract
      from the decision we have set out above at paragraph 2. The words "may
      also be refused" were used rather than "will also be refused" and  the
      word "may" was emphasised. Secondly the  rule  24  response  makes  it
      clear the findings could be relied upon "in any  further  application"
      and thirdly Mr Whitwell confirmed that any further  application  would
      be decided on its merits. We have no doubt that  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer will respect the findings made by the First-tier Judge in this
      case on the deception issue.

      The appeal is accordingly dismissed.


Signed
G Warr (Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

2 March 2016



Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and we make none

Anonymity Order

No anonymity order was made and none was applied for



