
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00576/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th April 2016                       |On 25th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - abu dhabi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               sami ullah khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against a decision  of  Judge
    Meyler of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)  promulgated  on  2nd  July
    2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 27th April 1985 who  in
    December 2014 applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a
    family visitor.

 4. The Claimant indicated that he wished to visit his wife Nasim Gul  (the
    Sponsor) who is a British citizen, and also his son who was born in the
    United Kingdom on 25th May 2012.  The Claimant indicated  that  he  and
    his wife had married in Pakistan on 18th July 2011.

 5. The Claimant submitted with his application  a  letter  from  his  wife
    dated 14th November 2014 inviting him to stay with her  in  the  United
    Kingdom for "up to one month during my maternity after labour".

 6. The ECO refused the application on 5th January 2015 with  reference  to
    paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules, not being  satisfied
    that the Claimant genuinely intended only a short visit to  the  United
    Kingdom, and not being satisfied that he would leave at the  conclusion
    of his visit.  The ECO did not accept that the Claimant  had  given  an
    accurate account of his circumstances which in the  view  of  the  ECO,
    undermined the  credibility  of  the  Claimant's  application  and  the
    statements that he had made in connection with his application.

 7. The Claimant appealed to the FtT, requesting that his appeal be decided
    on the papers, rather than at an oral hearing.  In  brief  summary  the
    Claimant contended that  he  had  given  an  accurate  account  of  his
    circumstances in Pakistan and that he satisfied  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and in addition relied upon Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).  In relation
    to Article 8 the Claimant contended;

         "My partner has the right to have her husband's support in her time
         of need and my children have the right to spend at least one  month
         with their father."

 8. The application was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager in the light
    of  the  appeal,  but  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  was
    maintained.

 9. The FtT considered the appeal on the  papers  as  requested.   The  FtT
    recognised  that  the  Claimant  had  a  right  of  appeal  limited  to
    consideration of human rights, and therefore considered  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention.

10. The FtT noted that the ECO had attempted to contact the Sponsor without
    success and that there had been no further evidence  from  the  Sponsor
    since the date of decision.  The FtT noted in paragraph 16  that  there
    was no evidence to explain the reason for the  separation  between  the
    Claimant and Sponsor and there was no evidence confirming  that  family
    life was actually enjoyed between the parties.  Neither was  there  any
    explanation as to why family life could not  be  enjoyed  in  the  same
    manner as previously, with the parties living separately, nor was there
    any explanation as to why the Sponsor could not visit the Appellant  in
    Pakistan.  The FtT observed that cohabitation is  not  a  pre-requisite
    for the enjoyment of family life, but in this  case  there  is  a  very
    considerable geographical separation as well as a lack of  cohabitation
    and no explanation for that separation.

11. The FtT found that there was no evidence that the  marriage  subsisted,
    or that there were any emotional  ties  between  the  parties,  and  no
    evidence that the Claimant enjoys close personal ties with the Sponsor.
     The FtT found in paragraph 24;

         "Were it not for the children, I would  have  dismissed  this  case
         without hesitation."

12. However the FtT went on to find in paragraph 21;

         "However the law requires me to accept that there is a family  life
         bond between the Appellant and his  two  children,  who  are  third
         parties to this appeal but nonetheless affected  by  the  decision.
         It is not in dispute that the marital union was genuine and  lawful
         nor is it in dispute that both children are  born  of  the  marital
         union.  I therefore accept that family life is engaged between  the
         Appellant and his two children in the UK."

13. The FtT went on to allow the appeal under Article  8  taking  the  view
    that Article 8 was engaged by reason of a family  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his two children, and that to refuse entry  clearance
    denied the two children any contact with their  biological  father  and
    was therefore disproportionate.

14. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    summary it was contended that the  FtT  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings on a material matter.

15. It was contended that the  FtT  erred  in  proceeding  to  undertake  a
    proportionality assessment, without having made a reasoned finding that
    there is  family  life  between  the  Claimant  and  Sponsor.   It  was
    submitted that the FtT had erred in paragraph 25 by  referring  to  the
    "existence of presumed family bonds between father and  children",  the
    ECO submitting that such a presumption  is  not  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8.

16. It was also submitted that the FtT had erred in paragraph 23 by finding
    that the Sponsor may encounter difficulties if she visited Pakistan, as
    she  is  a  British  citizen  of  Afghan   origin,   and   women   face
    discrimination in Pakistan.  It was submitted  that  this  amounted  to
    speculation, and there was no evidence to support this assertion.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on  8th
    October 2015, and directions were given that there should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal, to ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

18. There was no attendance on behalf  of  the  Claimant.   Notice  of  the
    hearing had been given both to the Claimant and  Sponsor  at  the  last
    address notified to the Tribunal, and the notices of hearing  had  been
    issued on 9th March  2016.   I  considered  rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 which  states  that  if  a  party
    fails to attend a hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  may  proceed  with  the
    hearing if satisfied that the party has been notified of the hearing or
    that reasonable steps have been  taken  to  notify  the  party  of  the
    hearing, and it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing.

19. I was satisfied that proper notice of the hearing had been  given,  and
    that it was in the interests of justice to proceed and consider the FtT
    decision, taking into account that entry clearance had been refused  as
    long ago as 5th January 2015, and the FtT decision had been promulgated
    on 2nd July 2015.

20. I heard submissions from Mr Mills who submitted that the FtT had  erred
    in paragraph 21 by finding that the law required the FtT  to  accept  a
    family life bond between the Appellant and his two children.  Mr  Mills
    submitted that the correct position is that there is a  presumption  of
    family life between a parent and a child, but the burden of  proof,  so
    far as engagement of Article 8 is concerned, rests upon the  individual
    claiming that family life exists.  The evidence before the FtT did  not
    prove this.  Mr Mills submitted therefore, that  the  FtT  should  have
    found, due to the lack of evidence, which was commented on by the  FtT,
    that Article 8 was not engaged.

21. In the alternative, if the FtT was correct to find that family life was
    engaged between the Claimant and  his  child,  the  FtT  had  erred  by
    falling into speculation, when considering proportionality.

22. I was asked to set aside the decision of the FtT, and to re-make it, by
    dismissing the Claimant's appeal.

23. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. In my view the FtT was correct  to  find  that  the  Claimant  had  not
    established family life between  himself  and  the  Sponsor,  and  gave
    adequate reasons for this conclusion, and referred appropriately to the
    lack of evidence.

25. I accept the submission made by Mr Mills that the FtT fell  into  error
    in paragraph 21, by recording that the  FtT  was  required  by  law  to
    accept that there is a family life bond between the Appellant  and  his
    two children.

26. Having considered all the papers submitted to the Tribunal, I can  find
    no evidence to indicate  that  the  Claimant  and  his  wife  have  two
    children.  There is a birth certificate confirming that the  Claimant's
    son was born in the United Kingdom on  25th  May  2012,  and  there  is
    reference to the Sponsor being pregnant, but there is  no  evidence  to
    indicate that another child was born at the date of  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, which was 5th January 2015.  In an appeal against refusal of
    entry clearance, it is the circumstances appertaining at  the  date  of
    refusal that must be considered.

27. The ECO has not disputed that the Claimant has a child  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but it is for the Claimant to prove that  family  life  exists
    between himself and the child.  The fact  that  an  individual  is  the
    biological parent of a child does not necessarily mean that family life
    exists.

28. I accept that AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA  Civ  801,  confirms  (paragraph
    28);

         "That while an interference with private or  family  life  must  be
         real if it is to engage Art.8(1), the threshold of engagement  (the
         'minimum level') is not a specially high one."

29. Even though the threshold of engagement is  not  especially  high,  the
    burden in this case, is on the Claimant to establish family  life  with
    his child.  The  FtT,  in  fact,  directly  points  to  an  absence  of
    evidence, which is why it was found that  family  life  did  not  exist
    between the  Claimant  and  the  Sponsor.   There  is  no  satisfactory
    evidence of any form of contact between the Claimant and his  son,  and
    no evidence that they have physically met.  The FtT noted in  paragraph
    19 that there did not appear to be any close personal ties between  the
    Claimant and his children, and commented that there  may  be  plans  to
    create such close personal ties in the future.  In my view, the FtT was
    correct to note the absence of close personal ties and the  absence  of
    evidence of contact and communication, and therefore should have  found
    that the Claimant had not discharged the burden of proving that  family
    life existed between himself and his son.   I  conclude  that  the  FtT
    materially erred in believing that the law required an acceptance  that
    there was family life between a parent  and  a  biological  child,  and
    therefore the decision is set aside.

30. I re-make the decision by dismissing the Claimant's appeal.   I  do  so
    because the Upper Tribunal confirmed in Adjei [2015]  UKUT  0261  (IAC)
    that the first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
    grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights grounds  are
    available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If it is
    not, which will not infrequently be  the  case,  the  Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision  of  the  ECO
    under the rules and should not do so.

31.  The  Claimant  has  had  ample  opportunity  to  produce  evidence  to
    demonstrate that family life is engaged.  There  has  been  no  further
    evidence from the Sponsor since her letter of  invitation  in  November
    2014.  The Claimant has  specifically  requested  that  his  appeal  be
    considered by the FtT on the papers rather than  at  an  oral  hearing.
    The Claimant has not responded to the grant of permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, and has made  no  attempt  to  submit  any  further
    evidence to the Upper Tribunal, and again there was  no  attendance  on
    behalf of the Claimant before the Upper Tribunal.

32. I accept that the evidence that has been submitted indicates  that  the
    Claimant has a son in the United Kingdom, who is a British citizen  and
    who was born  in  this  country.   There  is  however  no  satisfactory
    evidence to indicate that there has ever been any contact  between  the
    Claimant and his son, and because of the lack of satisfactory evidence,
    I am not satisfied that Article 8 is engaged on  the  basis  of  family
    life between the Claimant and his son.  The findings of the FtT to  the
    effect that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  prove  family  life
    between the Claimant and the Sponsor are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT contained an error of law  and  was  set  aside.   I
substitute a fresh decision.  The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date: 13th April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.   There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 13th April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

