
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: va/00569/2014
     va/00570/2014
     va/00571/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th February 2015                         |On 9th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                FATHIMA NUSRA BISRUL KAREEM (first Appellant)
               FATHIMA ZAIBA MOHAMED SHIYAM (second Appellant)
               MOHAMED AADIL MOHAMED SHIYAM (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss A Seehra of Counsel instructed by Solidum
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against a decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese promulgated on 20th November  2014.



 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are Sri Lankan  citizens  born  3rd  January  1981,  25th
    February 2008, and 17th June 2010 respectively.  The first Claimant  is
    the mother of the second and third Claimants.   The  Claimants  applied
    for entry clearance as  family  visitors.   They  indicated  that  they
    wished to visit the Sponsor Abdul Cadar Udayar Mohammadu Shiyam  for  a
    period of ten days.  The Sponsor is the husband of the  first  Claimant
    and the father of the second and third Claimants, and is a  student  in
    the United Kingdom.

 4. The applications were refused on 19th December 2013.   In  relation  to
    the first Claimant the refusal was based on paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, on the basis that  a  false  bank  letter  had  been
    submitted with the application.  The application was also refused  with
    reference to paragraph 41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii).   The  applications
    of the second and  third  Claimants  were  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph 46A(i), (iv) and (v).  The refusals under  paragraph  41  and
    46A, followed on from the primary reason for refusal, which related  to
    the submission of a false document.

 5. The Claimants appealed, relying upon Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The appeals were heard together by Judge Abebrese (the  judge)  on  7th
    November 2014.  The  judge  found  that  the  first  Claimant  had  not
    submitted a false document, and found that refusal of  entry  clearance
    was unreasonable and unjustified and breached the principles of Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention.  The evidence of the Sponsor was found to  be
    credible.  The appeals were allowed.

 7. This decision caused the ECO to apply for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal.   In  summary  the  grounds   contained   within   the
    application for permission to appeal make the point that the  Claimants
    only had a right  of  appeal  following  refusal  of  entry  clearance,
    limited to the grounds in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).   The  Claimants
    therefore could only appeal on grounds  of  racial  discrimination,  or
    breach of human rights.

 8. The ECO pointed out  that  the  judge  had  made  limited  findings  at
    paragraph 13 in relation to Article 8, but had failed to  give  reasons
    for these findings and had failed to make a proportionality assessment.
     The Sponsor is a student with limited leave in the United Kingdom, and
    it was contended that family life could continue once  his  course  had
    finished and he had returned to Sri Lanka.  It was contended  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the decision
    to  refuse  entry  clearance  disproportionately  interfered  with  the
    Article 8 rights of the Claimants and Sponsor.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker who found the grounds arguable.

10. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal, to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Kandola relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.  While it was accepted that the judge  needed  to
    consider whether the decision to refuse entry clearance was lawful,  Mr
    Kandola submitted that reasons given  for  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 were woefully inadequate and lacked proper analysis.

12. In reply Miss Seehra  relied  upon  her  written  response  dated  16th
    February 2015, in submitting that the First-tier Tribunal had not erred
    in law.  I was asked to note that the grounds on  which  permission  to
    appeal had been granted, did not challenge findings made by  the  judge
    that the Claimants did not provide a false document,  and  the  finding
    that the Sponsor was credible was not challenged.

13. I was also asked to note that the ECO had not  challenged  the  finding
    that Article 8 was engaged.  Miss Seehra  submitted  that  because  the
    judge found the refusal of entry clearance to be not in accordance with
    the law, the judge was not required to go on and consider the issues of
    necessity and proportionality.

14. Mr Kandola accepted that there had been no  challenge  to  the  finding
    that a false document had not been produced, nor any challenge  to  the
    finding that Article 8 was engaged.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. It is common ground that the Claimants had a limited  right  of  appeal
    following refusal of entry clearance, and that they raised Article 8 as
    a ground of appeal.

17. At first sight it is no surprise that the ECO sought to  challenge  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  There is no mention of Article  8
    until paragraph 13, and then the reference is brief.

18. If an appeal is made on Article 8 grounds, it is to  be  expected  that
    the judge would firstly consider whether the appeal can  succeed  under
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  If not,  the
    judge would then consider whether Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules should be considered.

19. There is no reference in this decision  to  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE, and it has not been contended on behalf of the  Claimants  that
    they could succeed in their  Article  8  claim  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

20. If Article 8 was to be considered outside the rules, this would  be  on
    the basis that the Immigration Rules are not a  complete  code,  unlike
    the Immigration Rules dealing with deportation.   Consideration  should
    then be given to the approach set out in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  which
    indicated that the following questions should be considered;

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

21. The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that if Article  8  is
    engaged, the family  lives  of  all  members  of  the  family  must  be
    considered, not only that of the Claimants.

22. There is no reference to the Razgar  approach  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, but the ECO has not challenged the finding that Article 8  is
    engaged.  This is perhaps surprising, given that this is an application
    for a family visit.  However in the absence  of  such  challenge,  that
    issue is not before me.

23. The finding that the Claimants had not submitted a false  document  was
    open to challenge in view of the fact that the judge recorded  that  no
    specific reasons had been  supplied  by  the  ECO  as  to  why  it  was
    contended that the bank letter was false.  The ECO did supply  evidence
    in the form of a Document Verification Report dated 17th December 2013.
     It appears that this was not provided to the  Claimants,  as  the  ECO
    wished to rely upon the procedure set out in section 108  of  the  2002
    Act.  However, there has been no challenge to the finding that a  false
    document was not submitted, and therefore this issue is not before  me.



24. The challenge made by the  ECO  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    relates to the lack of a proportionality assessment and  inadequacy  of
    reasoning  for   finding   that   refusal   of   entry   clearance   is
    disproportionate.

25. In view of the acceptance by the ECO that Article 8 is  engaged,  which
    is the second of the  five  questions  set  out  in  Razgar,  the  next
    question to be considered is whether the proposed  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law.

26. The judge found that a false document was not submitted.  The burden of
    proving that a false document has been submitted rests with the  person
    making the allegation, and the judge erred in paragraph 10  in  stating
    that the burden was on the Claimants.  This is not however  a  material
    error, as the judge has found in favour of the Claimants.   Mr  Kandola
    accepted that the judge was entitled to consider  the  falsity  of  the
    document on the basis that  the  judge  had  to  consider  whether  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance was lawful.  The finding made by the
    judge, meant that the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  entry
    clearance on the basis of a false document was not in  accordance  with
    the law, and therefore the answer to the third of the Razgar  questions
    has to be in the negative.

27. Having found that the decision was not in accordance with the  law,  it
    is therefore not necessary for the judge to  go  on  and  consider  the
    fourth and fifth of the Razgar questions, which relate to necessity and
    proportionality, and would entail consideration of the factors set  out
    in section 117B of the 2002 Act.

28. The challenge made on behalf of the  ECO  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision rests solely on proportionality, and as the judge did not need
    to consider that, I find no material error of law and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.

I do not set aside the decision and the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 2nd March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal of the ECO has been dismissed the fee award made by the First-
tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                              Date 2nd March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
