
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00314/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 23 October 2014                           |On 27 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, OMAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                AMMAR KUWATLI
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     no legal representative; Dr M Kouatly, sponsor,
present
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer

              APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL NOT ADMITTED

 1. By determination promulgated on 28 May 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kempton allowed Mr Kuwatli's appeal against refusal of his  application
    for a visit visa.

 2. The ECO applied 4 days out of time for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, explaining  that  the  delay  was  due  to  a  backlog,
    insufficiency of resources, and an oversight.  The proposed grounds  of
    appeal were that the judge purported to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, over which she had no  jurisdiction,  and  that  she
    gave no adequate reasons for suggesting that alternatively  the  appeal
    might have been allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. On 11 July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes purported to grant
    permission to appeal.  However, his decision  overlooks  to  deal  with
    whether time should be extended, so that was the first point for us  to
    decide.

 4. At first sight we  would  have  been  inclined  to  extend  time.   The
    explanation for the delay is not of great  merit,  but  the  period  is
    short, and both aspects of the grounds are  strong.   A  jurisdictional
    error, in particular, should not readily be allowed to go uncorrected.

 5. However, Dr Kouatly drew our attention to circumstances  which  shed  a
    very different light.  He is the respondent's  brother.   The  original
    application was made along with one by their mother.   The  application
    was also refused, and she also appealed.  The cases  were  not  linked.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge D C Clapham heard the mother's  appeal  after
    this case had been decided in the First-tier  Tribunal.   Before  Judge
    Clapham, Dr Kouatly drew attention to the FtT  outcome  in  this  case.
    The ECO did not raise the points made in the application for permission
    now before us.  Judge Clapham followed the decision by  Judge  Kempton,
    and allowed the mother's appeal.    Dr Kouatly had not been advised  on
    any application by the ECO to appeal to the UT in their mother's case.

 6. We were able to ascertain from tribunal records that the time to  apply
    has expired, and that no  such  application  has  been  received.   Mrs
    O'Brien had no information about the mother's  case  until  the  matter
    arose in course of the hearing, but having been given a short  time  to
    make enquiries,  she  was  able  to  confirm  not  only  that  no  such
    application had been made, but that a decision had  been  made  not  to
    seek permission.

 7. The ECO having specifically decided not to challenge  a  decision  made
    for identical reasons in the connected case of a close relative, we see
    no justification for allowing a late challenge here, even although  the
    grounds are of (at least) arguable strength.

 8. The application for permission to appeal is not admitted.


         [pic]


         23 October 2014
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




