
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00129/2013
     VA/00120/2013
     VA/00124/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th September, 2013                        |On 30th September, 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Rajbeer Singh Roud
                            Bikramjit Singh Roud
                             Kawaljeet Kaur Roud
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J King, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  to
    whom I shall refer as "the claimant"  and  the  respondent  is  Rajbeer
    Singh Roud, a citizen of India who was born on 15th  July,  2010.   The
    respondent's parents Bikramjit  Singh  Roud  and  Kawaljeet  Kaur  Roud
    applied, with the respondent, for a visit visa under the provisions  of
    paragraph 41 of HC 395 as amended,  ("he  Immigration  Rules").   Their
    applications were all refused by the appellant.  The respondent and his
    parents appealed and their appeals were heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Cameron  at  North  Shields  on  18th  July,  2013  and   in   a
    determination promulgated on 19th July, last. Judge Cameron allowed the
    appeals of the respondent's parents and purported to allow  the  appeal
    of the respondent.

2.   The claimant appealed the decision to allow  the  respondent's  appeal,
    but not the decision to allow the appeals of his parents.  The  grounds
    of the appeal point out that the  respondent's  application  was  dated
    12th October, 2012,  and  that  the  respondent  was  accompanying  his
    parents to visit his uncles.

3.    On  9th  July,  2012,  the  Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor)
    Regulations 2012 ("the Regulations") came into  force,  the  effect  of
    which is to re-categorise the class or description prescribed  for  the
    purposes of Section  88A(1)(a)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  Under Section 88A(1)(a) of the  Act,
    a person may not appeal under  Section  82(1)  against  refusal  of  an
    application for entry clearance, unless the application is made for the
    purposes of:

         "(a)     visiting a person of a class or description prescribed by
         the Regulations for the purpose of this sub-Section."

4.   Under the Regulations, the respondent is a "family  member"  if  he  is
    visiting a  spouse,  civil  partner,  father,  mother,  son,  daughter,
    grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, brother  or  sister,
    father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law,  son-in-
    law   or   daughter-in-law   or   stepfather,   stepmother,    stepson,
    stepdaughter, stepbrother or stepsister. The Regulations do not give  a
    right of appeal to someone who has applied for entry clearance to visit
    the United Kingdom for the purposes of a family visit  to  visit  their
    uncle.

5.   As a result, the respondent had no right of appeal and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge therefore had no  power  to  consider  the  respondent's
    appeal.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law.  I set aside her  decision.
     The respondent had no right of appeal.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
