

                                                           [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal number:
VA/00392/2014

                                                  VA/00394/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |                        Decision and       |
|                                |Reasons Promulgated                        |
|On July 2, 2015                 |                        On  July 27, 2015  |
|                                |                                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS ELIF KURBAN
                                MR HAC KURBAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Kanasal, Counsel, instructed by Oakfield
Solicitors LLP

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellants are sister and brother and they are citizens of  Turkey.
    They applied  for  entry  clearance  on  November  5,  2013  for  entry
    clearance to visit  the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  the  first  named
    appellant's daughter's wedding. Their applications were refused by  the
    respondent on December 4, 2013 and their appeals under Section 82(1) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as limited by Section
    84(1)(c), were lodged on December 30, 2013.

 3. The  case  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Napthine
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on November 13, 2014 and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 20, 2014 he allowed their appeals both
    under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent appealed those decisions on December 4, 2014  but  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler refused  permission  to  appeal.  The
    respondent renewed her grounds of appeal  arguing  the  FtTJ  erred  by
    allowing the appeals under the Immigration Rules and that this  finding
    impacted on the adequacy of reasoning in respect of the article 8  ECHR
    decision. Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein gave permission on  April  20,
    2015.

 5. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  both  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The UK sponsor was not in attendance.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. Ms Kanasal accepted the FtTJ erred in allowing the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules but submitted the decisions under article 8 were open
    to him.

 8. Miss Fijiwala confirmed that the respondent's challenge was limited  to
    the decision to find that  article  8  was  engaged  and  she  did  not
    challenge the proportionality findings.


    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 9. Miss Fijiwala relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  the
    FtTJ erred in his approach to the issue of family life  in  visit  visa
    claims. She referred to the Tribunal decision of  Adjei  (visit  visas-
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 and in particular paragraphs [14]  to  [18].
    She submitted the FtTJ erred in finding  that  article  8  was  engaged
    because the purpose of the visit was for  a  marriage  and  because  in
    observant Turkish families casual living together with a  partner  that
    was not marked by a ceremony, was not acceptable. The FtTJ should  have
    considered the parties and whether there was any dependency rather than
    the purpose of the visit itself. This was  an  error  in  law  and  the
    decision should be reversed.

10. Ms Kanasal argued the FtTJ had considered the issue of family life  and
    in paragraph [14] he found that refusing entry clearance  was  a  clear
    breach of the article 8 rights of each appellant to a family life.  The
    FtTJ had given his reasons for why there was family life in  paragraphs
    [15] and  [16]  and  this  appeal  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the decision. Adult relatives had  rights  of  appeal
    otherwise the law would state they did not.


    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

11. The government changed the law on rights of appeal  over  a  period  of
    time to the extent that appellants, such as these, only have a  limited
    right of appeal on human rights grounds. The Tribunal in  Adjei  (visit
    visas-Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 made clear the correct approach to  be
    taken.

12. The appellants' original  appeals  were  heard  before  this  case  was
    promulgated so the FtTJ did not have any guidance  on  the  recommended
    approach to take.

13. It is clear the FtTJ had  considerable  sympathy  with  the  appellants
    because he found they met the Immigration Rules and erroneously allowed
    their appeals both under the Rules and article  8  ECHR.  The  fact  he
    found the Rules were met is a matter the parties  can  refer  an  entry
    clearance officer to, albeit it relates to the facts as at the date  of
    the decision

14. The decision under the Rules is a clear error in law as  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to allow such appeals.  Without  hesitation  I  set  aside
    those decisions. I do not remake those decisions as there are no  valid
    appeals before me.

15. The FtTJ noted the appellants had restricted rights of  appeal  and  at
    paragraph [14] of his determination he found there was a  clear  breach
    of their family life rights although he did not give  his  reasons  for
    this. What he did in paragraphs [15] and [16] of his determination  was
    to make findings that a marriage could be an "important rite  of  life"
    and that observant Turkish  families  do  not  support  "casual  living
    together unmarked by a ceremony".

16. The Tribunal at paragraph [9] in Adjei (visit visas-Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 261 made clear

        "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
        grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
        are available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
        If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
        has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
        the ECO under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
        engaged, the Tribunal will need to look at the extent to which  the
        claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
        rule  because  that  will  inform  the  proportionality   balancing
        exercise that must follow."

17. The Tribunal made clear in  paragraph  [10]  that  notwithstanding  the
    Rules were met it was not open to a claimant to bring  a  challenge  on
    that basis.

18. The Tribunal in Adjei considered various relationships and at paragraph
    [15] made clear that where the relationship was between parent/child or
    a relationship that did not disclose any  aspect  of  dependency  or  a
    relationship that was any different from what might be expected between
    such relatives, then there was no reason why such  relationships  could
    not be maintained in the way relatives  who  have  chosen  to  live  in
    separate countries manage to do so.

19. There is no evidence of any level of dependency between the  appellants
    and  the  first-named  appellant's  mother/uncle.  In   fact   evidence
    submitted demonstrates  she  is  financially  independent  as  a  self-
    employed graphic designer.

20. The FtTJ erred in these appeals because he considered the appeals based
    on the reason entry clearance was  sought  and  neglected  to  consider
    whether there was family life. He was required to  consider  dependency
    as adults but it was not an assessment of their wish  to  visit  for  a
    wedding.

21. No family life within article 8 was demonstrated and I not only find an
    error in law but I further find their appeals should also be  dismissed
    under article 8 ECHR because family life is not engaged for  article  8
    purposes.

    DECISION


22. There was a material error in law. I set aside  the  decisions  of  the
    FtTJ and find as follows:


     a. There is no  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules. There is no valid appeal.
     b. I dismiss the appeals under article 8 ECHR.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
