
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00259/2014
                                                               VA/00254/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 3 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Mrs Elizabeth Muchabaiwa - first claimant
                    Mr Elias Muchabaiwa - second claimant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   Ms T Kyakwita (Legal Representative, Immigration
                    Advice Service (Hounslow))


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me as an error  of  law  hearing.   The  first
    Claimant, whose date of birth  is  26  April  1947,  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe.  The second Claimant, whose date of birth is 1 December 1943,
    is also a citizen of Zimbabwe.

2.   The Claimants appealed the refusal made by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    (Pretoria) of their application for entry clearance as  family  members
    to visit their adult children in the UK. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Beach) allowed the appeals on human rights grounds in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 24 February 2015.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

3.   The Tribunal considered the restricted grounds limited to human  rights
    in accordance with Section 84(1)(b) & (c) Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act [17].  The Tribunal found no  family  life  as  between  the
    Claimants and their sponsors all of who were adults [19].  The Tribunal
    found that there was an interference with private life as the  decision
    effectively denied the Claimants the opportunity to see each other face
    to face and further concluded that the decision was  not  proportionate
    given that the cost of travel to a third country  was  prohibitive  and
    that two family members  residing  in  the  UK  were  unable  to  visit
    Zimbabwe because they were refugees [21].

Grounds of Application

4.   The Secretary of State contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to apply Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

5.   Ground 2 argued that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  by  finding  there
    was private life and  further  that  there  was  an  interference  with
    private life.  The Tribunal failed to take into  account  relevant  law
    (EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 64), that consideration is to be given
    to existing as opposed to future private life.

6.    Ground  3  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   assessment   of
    proportionality was inadequate; it failed to explain why refusal of the
    visa was a disproportionate interference.

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  on  28
    April 2015 on the grounds that the FtT  failed  to  explain  why  there
    would be an interference with private life and failed to consider  that
    contact could be maintained in a third country.

Error of Law Hearing

8.   At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr
    Tarlow submitted that the private life finding was incorrect  in  light
    of EM (Lebanon) (cited  above).   Members  of  the  family  could  make
    contact using modern methods  of  communication  such  as  Skype.   The
    Tribunal had used private life as an alternative basis to  family  life
    which was an incorrect approach in law.

9.   Ms Kyakwita submitted that the Tribunal considered all of the  evidence
    including oral evidence from the sponsors and placed weight on the fact
    that two of the UK family members were refugees who could not travel to
    Zimbabwe.   Costs  were  a  relevant  consideration  as  it  would   be
    prohibitive to pay for the air tickets for all family members to travel
    to South Africa.  The Tribunal had taken into  account  the  extent  to
    which the Claimants failed to meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and  found
    evidence to show that they were genuine visitors.

10.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now  give
    with my reasons.

Discussion and Decision

11.  I can find no basis for the criticism that the Tribunal failed to  deal
    with the appeal with reference to the restricted right of appeal  under
    Section 84.  Although the statutory provision was not set  out  in  the
    decision, reference is made to the scope of the appeal  at  [17].   The
    Tribunal then went on to consider whether or not there was family  life
    and concluded that given that there was no dependency above and  beyond
    the normal family ties as between adults, there  was  no  family  life.
    However, the Tribunal went on to consider private life which was  found
    to exist in the context that contact between family members existed and
    the decision denied all family members  the  opportunity  to  see  each
    other face to face.

12.  I am satisfied that there was no error by the Tribunal in terms of  the
    consideration of private and family life.  In NN (South Africa) &  Anor
    v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 653 the Court of Appeal  considered  whether  or
    not family life is established is a question of fact in each  case  and
    whether or not it is appropriate to focus on family  life  rather  than
    private life, but in practice the factors to be examined  in  order  to
    assess the proportionality of the removal are the  same  regardless  of
    whether private or family life is engaged.   This  is  also  consistent
    with the Tribunal's approach in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 in  which
    it was considered that Article 8 also required the Secretary  of  State
    to focus on the positive obligations on the  UK  to  facilitate  family
    reunion, and in conducting the balancing exercise the need to  consider
    other ways or  possibilities  to  enjoy  family  life  elsewhere.   The
    decisive issue was whether it could reasonably  be  enjoyed  elsewhere.
    Furthermore the Tribunal considered that part of private life  was  not
    simply to look at the existing circumstances but also  not  to  inhibit
    family life in future.

13.  I now consider ground 3 as regards the  assessment  of  proportionality
    and the contention that the Tribunal failed to explain why the  refusal
    of the visa was disproportionate. I am satisfied that the Tribunal  did
    not adequately explain why, given that the Claimants and their sponsors
    maintained contact on a regular basis via WhatsApp and  telephone,  the
    decision  amounted  to  an  interference  with  their  private   lives.
    Furthermore in  considering  proportionality  the  Tribunal  considered
    alternative ways of maintaining family and private  life  the  Tribunal
    and placed weight on the  costs  of  flights  and  travel  to  a  third
    country. Whilst accepting that two of the  family members are unable to
    travel to Zimbabwe because they are refugees, nevertheless there was no
    other reason given aside for cost to prevent them from travelling to  a
    third country in order to visit the Claimants there.  This is an  error
    of law.

14.  Furthermore  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  erred  at  [21]  in
    concluding that  the  decision  made  by  the  respondent  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. The Tribunal focused on decision  taken  under
    the Immigration Rules and concluded that that decision was wrong in law
    having made findings to the contrary. It is beyond  the  scope  of  the
    hearing of a restricted right of appeal for the Tribunal to  reconsider
    the substantive decision, but the Tribunal can consider the  extent  to
    which the application is refused  as relevant  to  the  proportionality
    assessment.

Decision re error of law

15.  The decision discloses  material  errors  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
    decision and remake the decision with reference to  the  evidence  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

16.  There was no evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  show  that
    there was dependency above and beyond the normal  family  ties  between
    the Claimants and the sponsors who are adults.  The issues  incorporate
    both family and private life matters  and  in  the  context  of  family
    visits Article 8 rights must be viewed in that context. I am  satisfied
    that private and family  life  can  constitute  an  obligation  not  to
    inhibit family life in the future.  This must be relevant to the appeal
    where the Claimants   have been separated for some twelve years because
    of the politically unstable situation  in  Zimbabwe.   However,  whilst
    accepting  that  communication  by  modern  means  such  as  Skype  and
    telephone is an unrealistic and limited form  of  communication,  I  am
    nevertheless satisfied that there are other  possibilities  for  family
    members to meet each other, for example in a third country.  There  are
    no insurmountable obstacles to  family/private  life  reasonably  being
    enjoyed elsewhere notwithstanding  the  high  cost.   Whilst  therefore
    concluding that family/private life is engaged I am not satisfied  that
    the decision amounts to an interference with the  Article  8  right  as
    contact can be continued and members of the family in the UK can  visit
    the parties in Zimbabwe and those who have refugee status are  able  to
    visit the family in another country.

Notice of Decision

17.  I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 30.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 30.7.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
