
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/00731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 November 2016               |On 20 December 2016               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs RANI SAXENA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Yeo, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
           Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department)
           appealed with permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Colyer on 17 October 2016 against the  determination  of  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Moore who had allowed the Appellant's  visit
           visa appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The decision and reasons
           was promulgated on 24 June 2016.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of India.  Her application to visit
           her son in the United Kingdom had  been  refused  by  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer on  31  December  2014.   The  Respondent  had
           previously  been  refused  settlement  as  an  adult   dependant
           relative and her appeal had been dismissed.  She had visited the
           United Kingdom in 2009 and returned to India.  The  judge  found
           that Article 8 ECHR was engaged on the facts, that the Appellant
           satisfied the relevant Immigration Rules, and that  the  refusal
           was a disproportionate interference with the respect due to  her
           family life.   Hence the appeal was allowed.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had erred by failing to give  sufficient
           reasons  for  finding  that  family  life  was  engaged  and  by
           conducting an inadequate proportionality assessment.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Brockelsby-Weller for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of
           onwards appeal and grant.  In summary she argued that the  judge
           had erred by finding that Article 8 ECHR was engaged.  There was
           no evidence of financial dependency nor of emotional dependency,
           as discussed in Ghising and  Others  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC).
           There had  been  no  cohabitation.  Dasgupta  (error  of  law  -
           proportionality  -  correct  approach)  [2016]  UKUT  28   (IAC)
           suggested that  emotional  dependency  between  grandparent  and
           grandchild would  be  fact  sensitive  and  that  had  not  been
           established in this appeal.  The judge's  decision  and  reasons
           could not stand.  The appeal should be remade and dismissed.

      6.    Mr Yeo for Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24 notice.
            The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  decision  and  reasons  was
           unimpeachable, careful and thorough. It was not easy to see  why
           permission to appeal had been granted.  The judge had found as a
           fact that there was family life.  There was evidence of  regular
           contact and past visits.   Numerous  authorities  supported  the
           judge's approach, in particular  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
           clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC); Adjei (visit visas - Article
           8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC); Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015]
           UKUT 487 (IAC) and  Abbasi  and  another  (visits-  bereavement-
           Article 8) [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC).  The Razgar questions  applied
           and had been correctly answered.  The Immigration Rules  defined
           the margin of appreciation for Article 8 ECHR purposes and, once
           the judge had found that the Immigration  Rules  were  met,  the
           Article 8 ECHR outcome was obvious and had to be decided in  the
           Appellant's favour.

      7.    Mr Yeo submitted that this appeal was one where costs  had  been
           unreasonably caused by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department.  There  had  in  short  been  no  proper  basis  for
           pursuing the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
           Tribunal appeal had not been opposed with any vigour  and  legal
           argument  had  been  reserved  for  the  permission  to   appeal
           application and onwards appeal.  Mr Yeo submitted a schedule  of
           the Respondent's costs.

      8.    The unreasonable costs applicant was opposed by  Ms  Brocklesby-
           Weller. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  had
           obtained permission to appeal and had been  entitled  to  pursue
           that appeal,




      No material error of law finding


      9.    In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to  appeal  might
           well be seen as generous.  Indeed, it seems to the tribunal that
           Secretary of State for the Home Department's apparent policy  of
           challenging all appeals allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
           Article 8 ECHR grounds might be thought to create an unfortunate
           impression of an extravagant use of the state's  resources,  and
           contributes to a further unfortunate impression that  litigation
           in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber is never ending.


      10.   The tribunal accepts Mr Yeo's submission that there was no error
           of law in the decision and  reasons.   It  was  indeed  a  well-
           crafted determination  in  all  respects.   The  judge  reminded
           himself of the limited scope of his jurisdiction, and was guided
           by the relevant current authorities, in particular Mostafa.  The
           judge examined the evidence closely, and gave ample  and  secure
           reasons for finding that  there  was  family  life  between  the
           Respondent  and  her  sponsor.   Indeed,  the  fact   that   the
           Respondent had  previously  (albeit  unsuccessfully)  sought  to
           settle with the sponsor was obvious evidence that  there  was  a
           close  family  relationship.  Financial  dependency  was  not  a
           necessary ingredient of that.  Nor was emotional  dependency  as
           such, because these was not a settlement application, merely  an
           application  to  maintain  family  connections  through  visits.
           Development of that family  life  within  the  confines  of  the
           Immigration Rules was a relevant consideration.  The judge  gave
           proper reasons for finding that  the  family  life  extended  at
           least potentially to the Respondent's grandchildren.


      11.   The judge also examined the evidence concerning the Respondent's
           ties with India, and gave proper reasons for  finding  that  she
           had a number of strong ties which demonstrated an  intention  to
           return there at the conclusion of her visit, notwithstanding the
           previous lawful attempted settlement.  The judge found that  the
           Immigration Rules, the margin of appreciation  set  out  in  the
           Immigration Rules indicating the Secretary of State for the Home
           Department's view of where the proportionality balance  lay  for
           Article 8 ECHR purposes, had been  satisfied.   The  submissions
           advanced on the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department's
           behalf amount to no more than an expression of disagreement with
           the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  which  been  reached   on
           conclusions of fact (doubtless  with  superior  evidence)  which
           were distinctly  different  from  those  reached  by  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer.


      12.   The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no error of law.


      13.   Whilst the tribunal has some sympathy with Mr Yeo's  application
           on behalf of the Appellant for a wasted costs order against  the
           Secretary of State for the Home Department, and  considers  that
           the costs set out in the accompanying schedule are in themselves
           are fair and  appropriate  in  amount,  the  fact  remains  that
           permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
           The Home Office Presenting Officer simply relied on the  reasons
           for refusal letter  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  the
           appeal was not conceded.  Thus the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
           pursue an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and to assemble  further
           legal argument if so advised. The  onwards  appeal  was  pursued
           with conspicuous moderation by Ms Brocklesby-Weller and  nothing
           was done between the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  and  the
           eventual hearing to increase the costs borne by the  Respondent.
           The Upper Tribunal (IAC) does not enjoy a costs shifting  regime
           in statutory  appeals,  rather  its  costs  jurisdiction  is  in
           substance disciplinary to encourage adherence to the  overriding
           objective.  In the tribunal's judgment, the Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department's conduct did not cross  the  line  into
           unreasonableness as described in Ridehalgh v Horsefield and Anor
           [1994] EWCA Civ 40.  A wasted costs order must be refused.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.


      Signed                             Dated      20/12/2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
