

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th October 2016                           |On 7th October 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                SUNABAN BIBI
                         [ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     unrepresented, her niece Ms Parveen spoke on her
behalf
For the Respondent:    Ms R Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mrs Bibi, date of birth 7 March 1932, applied for a visit  visa  to
         visit her younger sister in the UK. The application was refused  on
         the ground that the ECO was not satisfied that  she  was  genuinely
         seeking entry for  the  purpose  and  period  stated  or  that  she
         intended to leave the UK on  completion  of  the  visit.  Mrs  Bibi
         appealed on the grounds that the decision breached  her  Article  8
         grounds. Her appeal was heard on 19th January 2016 and dismissed by
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
         promulgated on 25th January 2016.

      2. Mrs Bibi sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds
         that it was arguable:

          a) The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the evidence  at  the
             date of the hearing and not at the date of the application;

          b) failed to  have  adequate  regard  to  the  core  family  life
             (Article 8) that existed between Mrs Bibi and  her  sister  in
             the UK.

      3. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  stated  that  the
         refusal was a breach of  Article  8.  In  the  review  of  the  ECO
         decision by the ECM, the ECM states that there was  no  explanation
         other than assertion that the ECO had failed to take  into  account
         the UK sponsor's ill health and the genuine reason  for  sponsoring
         Mrs Bibi and no  explanation  how  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
         clearance interferes with family life given that  the  sponsor  had
         visited Bangladesh in March 2014, some 7 months earlier.

      4. In the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  the  sponsor's  niece
         gave evidence that the sponsor had suffered immensely on  her  last
         visit to Bangladesh such that she could not face the journey again.
         It was submitted that the lack of face to face contact,  given  the
         ages, health and personal circumstances  of  the  sponsor  and  the
         appellant,  the  failure   to   grant   entry   clearance   was   a
         disproportionate interference with family life between the  sponsor
         and the appellant.

      5. Although before me Ms Parveen  explained  that  the  appellant  had
         brought up her mother (the sister  whom  the  appellant  sought  to
         visit), that there were considerable health problems for the sister
         in the UK and that their relationship  was  very  close,  this  was
         evidence that was simply not before the ECO when the  decision  was
         taken. Ms Parveen  said  that  she  and  her  sister  had  provided
         significant material and evidence for transmission to the  ECO  and
         they could not understand why it had not been sent. On the basis of
         the documents before me, the evidence the  appellant  relied  upon,
         through her niece's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal (and to me)
         that evidence was not before  the  ECO.  In  the  absence  of  that
         information the ECO could not have come  to  any  conclusion  other
         than that which he reached. There was  simply  inadequate  evidence
         before the ECO to sustain a  finding  that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance was a breach of Article 8.

      6. There is no material error of law in the decision by the First-tier
         Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision


[pic]
                                    Date 6th October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
