
[pic]
IAC-fH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/00364/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16 March 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                SHAZIA TARIQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan born  20  September  1977,
    appeals with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Beg
    who, for reasons given in her determination  dated  17  November  2014,
    dismissed the appeal against the decision refusing the appellant  entry
    clearance to visit the United Kingdom with her British citizen daughter
    to see her British citizen husband (the sponsor) for a  period  of  two
    weeks.

 2.  The  respondent's  decision  dated  10  December  2013   refused   the
    application under the Rules on the basis that he was not satisfied that
    the appellant only intended a short visit or that she would  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of that period of  visit.   In  addition  the
    respondent contended the decision under Article 8 was justified  as  it
    did not impact on the ability of the appellant to conduct a family life
    as she had done so until then, and furthermore there did not appear  to
    be any insurmountable obstacles preventing the  sponsor  from  visiting
    her in Pakistan as he has done before now.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the sponsor.  He was presently staying at
    his adult daughter's house as he was unwell and had been there for  the
    previous two and a half months.  His wife, the appellant, would be able
    to reside with him at his address at 22 Upper Tooting Road. The sponsor
    needed someone to look after her.  He had reached  agreement  with  his
    wife at the time of their marriage  that  she  would  stay  with  their
    mother as she was unwell and only when  the  appellant's  two  brothers
    married would she apply for a settlement visa.  He had last visited his
    wife in Pakistan in 2012 when his daughter was  born.   Altogether  the
    sponsor has nine children, seven of whom are in the United Kingdom.  He
    has previously been divorced on two occasions.  He explained  that  his
    wife works as a supervisor for a packaging company in Lahore.  He could
    not visit his wife as he is unable to sit on an aircraft and  had  been
    depressed.  He suffers panic attacks.

 4. The judge noted  the  requirements  under  the  Immigration  Rules  for
    visitors and in particular evidence  from  the  sponsor's  GP  being  a
    letter dated 26 August 2014 on which it was noted "due to  his  various
    illnesses he is unable to tolerate  flying  to  Pakistan".   The  judge
    found the letter did not make it clear whether  the  sponsor  had  been
    medically advised against travelling by  air.   She  concluded  on  the
    evidence that there was a clear indication the sponsor would  like  his
    wife to be in the United Kingdom so that she  could  look  after   him.
    Having regard to his limited income (he is in receipt of  benefits)  it
    would be difficult for him to support a settlement application.

 5. The judge found the appellant was not a credible witness.  There was no
    evidence that the sponsor's older sister would be unable to look  after
    her mother even if she does not live  with  her,  and  furthermore  the
    appellant's two adult brothers could  easily look after  their  mother,
    noting that the  appellant  works  full-time  as  a  supervisor.  Their
    daughter was cared for by her maternal  grandmother  and  her  maternal
    uncles when  the appellant is at work.  There was no medical report  in
    respect of the appellant's mother.  The judge found  in  addition  that
    the appellant was to some degree dependent upon funds sent to her  from
    the  United  Kingdom  and  found  it  unlikely  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities she would need to do so were she  earning  in  excess  of
    25,000 Pakistan rupees per month as claimed.

 6. Specifically as to Article 8 the judge found that the parties had lived
    together for a limited period in Pakistan after they  married  in  2011
    and that they have a child born 2012.  Family life had  been  conducted
    through visits and by correspondence.  At the age of 2 the child's best
    interests would be focused on the appellant who was the constant in her
    life.  Whilst it was in any child's best  interests  to  be  with  both
    parents, she had never been looked after by her father.   According  to
    the appellant's witness statement she had stated that she  is  planning
    to come to the United Kingdom with  her  daughter  for  her  daughter's
    education when she is old enough to go  to  school.   The  judge  found
    there was evidence that the appellant  would  like  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom with her daughter and to live  with  her  husband.   She
    concluded that any interference with the family and private life  would
    not be disproportionate in all the circumstances.

 7. The challenge to this decision argues  that  the  judge's  analysis  of
    proportionality was limited to one paragraph.  No  reference  had  been
    made to which public interest had been balanced against the appellant's
    family life.  No consideration had been given  to  the  fact  that  the
    family unit was permanently severed by the decision not to grant  entry
    clearance and that the sponsor was unable to travel to Pakistan due  to
    health problems.  Crucially, no consideration had been   given  to  the
    fact that the sponsor and his  daughter  are  British  nationals.   The
    refusal to  grant  entry  clearance  to  the  appellant  prevented  the
    daughter from entering the country of nationality as she is  too  young
    to travel alone.  This had ramifications under EU law with reference to
    the decision in MA and SM (Zambrano):  EU  children  outside  EU)  Iran
    [2013] UKUT 380.

 8. On this basis it is argued that there had  been   a  misapplication  of
    Article 8.

 9. The second ground argues misapplication of the best  interests  of  the
    child principle.  It is argued that the child's best interests is to be
    with both parents.  Contact through modern means of  communication  was
    not sufficient for an active parent.   It was difficult to  contemplate
    a scenario where a s.55 duty is material to an immigration decision and
    indicates a certain outcome that Article 8 does not.

10. Permission to appeal was granted but it was arguably incumbent upon the
    judge to determine whether the sponsor's medical problems prevented him
    from travelling to Pakistan.  If they could not meet  in  that  country
    "prejudice could  be substantial".  It was arguable that the judge  had
    gone too far to infer from the medical evidence that the sponsor  could
    travel to Pakistan.  The judge had failed to  make  sufficiently  clear
    findings on salient issues.

11. The appellant did not appear at the hearing before me. Notice had  been
    given in according the Rules and I therefore proceeded in  the  absence
    of an  explanation   for  this  absence.   After  submissions  from  Mr
    Shillingday I reserved my decision.

12.  In the course of  those  submissions  he  drew  my  attention  to  the
    decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  and  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC)  although  reminding  me  also  that
    application for permission to appeal this  decision  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal had been made by the Secretary of State.

13. Be that as it may, I am nevertheless satisfied that  as  matters  stand
    this decision is authority for the approach I should take in  determine
    whether the judge erred.  As observed by the Tribunal at [16]:

         "Undoubtedly the paradigm Article 8 entry clearance  case  concerns
         applicants seeking to join close family members for the purposes of
         settlement.  However, it cannot be excluded that where one party to
         a  marriage is entitled to be in the  United  Kingdom  a  qualified
         obligation  to  facilitate  spousal  unification  for  the  limited
         purpose of a short visit and sojourn may arise and does arise here.
         ... The refusal decision had a material impact on  their  right  to
         enjoy family life.  He did not want to settle but to visit her, and
         subject to permissible qualifications he should be entitled  to  do
         that.  Whilst it would almost certainly be proportionate to  refuse
         him entry clearance if he did not comply with the  Rules,  his  and
         his wife's desire to be together in her home area  albeit  for  the
         purposes of  visit is very human and understandable."

14. The similarity to the  case  before  me  lies  in  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was seeking entry clearance as a visitor. The Entry Clearance
    Officer gave reasons under  the  Rules  for  doubting  the  appellant's
    intentions with reference to the quality of evidence provided regarding
    the appellant's financial circumstances.  The judge found there  was  a
    clear indication that the sponsor would like his  wife  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom so that she could  look after him.  She also  found  the
    appellant was not a credible witness although it has to  be  remembered
    that she has not given evidence.

15. My focus must be, however, on the grounds of challenge.  The first  was
    that the judge had failed to make clear findings as to whether  or  not
    the requirements of the Rules were met.  As observed by the Tribunal in
    Mostafa, a claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules was  not
    the question to be determined, but  was  capable  of  being  a  weighty
    though not determinative factor when deciding whether the  refusal  was
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing  immigration  control.
    Although the judge did not reach a specific finding on this aspect,  it
    is possible to infer from her findings that in substance  she  did  not
    accept that the Immigration Rules could be met.

16. The same ground challenges the  treatment by the judge  of  the  public
    interest.  In my view the  determination  suffers  from  a  lack  of  a
    structured approach. It is clear that Article 8 is engaged by virtue of
    the family life between the parties affected. Furthermore, the decision
    refusing the visit  application  did  result  in  sufficiently  serious
    interference to engage Article 8.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
    decision was lawful in  the  sense  that  the  respondent  applied  the
    Immigration  Rules  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration   Acts   and
    furthermore it is unarguable that the respondent is entitled to rely on
    immigration control as an expression of the aims available  to  justify
    that interference.   In  essence  the  case  therefore  turned  on  the
    proportionality of the decision.

17. The judge's analysis  on  proportionality  is  not  clearly  expressed.
    However  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  she  had  doubts   about   the
    truthfulness of the parties, particularly as to their intentions.  That
    being so, it is difficult to see how the interference with the  planned
    visit could  be said to be disproportionate if it was not accepted that
    the visit would be for the period and purpose stated.  Accordingly I do
    not find any error by the judge to be material.

18. The next  challenge  under  the  first  ground  is  that  the  decision
    permanent severs the family unit.  It needs to be borne  in  mind  that
    the application was simply for a two week visit.  It  remains  open  to
    the appellant to apply on a more permanent basis.  The grounds refer to
    the sponsor being unable to travel to Pakistan due to health  problems.
    The judge specifically dealt with this and I am satisfied she  did  not
    arguably err in her analysis of the limited medical evidence.  Dr Ahmad
    writes in support of the visit  visa  application  which  she  contends
    would have a beneficial effect on the  sponsor's  physical  and  mental
    health.  It is difficult to see how, if in the  light  of  the  chronic
    conditions he has, a two week  visit  could   have  such  a  palliative
    effect.  He stated that because of the sponsor's "various illnesses  he
    is unable to tolerate flying to Pakistan".  However those illnesses are
    described as depression, panic attacks, diabetes, high cholesterol  and
    high blood pressure.  The letter is not particularly clear.  If  it  is
    the depression and panic attacks which rules  out  the  possibility  of
    flying to Pakistan, there is no explanation how the sponsor was able to
    travel there in 2012.  Accordingly I am satisfied the judge fid not err
    in her analysis of this aspect.

19. The final limb to the first ground refers to the consequences under  EU
    law of the appellant's daughter being  an  EU  citizen.   The  evidence
    before the judge and the Entry Clearance Officer did not indicate  that
    it was the intention  of  the  parties  that  the  daughter  should  be
    accompanied by her mother to the United Kingdom  in   order  to  settle
    here.  It is difficult to see how this aspect has any relevance.  I  am
    satisfied it did not result in error.

20. The second ground relates to the best interests of that child.   As  Mr
    Shilliday pointed out, Section 55 does not apply  to  children  outside
    the United Kingdom although he accepted that the spirit of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Children's Convention should be applied
    in the Article 8 analysis. The evidence  before  the  judge  was  of  a
    decision by the appellant and her husband that  she  should  remain  in
    Pakistan with their child and raise her there until she was  ready  for
    schooling in the United Kingdom.  It is not possible  to  see  how  the
    refusal of a two week visit visa interfered in any significant way with
    that ambition.  It is clear to me that the second limb to this  ground,
    which one might very  well  expect  in  a  settlement  application,  is
    entirely misconceived.

21. My conclusion, therefore,  is  that  the  judge  might  have  expressed
    matters more clearly in her determination but  nevertheless  I  am  not
    persuaded that such errors as she made  resulted  in  a  need  for  the
    decision to be set aside and remade.  Sufficient reasons were given for
    the conclusion that interference with the appellant's family life would
    not be disproportionate.

22. Since writing this decision  the  sponsor  has  written  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal that  his  wife  had  forced  him  to  divorce  her  which  he
    attributes to his inability to visit her. He  refers  to  the  negative
    impact of this on his health but also explains that he does not wish to
    pursue the case. Even if I were persuaded that the decision  should  be
    remade and  the  appeal  were  allowed  this  development  indicates  a
    material change in circumstances that would  be  likely  to  result  in
    entry clearance being refused. But in the light of  my  findings  above
    this aspect is academic.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 27 April 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


