
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00626/2014
                                  VA/00627/2014
                                   VA/00628/2014
                                                               VA/00629/2014
                                                               VA/00630/2014
                                                               VA/00631/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 September 2014                          |On  18th September 2014      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           TASAWER SAMUEL PANDAYAR
                               RUBINA TASAWER
                                ANYA TASAWER
                                DAVID TASAWER
                                AARON TASAWER
                             MAHSAHMEEN TASAWER
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs Shumaila John, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wellesley-Cole  promulgated
    on 4 July 2014 in which she purported to allow  the  claimants'  appeal
    against the decisions of the respondent made on  29  December  2013  to
    refuse them entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  family  visitors.
    The applications in question had been made on 18 November 2013.

 2. The appellant refused the applications on the basis  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the claimants were genuinely seeking entry clearance  in
    the United Kingdom as visitors or  that  they  intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom (in the case of the first and  second  claimants);  and,
    that there would not be adequate arrangements for their support in  the
    case of the minor claimants.  The notices of refusal make it clear that
    there is in these cases no  right  of  appeal  except  on  the  grounds
    referred to in Section 84(1)(c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, that is, on human rights  and/or  race  discrimination
    grounds alone.

 3. The grounds of appeal are expressed in terms of human rights  but  also
    take issue with the bases on which adverse inferences were drawn by the
    appellant.

 4. Judge Wellesley-Cole determined the appeals on the basis of the  papers
    before her, and after making findings with respect  to  the  claimants'
    intentions, concluded that they met the requirements of paragraph 41 of
    the Immigration Rules as amended, and allowed all the appeals  on  that
    basis.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the right
    of appeal in all of these cases was restricted to human rights and race
    relations grounds as the applications had been made after 25 June 2013,
    the date on which Section 55 of the Crown and Courts Act had come  into
    force amending Section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002; and, that it had not been open to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    consider whether the decision was in accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules or otherwise in accordance with the law.

 6. On 24 July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 7. The sponsor was present as was Mr Bramble who acted on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  The sponsors said they were  aware  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal related solely to human rights and were understandably concerned
    that that issue had not been addressed in the determination.  They  did
    not resist Mr Bramble's submission  that  the  determination  of  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole was clearly flawed and should be set aside,  given  that
    it was vitiated by a clear error of law.

 8. It is unarguable that the right of appeal in these appeals was confined
    to the issues of human rights and  race  relations.   Whilst  it  might
    arguably  have  been  permissible  for  the  judge  in  considering  an
    assessment  of  proportionally  whether   the   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules were met, that is not a freestanding ground of appeal
    and in any event the judge did not consider the issue of  human  rights
    in any way.

 9. Judge Wellesley-Cole's decision therefore did involve the making of  an
    error of law which as went to her jurisdiction,  is  clearly  material.
    On that basis alone the determination must be set aside.

10. Given that Judge Wellesley-Cole made no findings at all with respect to
    human rights, there are no findings of fact in this determination which
    can be preserved.  As both parties agreed, there needs to  be  a  fresh
    judicial fact-finding exercise in respect of all relevant matters.   It
    is therefore not appropriate for this matter to  remain  in  the  Upper
    Tier and I therefore remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  did
    involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  oral
    hearing.  For the avoidance of doubt none of the findings  of  fact  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole are preserved.






Signed                                  Date:  18 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


