
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/00940/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November, 2016                          |On 9 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AZIZ AKHTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVitie a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Karnik of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  being  "the
    claimant".

2.    The  respondent  is  a  Pakistani  citizen  born  in  1947  who   made
    application to visit her son Tahir Mehmood in the  United  Kingdom  for
    two months but her application for entry clearance was  refused  on  13
    January, 2015 under paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of Statement  of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended.  The appellant appealed on the
    basis that the decision was incompatible  with  her  rights  under  the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms.

3.   The respondent appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier Judge  A
    K Simpson in Manchester on 2 December, 2015.  The judge concluded  that
    the  appellant  had  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules and went on to consider her Article  8  rights.   The
    judge was satisfied that the appellant has three  sons  and  they  have
    numerous children living in the United Kingdom.  The judge assumed that
    the appellant enjoyed a family life with her three  sons  and  numerous
    grandchildren sufficient to be interfered with by the decision  of  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse   to   grant   the   respondent's
    application.

4.    The  claimant  sought  permission  to  appeal  and  in  granting   the
    application First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly said:

         "It is arguable, for the reasons stated in  the  application,  that
         the Tribunal failed to identify any particular  circumstances  that
         were


         (a)  legally capable of supporting its conclusion that family  life
             existed between the [respondent] (who resides in Pakistan) and
             her adult sons (who reside in the United Kingdom) and/or


         (b)  of sufficient consequence to engage the potential operation of
             Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection
             of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms."


5.   At the hearing before me Mr Karnik of Counsel  appeared  on  behalf  of
    the respondent.  He told me he was in some difficulty  because  he  had
    not seen the bundle  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  to  the
    Tribunal.  His solicitors had requested a copy from previous solicitors
    but these had not been forthcoming.  I handed Mr Karnik a bundle  which
    I found in the file.  I allowed him time to read the bundle and allowed
    time for  the  Presenting  Officer  to  examine  it  also.   Mr  Karnik
    suggested that the witness statements talk of  providing  provision  to
    the applicant for her expenses of her visit and for her living expenses
    and accommodation.  He suggested that financial support was  sufficient
    to show support beyond  normal  emotional  family  ties  and  that  the
    context was  relevant.   Here  the  appellant  is  a  grandmother  with
    extended family living in the United  Kingdom  and  she  has  some  ten
    grandchildren and it is being suggested by the Secretary of State there
    is no interference with someone who wishes to visit  her  children  and
    grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that  there  clearly
    was an interference and in the  context  of  this  appeal  the  judge's
    approach was correct.  As to the question of proportionality, the judge
    had found that the Immigration Rules were met.  Mr  McVitie  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that paragraph 6 of  the  judgment
    of Kaur (Visit appeal; Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487  was  relevant.
    Paragraph 12 of the determination the judge has only quoted  paragraphs
    1, 2 and 3.   Mr  Karnik  suggested  that  since  in  this  appeal  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules paragraph 6  of
    the determination of Kaur was not appropriate.

6.   I was about to conclude the hearing when Mr  Karnik  pointed  out  that
    his client had now arrived.  He said that he had not had an opportunity
    of speaking to .... before the  hearing  because  his  client  was  not
    present and before I concluded the hearing he asked that I should  give
    him a moment to speak to his client.  I agreed.

7.   On returning Mr Karnik told me that there were in fact some  35  family
    members of the appellant's extended family in the United Kingdom and  a
    similar number living in Pakistan.

8.   I reserved my decision.

9.   Family life within the meaning of Article 8  does  not  normally  exist
    between adult siblings and between  parents  and  adult  children.   If
    family life does not exist then Article 8 will not be engaged.  Article
    8 can be engaged between adult siblings and between parents  and  adult
    children where there are further elements of dependency involving  more
    than emotional family ties.  (MS (Article 8 - family life -  dependency
    - proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064).

10.  Neither blood ties nor the concern  and  affection  which  normally  go
    with them are by themselves or together sufficient to constitute family
    life (Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA
    Civ 31.

11.  There was simply no evidence before Judge Simpson of  further  elements
    of dependency over and above the normal emotional ties that  one  might
    expect between a mother and her children  and  a  grandmother  and  her
    grandchildren.

12.  I have concluded  that  Judge  Simpson  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance   Officer   would   constitute   an
    interference with the respondent's family life and allow the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  In the absence of any evidence of  any  elements
    of intervening devotion between the respondent and her children and the
    respondent and her grandchildren I find that the decision of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is not one which  interferes  with  the  respondent's
    Article 8 rights.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in the making  of  her  decision.
    I set aside her decision.  My decision is that the respondent's  appeal
    be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

