
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/00074/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 18 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                          eNTry CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr muhammad shabir
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hayat (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Keane  promulgated on  17 November  2014  allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Muhammad Shabir against a decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  at
    Abu Dhabi dated 18  November  2013  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant and  Mr
    Shabir is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Mr Shabir as the Appellant and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    Respondent.

Decision and Background

3.   The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  1  May  1970.   On  23
    October 2013 he applied for entry clearance  to  visit  his  cousin  Mr
    Sikander Hayat, ('the sponsor').   The  application  was  refused  with
    reference to paragraphs  41(i)  and  (ii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Essentially  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's claimed employment and financial circumstances for  reasons
    set out in the Notice of Immigration Decision dated 18 November 2013.

4.   The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    heard evidence from the sponsor and allowed the appeal under the  Rules
    for reasons set out in his decision.

5.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davidge on 7 January 2013.

Consideration

6.   The Respondent challenges the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to  recognise  that
    the scope of the  Appellant's  appeal  was  limited  to  grounds  under
    section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 by reason of the general restriction in respect of visitor appeals
    brought into effect from 25 June 2013 by section 52 of  the  Crime  and
    Courts Act 2013.

7.   I pause to note, as observed in the Respondent's grounds in support  of
    the application for permission to appeal, there was in any event,  even
    preceding this restriction, a restriction by virtue of the  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012  such  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal would not have attracted a  full  right  of  appeal  because  he
    proposed a visit to a cousin.

8.   It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  had  no  regard  to
    the restriction  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The  Judge  states  at
    paragraph 2 of the  determination:  "The  following  Immigration  Rules
    applied to the appeal:", and then set out the text of paragraph  41  of
    the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph  10  of  the  decision  the  Judge
    expressed himself satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proving to the balance of probabilities the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Rules.  Further, under the heading  'Decision'  the
    Judge stated "The  appeal  in  respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    allowed".

9.   The Judge does not address the  grounds  that  were  available  to  the
    Appellant.

10.  In the circumstances  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error of law  and  must  be  set
    aside.  The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be re-made.

11.  I note that in the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, whilst it is pleaded in  a  generalised  assertion  that  the
    decision was unlawful because it was incompatible with the  Appellant's
    rights under the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  there  is  no
    particularisation of any such breach notwithstanding otherwise detailed
    grounds of appeal addressing the case under the Rules.  There  is  also
    passing reference to the decision being "discriminatory in nature", but
    again no particularisation of that allegation is made.

12.  The sponsor who has attended before me  today  has  indicated  that  he
    last saw the Appellant three years ago,  and  usually  visits  Pakistan
    every two or three years.  When he does so he will  see  the  Appellant
    who lives close  to  the  sponsor's  home  in  Pakistan.   The  sponsor
    confirmed that there was no underlying purpose to  the  proposed  visit
    other than to see the sponsor and  his  wife  and  also  to  visit  the
    country.  When asked if it would be a problem for either the  Appellant
    or the sponsor if the Appellant were unable to visit him in the  United
    Kingdom, the sponsor said "not really".

13.  In all of the circumstances it seems to me that  the  Appellant's  case
    does not get past the first two Razgar  questions,  and  therefore  any
    issue as to the lawfulness of the decision that might arise  under  the
    third Razgar question - which might be a live issue  in  light  of  the
    favourable findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect of  the
    Rules - is not reached.

14.  The appeal must fail on  the  basis  that  the  restricted  grounds  of
    appeal are not made out on the particular facts.

15.   Notwithstanding  that  the  appeal  must  be  dismissed,  Mr   Bramble
    acknowledges that the setting  aside  of  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Keane does not in itself deprive the Appellant of the  benefit
    of the favourable factual findings therein.  It  is  clear  that  Judge
    Keane was very impressed with the evidence of the sponsor and reached a
    conclusion for cogent and detailed reasons that  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine visitor who intended to return to Pakistan after a short  visit
    to see the sponsor.  The  Judge  was  also  clear  and  cogent  in  his
    findings as to the relevant financial requirements and the availability
    of suitable accommodation.  It follows therefore that it is open to the
    Appellant  to  re-present  himself  for  entry  clearance  with  a  new
    application and to direct the Entry Clearance  Officer's  attention  to
    the favourable findings of Judge Keane.  This does not mean to say that
    the application must therefore be allowed:  if the Appellant makes  any
    further application  it  will  have  to  be  assessed  on  all  of  the
    circumstances at the relevant time and the Entry Clearance Officer  may
    wish to have regard to any relevant change  of  circumstances  and  the
    nature of  the  supporting  evidence  presented  at  that  time  -  but
    nonetheless it may be of some assistance to the Appellant that  he  now
    has the benefit of Judge Keane's favourable findings.

16.  Be that as it may, the decision in the appeal today is unfavourable  to
    the Appellant.

Notice of Decision

17.  There was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside.

18.  I re-make the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.



    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 17 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 17 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
