
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number VA/00475/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                HAZOORA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu (Solicitor, Harbans Singh & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This was the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  Judge
    Ford in which she allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the ECO in New Delhi refusing her permission  to  visit  the  UK  to
    donate a kidney to a family friend. Judge Ford found that the Appellant
    had willingly decided to donate her kidney  with  the  support  of  her
    husband and that she met the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Judge Ford found that in the circumstances article 8  was  engaged  and
    that refusal of a visit visa was disproportionate.

 2. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in grounds of application of the 5th of November 2015. It  was
    argued that having found that there was  no  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor. The Judge had not considered the possibility  of
    the transplant taking place in India where the offer  of  donation  had
    taken place. In finding that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    were met the proportionality assessment was inadequate and that article
    8 had been used to provide redress for what  was  perceived  to  be  an
    incorrect refusal under the rules.  Permission  was  granted  by  Judge
    Grant on the 13th of April 2016.

 3. For the Secretary of State it was  argued  that  to  engage  article  8
    compelling issues were required and before an Immigration  Judge  moved
    on to consider the Immigration Rules it  had  to  be  established  that
    article 8 was actually engaged. The case of Abassi was a  poor  analogy
    with the situation here. There was no connection between the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor who were not related and  were  only  friends,  it  was
    submitted that article 8 would not have been engaged if they  had  been
    cousins. In any case it was  submitted  that  even  if  article  8  was
    engaged there was no interference as the operation  to  transplant  the
    kidney could take place elsewhere. The Appellant had undergone  medical
    assessments in India and it had not been shown that the operation could
    not take place there.

 4. For the Appellant it was noted that the option of  treatment  in  India
    had not been raised by the ECO or in the First-tier Tribunal. The  Home
    Office Presenting Officer had been concerned with whether the Appellant
    was giving the kidney freely or under duress and that had been resolved
    by the decision. The possibility of an operation  India  had  not  been
    raised or considered by the First-tier Tribunal and so that was not  an
    error. There was no evidence that the health  service  in  India  could
    carry out the procedure.

 5. It is clear from recent developments in the case law that article 8  is
    not only engaged in circumstances of dependency going beyond the  usual
    ties between related adults. Where private  life  is  concerned  it  is
    clear that article 8 is engaged in very limited circumstances  relating
    to the physical and moral integrity of the applicant, Patel [2013] UKSC
    72.ifferent  considerations  apply  to  the  social  contacts   between
    individuals where one is in  the  UK  and  the  other  is  outside  the
    jurisdiction.

 6. By article 1 of the ECHR the rights conferred in the following articles
    are conferred on those within the jurisdiction of the high  contracting
    parties. The first task is to ensure that article 8 is engaged and once
    article 8 is engaged the issue is whether the  refusal  to  permit  the
    entry of the non-national is a disproportionate interference  with  the
    rights of the UK based individual.

 7. The approach in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 where Lord Bingham set out the  5
    stage approach as follows:
         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?(2)  If  so,  will
         such interference have consequences of such gravity as  potentially
         to engage the operation of article 8?
         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
         society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
         legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

 8. Judge Ford gave her reasons in paragraph 20 for finding that article  8
    was engaged. She found that article 8, on the basis  of  private  life,
    was engaged with the Sponsor requiring  a  kidney  transplant  and  the
    desire of the Appellant to donate one.  Obviously  here  in  the  first
    question "removal" has to be replaced  with  "refusal  to  grant  entry
    clearance".

 9. It has to be borne in  mind  that  the  Appellant  is  not  within  the
    jurisdiction of the UK and the decision to refuse her  visit  visa  was
    not an interference with her private life. In  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  487  (IAC),  at  paragraph  24,  it  was
    observed that in would only be in very  unusual  circumstances  that  a
    person other than a close relative would be able to show  that  refusal
    would come  within  the  scope  of  article  8.  The  question  of  the
    territorial application of article 8  cannot  be  ignored  and  if  the
    article is engaged then it requires an  assessment  of  proportionality
    but focussing on the individual within the jurisdiction.  A  structured
    approach in line with Razgar above is required.

10. I find that the Judge was wrong to find that  article  8  was  engaged.
    Given that there is no familial connection between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor this case was predicated on private life  alone  and  with  the
    focus on the Appellant the refusal had no bearing on any of her rights.
    The Appellant and Sponsor are family friends that alone does not engage
    article 8. In accepting that the donor may not  be  the  only  suitable
    donor for the Sponsor it could not be said that there was dependency in
    this case which is required to engage article 8.

11. Individuals not in the UK do not have the right  to  demand  entry  for
    their own purposes and there is control over the extent to  which  they
    can do so for the purposes of other people.  The  Judge  observed  that
    there was no evidence that the Appellant was the only  available  match
    and whilst the possibility of an operation in India was  not  canvassed
    that would be relevant to whether this was disproportionate.

12. In the circumstances I find  that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that
    article 8 was engaged in this case. In finding that article 8  was  not
    engaged it follows that the Judge had no jurisdiction to  consider  the
    appeal further and the only option available would have been to dismiss
    the appeal. As a result  I  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal.  It  remains  open  to  the
    Appellant  to  re-apply  under  the  rules  that  now  apply   to   the
    circumstances of this case under the terms  of  paragraph  41A  of  the
    Immigration Rules with the required supporting evidence.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in  the  appeal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  Hazoora
Begum.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 26th August 2016
