
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01220/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th October 2016                 |On 4th November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Mr Golam Zakaria Choudhury Shiplu
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer in  New  Delhi  to  refuse  him
    entry clearance as a visitor to visit his twin  sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom and see his sister's son, who was seriously ill.

 2. The appeal was decided on the  papers  and  the  appellant's  right  of
    appeal limited to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. In the light of the circumstances set out at paragraph 14 of the First-
    tier Tribunal  decision,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  family  life  is
    established between these two adult siblings. Accordingly, the  judge's
    consideration of the remainder of the Razgar factors is erroneous and I
    set aside the decision and substitute a decision dismissing the  appeal
    on all grounds.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:  3 November 2016
          Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


