
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
VA/01181/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 14th January 2016                     |       On 12th February 2016        |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr edwin kwaw paha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UK VISA SECTION

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L K-Afful (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey, promulgated on 28th October 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 22nd October 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the  appeal  of  Edwin  Kwaw  Paha,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, who is presently  resident
    in Denmark, and was born on 5th April 1977.   He  appeals  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 12th February  2014  who
    rejected his application to enter the UK as a family visitor.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he wished to visit his wife and child and
    his wife, Ms Josephine Appiah, is his  Sponsor.   He  applied  on  14th
    January 2014.  He is living in Denmark as a student.   The  Respondent,
    however, had regard to paragraph 320(7A) and (7B)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and noted that the Appellant had been refused entry clearance on
    15th April 2009 because he had used deception  in  his  application  in
    that he had not declared the fact that he had been refused  a  visa  in
    his previous application for entry clearance on 25th February 2011.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the evidence of the sponsoring  wife,  Ms  Appiah,
    who stated in her  witness  statement  that  the  allegation  that  the
    Appellant had exercised deception was a mistake because it  arose  from
    his 2009 application, where there had been an onerous answer.  However,
    in relation to the current application, the  Appellant  had  given  the
    correct answer, which would not be the  action  of  someone  trying  to
    deceive.  The  judge  considered  the  copy  of  the  Appellant's  2009
    application and the refusal.

 5. It had not been disputed before the Tribunal that it was  correct  that
    the Appellant had been refused twice before, and yet  in  his  20  page
    application, he clearly stated in answer to question 83,  that  he  had
    never been refused a visa.  The  Respondent  therefore  discharged  the
    burden of showing that the Appellant had  not  been  truthful  (as  the
    judge had reminded herself  at  the  outset  of  her  determination  at
    paragraph 3).  When the Appellant's representative argued that the copy
    of the 2009 application had not been provided, the judge explained that
    since it was his own application, he was reasonably deemed to have been
    aware of why the current application was refused (see paragraph 14).

 6. The judge proceeded to dismiss the appeal under paragraph  320(7A)  and
    (7B).  The judge went on to give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt
    in that the Appellant, as the judge explained,  had  been  truthful  in
    saying that he had not been refused entry clearance into the UK in  the
    last ten years (see question 28).

 7. The judge went on to consider both the Article 8 arguments in  relation
    to family life, and the Section 55  power  under  the  BCIA  2009.   In
    relation to Article 8, the judge explained  that  the  visit  was  only
    intended for two weeks and there was no indefinite separation envisaged
    because the Appellant was only temporarily as a student in Denmark  and
    the parties could reunite  after  that,  especially  as  there  was  no
    Article 8 right to choose to live in the country of one's choice.

 8. In relation to Section 55, the  judge  explained  that,  "In  terms  of
    section 55 the son's  parents  chose  to  live  in  separate  countries
    knowing that they have a child and must reasonably therefore  be  taken
    to have considered the possible effect on him of his father studying in
    another country" (paragraph 25).  The judge went on to  say  also  that
    the planned visit was only for two weeks, but that given that there had
    been a separation between the child and the father since 2008, a  short
    two week visit was not going to have any particular impact in terms  of
    the Section 55 duty of the Secretary of State to the best  interest  of
    the child.

Grounds of Application

 9. In his grounds of application, the  Appellant  states  that  the  judge
    erred with respect to a finding on  the  Appellant's  dishonesty  given
    that the Court of Appeal guidance in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773
    was that dishonesty had to be expressly  proven  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in terms of an intention to positively mislead.  The  Appellant's
    dishonesty had not been  ever  considered  because  the  Appellant  had
    chosen not to appeal the 2009 decision against him.

10. On 15th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

11. On 23rd December 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered.  This  made  the
    following points.  First, the Appellant did not appeal the 2009 refusal
    and nor did he subsequently give any evidence  as  to  how  it  was  an
    oversight for him to not  have  disclosed  material  matters.   It  was
    simply not credible that the Appellant could not recall that he  had  a
    previous application refused.

12. Second, the Appellant was subsequently refused for  past  deception  in
    2011.  The Appellant again chose not to appeal that refusal.

13. Third, it was close to perverse for the Appellant to now seek  to  rely
    upon AA (Nigeria) and to  assert  that  his  dishonesty  had  not  been
    established.

14. Fourth, it was a choice of the parties to live apart from  each  other.
    The Sponsor lived in England and the Appellant lived as  a  student  in
    Denmark.  It was therefore entirely open to the judge to conclude  that
    the  family  life  was  not  sufficiently  strong  to  warrant  further
    consideration outside the Rules.  The judge did  closely  look  at  the
    factual history of the Appellant and his family.   They  had  lived  in
    different countries for the majority of their married life.

15. Fifth, there was no indication that the Appellant and  his  wife  could
    not live together in Ghana  if  they  so  wished  to.   The  judge  had
    indicated that after his studies the Appellant could  indeed  have  the
    option of so doing.  Finally, as far as Section  55  of  the  BCIA  was
    concerned, this was expressly addressed by the judge with regard to the
    relevant facts.

The Hearing

16. At the hearing before me, Mrs  K-Afful  went  through  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  She made the following submissions.  First, the  issue  before
    the judge was whether the Appellant had  used  deception  in  his  2009
    application and whether that deception was used dishonestly.  The  case
    of AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 was clear that dishonesty had  been
    expressly proved by the Respondent Secretary  of  State.   Second,  the
    judge erred by making a material factual error.   Reliance  was  placed
    upon Nixon [2014] UKUT 00368.  The judge assumed that the  parties  had
    chosen to live separately as a matter of choice.  She was wrong in this
    because the judge failed to appreciate  that  the  applicant  had  been
    banned from the UK since 2009  for  ten  years  on  grounds  of  having
    exercised deception and all his subsequent applications were refused on
    that basis.  This was not separation by choice.   It  was  an  enforced
    separation.  It was accordingly, a material factual error.  Third,  the
    judge misdirected herself in relation to Article 8 because she ought to
    have considered Article  8  ECHR  outside  the  Rules  given  that  the
    Immigration Rules are not a complete code and the proportionality  test
    will be at large in a case such as the present.   Fourth,  the  judge's
    reasoning in relation to the best interest of the child was contrary to
    established principles on child law.  The cases of LD (Zimbabwe) [2010]
    UKUT 278 and Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 was clear in this respect.

17. For his part, Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   He
    submitted  that  there  was  no  material  error.   He  said  that  the
    materiality of any error by the judge was simply not strong enough.  If
    anything, the judge had gone on to dismiss the appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under  human  rights  grounds,  when,  given  the
    nature of the decision and the refusal,  all  that  was  needed  was  a
    consideration under the  Immigration  Rules.   Nevertheless,  the  fact
    remained that in 2009 and 2011 the  Appellant  was  refused  and  never
    chose to appeal.  There was no evidence which could have persuaded  the
    judge that this was an Appellant who had been honest.  First, the judge
    was not satisfied that the applicant was only coming  to  this  country
    for a short period.  Second, she was not satisfied that her decision to
    refuse  was  relevant  to  Article  8   proportionality   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, given that the Appellant's interest  was  simply  to
    visit for two weeks, in circumstances where he  had  been  barred  from
    entering the UK, and  had  lived  separately  from  his  wife  for  the
    majority of their married life.  Finally, as far as Section 55  of  the
    BCIA was concerned the judge expressly considered this at paragraph  25
    and did so in relation to the facts that she had already found.

18. In reply, Mrs K-Afful submitted that the judge should  have  considered
    Article 8 jurisprudence outside the Immigration Rules even if  she  had
    already decided to refuse the application under the Immigration Rules.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  the  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20. This is a case where the Appellant had been refused in 2009  and  2011.
    It was known to the Appellant why he had been refused.  At the  hearing
    before Judge Pacey  it  had  been  argued  that  a  copy  of  the  2009
    application and  the  refusal  was  not  provided  to  the  Appellant's
    representative.  The judge dismissed this contention on the basis  that
    it was the Appellant's own application and he would have known what  he
    had put in it.  Given the two previous refusals, which were in relation
    to the Appellant having exercised deception  in  the  past,  the  judge
    concluded that, "The Respondent has therefore discharged the burden  of
    proof" (paragraph  13).   The  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  this
    conclusion on the basis of the evidence that was before her, which  she
    had clearly highlighted fully.  I agree with the Respondent's  Rule  24
    response that, "It is close to perverse for the Appellant to  now  seek
    to rely on AA and assert that his dishonesty is not  established"  (see
    paragraph 4).

21. Second, as far as Article 8  was  concerned  the  parties  were  living
    separately from each other, and had done so for the majority  of  their
    life, and the Appellant's Article 8 right was simply in relation  to  a
    visit visa application for two weeks, which the Respondent had rejected
    because the Respondent did not believe this to be a genuine visit,  and
    unless there was anything further, which  needed  consideration,  which
    could not  be  properly  considered  through  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the  judge  was  under  no  obligation  to  consider
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence, because  the  result  would  have
    been the same.  It is not as if Article 8 has not  been  considered  at
    all.

22. Third, in relation to the Section 55 jurisdiction for the  welfare  and
    best interest  of  the  child,  the  judge  plainly  makes  an  express
    reference to this and considers this in the context  of  the  facts  as
    already found.  In short, the determination of the judge is  clear  and
    comprehensive and there is simply no basis for the  challenge  to  this
    decision, notwithstanding Mrs K-Afful's valiant efforts to persuade  me
    otherwise.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th February 2016



