
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01287/2014
     VA/01288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2014                               |On 28 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MRS DEEPA
                              Mr DAVINDER KUMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Y Budhirajy, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant and Mrs Deepa and Mr Kumar  the
    respondents but it is convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellants'  appeals  against
    refusal of entry clearance to them as visitors were allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Waygood ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on
    12 December 2014.  The judge found as a fact that the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules ("the rules") in paragraph 41 were met  and  took
    this finding into account in an Article 8 assessment.   He  also  found
    that the appellants enjoyed close family relationships with  their  son
    and sponsor, Mr Y Budhirajy and with their daughter-in-law  (his  wife)
    and grandchildren.

2.    In his Article 8 assessment, the  judge  took  into  account  guidance
    given in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 and other
    authorities.  In the particular circumstances of the case, having found
    that Article 8 was engaged, he came to the conclusion that  refusal  of
    entry clearance  amounted  to  a  disproportionate  response.   In  his
    weighing of the competing factors, he had regard to section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge made a material misdirection of law.  Refusal  of  entry
    clearance did not interfere with the family lives of the appellants and
    Article 8 was not engaged.  The existing pattern of contact between the
    appellants and their relatives here could  be  continued  by  means  of
    telephone  calls   and   Skype   messaging.     In   any   event,   the
    proportionality assessment was inadequate and there was no  explanation
    why the refusal of a visa amounted to a  disproportionate  interference
    with Article 8 rights.  The judge did not  consider  that  the  sponsor
    might visit the appellants in India or in a third country.

4.   In a rule 24 response prepared by  the  appellants'  solicitors  on  19
    March 2015 reliance was placed upon Mostafa [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC).
    The judge did not materially err.  On the contrary, his  reasoning  was
    consisted with guidance given in that case.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   At the outset,  I  explained  to  Mr  Budhirajy  the  procedure  to  be
    followed. He confirmed  that  he  understood  that  he  would  have  an
    opportunity to respond to Mr Walker's submissions, made  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

6.   Mr Walker said that the rule 24  response  unsurprisingly  referred  to
    Mostafa.  It was fair to  say  that  the  judge's  approach  led  to  a
    conclusion similar to the one reached  by  the  Presidential  Panel  in
    Mostafa.  The appellants had not overstayed their visas  in  the  past.
    The Secretary of State contended that the  appeals ought  not  to  have
    been allowed and that the proportionality assessment was not  adequate.
    On the other hand, the judge clearly had considered Article 8  in  some
    detail.

7.   Mr Budhirajy said that the family was  tightly  knit.   He  wanted  his
    parents to visit and then return to India.  They  had  visited  in  the
    past and not overstayed. The processes were very lengthy and  nearly  a
    year had passed since the applications for entry clearance.  The family
    had wished to make a fresh application and  were  told  that  this  was
    possible but, on the other hand, that a fresh application would only be
    accepted if the appeals were withdrawn.  Mr  Budhirajy  said  that  his
    wife was expecting a child in July 2015.

8.   Mr Walker had nothing to add to  his  submissions  or  to  the  written
    grounds.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The decision was promulgated in mid-December  2014,  about  two  months
    before the Presidential Panel's  decision  in  Mostafa  came  into  the
    public domain.  The judge appears to have anticipated the reasoning  in
    Mostafa, in concluding that whether the requirements  of  paragraph  41
    are met or not is not the determinative question,  although  a  finding
    that those requirements are met may be relevant in  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  He put emphasis on the strength of  the  family  life
    claimed to exist between the claimants and their sponsor here.

10.  The decision is very detailed and contains summaries  of  the  evidence
    heard by the judge and the submissions made by the appellant's  counsel
    and the Presenting Officer.  It is clear that the judge's finding  that
    the appellants and their sponsor and his family together enjoyed  close
    family life ties was open to him. The grounds fail to show any error of
    law in this regard. As the judge  followed  the  approach  in  Mostafa,
    presciently, he did not err in taking into account the requirements  of
    the immigration rules and, again, I find that his factual finding  that
    the requirements were met was open to him.  He went on to find that the
    appellants' human rights were engaged.  Again, that will not always  be
    the case in family visit appeals but the grounds fail  to  identify  an
    error of law here.

11.  In Mostafa, the Presidential Panel held that it would only be  in  very
    unusual circumstances that a person other than a close  relative  would
    be able to show that refusal of entry clearance comes within the  scope
    of Article 8(1).   In practical terms, this is likely to be limited  to
    cases where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close
    life partners or parent and minor child, and even then Article  8  will
    not necessarily be engaged in cases where the proposed visit  is  based
    on a whim or will not add significantly to the  time  that  the  people
    involved spend together.  The relationships in  issue  in  the  present
    appeal are not those of husband and wife or parent and minor child.  As
    noted earlier, however, the judge made a  particular  finding  of  fact
    that the relationships between the appellants and their relatives  here
    were close.  He took into account the  frequency  of  visits  over  the
    years.  I find that he did not materially err in law  in  finding  that
    Article 8 was engaged, in the light of his findings of fact.

12.  In the grounds, the proportionality assessment is criticised  as  being
    insufficient.  In particular,  it  is  said  that  the  judge  gave  no
    consideration to a possible visit by the sponsor to the  appellants  in
    India or a third country.  In fact, the judge did consider this  point,
    for example in paragraph 41, where he took into account  evidence  from
    the sponsor that visits to India would be  difficult  because  of  work
    commitments and the young age of the grandchildren. The judge  did  not
    treat this aspect as determinative, which would no doubt have  been  an
    error, but it was clearly material and he took it into account  in  his
    overall assessment.  Having  found  that  Article  8  was  engaged,  he
    weighed the competing interests at paragraphs 43 to 51.  The  balancing
    exercise has been  carefully conducted and is thorough.    The  grounds
    do not identify any error of law here.   Again,  the  judge's  approach
    appears to be on all fours with the Presidential  Panel's  analysis  in
    Mostafa.

13.  In summary, although a different conclusion may well have been  reached
    by a different judge, the overall finding that the appeal  fell  to  be
    allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  was  supported  by  a  cogent   prior
    assessment.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    material error of law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed        Date 7 April 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
    occasion.



Signed        Date 7 April 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

