

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/01197/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2014                          |On 01 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between
                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, WARSAW

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                TATIANA ALICI
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    no representation

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the  rest
       of this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The case has a history of confusion, which has been  contributed  to
       by both sides.

    3. The appellant applied for entry clearance as a visitor.   By  notice
       dated 4 January 2013, the ECO refused that application.  It  may  be
       observed in passing that  the  reasons  given  appear  rather  over-
       suspicious, particularly as similar  previous  applications  by  the
       appellant had been granted.

    4. The appellant appealed (or purported to appeal)  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  She did not ask for  an  oral  hearing.    Judge  J  D  L
       Edwards purported to allow her appeal after  consideration  "on  the
       papers" by determination dated 25 October 2013.


    5. The ECO appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  the
       determination is self-contradictory and lacks reasoning.

    6. The case came before Vice President Ockelton and UT Judge  Deans  on
       18 July 2014.   In a notice dated 22 August 2014, signed by the Vice
       President, the UT said that the ECO's grounds on their face appeared
       to make a reasonable criticism, and that "... a judgment which makes
       no reference to the facts on which it is based  or  to  any  lasting
       concerns  of  the  other  party  is  unlikely  to  be  regarded   as
       professional by any standards."  However, for reasons  explained  in
       the notice, unless withdrawn by the ECO the case was to be relisted.

    7. On 30 September 2014 Mr  Matthews  pointed  out  that  the  original
       decision was one which carries a right of appeal on human rights and
       racial discrimination grounds only, and no such grounds had been put
       forward, or could rationally be said to arise.  He acknowledged that
       the ECO's refusal reasons were not strong, but that was  beside  the
       point.

    8. The submission by Mr Matthews is correct.  The "appeal" to the First-
       tier Tribunal should not have been accepted as  such.   Having  been
       put before Judge Edwards for decision, a notice of no  valid  appeal
       ought to have been issued.  The point has  been  noticed  only  very
       late in proceedings, but as it goes fundamentally  to  jurisdiction,
       it must now be given effect.   The  appropriate  mechanism  at  this
       stage is to allow the ECO's appeal to the UT, to set aside the First-
       tier Tribunal determination, and to substitute a decision dismissing
       the appeal, as originally brought by Mrs  Alici  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    9. The failure of these proceedings should not be held  as  adverse  to
       any further entry clearance or  other  immigration  application  Mrs
       Alici may make.


                               [pic]
                                30 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


