
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  VA/01478/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Wednesday 28 September 2016       |On Tuesday 26 October 2016           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MR GUENDOUZI HAMZA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PARIS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Jein solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Thanki   promulgated  on  9  March  2016  ("the   Decision")
         dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's  decision  dated  20
         January  2015  to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  as   a   visitor.
         Permission to appeal the Decision was granted on 15 August 2016  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on the basis that  it  was  arguable
         that the Judge erred in refusing the Appellant's application for an
         adjournment.  The adjournment was sought  on  the  basis  that  the
         Appellant's "sponsor" was unable to attend the  hearing  due  to  a
         family emergency which required him  to  return  to  Algeria.   The
         matter comes before me to determine whether the First-Tier Tribunal
         Decision involved the making of a material error of law and,  if  I
         so find, to re-make the decision or  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for redetermination.

      2. The Appellant is a national of Algeria who applied to enter the  UK
         as a visitor for a period of eight days.  The purpose of the  visit
         was stated in the application form to be  to  "visit  some  tourist
         attractions visit some museums and galleries spend one or two  days
         with my brother".  The address given in the  application  form  for
         where he would stay in the  UK  was  an  address  in  Ilford.   The
         address given for his brother  is  a  different  address.   In  the
         application form, the Appellant clearly stated that he  was  paying
         for the trip himself.  He answered no to the question at Q65 of the
         application form ("Is someone other than you paying for  all  or  a
         part of your trip?").

      3. The Appellant's application was refused on the basis that, although
         he had mentioned that he was refused entry clearance as  a  student
         in 2009, he had failed to mention that he was  also  refused  entry
         clearance in 2008.  That omission was  said  to  have  damaged  his
         credibility.  In  addition,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  the
         statement of the Appellant's means which was not  substantiated  by
         independent documentation.   The bank statements produced showed  a
         large deposit, the provenance  of  which  was  not  clear  and  the
         Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  could  afford  the
         cost of  the  visit.   The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
         Appellant would leave at the end of his visit and  found  therefore
         that he was not a genuine visitor and could not satisfy the Rules.

      4. The Appellant's appeal was a limited one.  He could have challenged
         the Respondent's decision generally  by  way  of  judicial  review.
         However, in his appeal, the only ground available to him was on the
         basis that the refusal decision breached his human rights by reason
         of section 84(1)(c) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         ("the 2002 Act").  That could relate only in the  circumstances  to
         Article 8 ECHR.   In addition, by section 85A(2) of the  2002  Act,
         the Judge could have regard only to circumstances  appertaining  at
         the date of the Respondent's decision.

      5. The Appellant was represented in his appeal by  the  same  firm  of
         solicitors as continue to represent him now.  As the Judge noted at
         [10] of the  Decision,  the  Appellant  via  his  brother  and  his
         solicitors were notified of the hearing date of 19 February 2016 on
         28 August 2015.  In  spite  of  that,  as  noted  at  [15]  of  the
         Decision, the Appellant's solicitors had failed to supply an appeal
         bundle.  There was no witness statement from either  the  Appellant
         or the Appellant's brother in spite of the solicitors having nearly
         six months to prepare for the hearing.

    The adjournment

      6. The adjournment was sought by letter dated 17 February  2016.   The
         reason for the adjournment was the  inability  of  the  Appellant's
         brother to attend the hearing.  The letter stated as follows:-

             "Please note that our client's appeal has been  listed  to  be
             heard on the 19th February 2016.  Unfortunately,  the  Sponsor
             of our client Mr Guendouzi Sidali had to travel as a matter of
             urgency due to a family emergency.  Therefore the  Sponsor  is
             currently out of town and unable to attend the hearing on 19th
             February 2016.  The Sponsor is away  until  the  situation  is
             resolved.

             In the above circumstances, under compelling and compassionate
             circumstances we humbly request  the  tribunal  exercises  its
             description [sic] in  our  client's  favour  and  adjourn  the
             appeal."

      7.  The adjournment request was refused.  The solicitors then followed
         this up with another letter dated 18 February 2016 which  reads  as
         follows:-

             "Please  note  the  fact  that  due  to  privacy  reasons  and
             sensitive nature of the family issues,  we  are  reluctant  in
             finding out the nature of the family issues from  the  sponsor
             in detail.

             Furthermore the sponsor of the appellant is returning  to  the
             United Kingdom on Monday.  We  have  forwarded  the  sponsor's
             return air ticket"

         I note that the air ticket does not appear to have been attached to
         the letter.  The adjournment request was reiterated.

      8. There was no response from the Tribunal to that second  adjournment
         request prior to the start of the hearing.  In spite  of  that  the
         solicitors did not attend nor send along a barrister  to  represent
         the Appellant.  It was said by Mr Solomon in submissions to me that
         this was because the solicitors were without funds.  However,  that
         did not form any part of the request for the  adjournment  and  the
         solicitors appear to have understood themselves to continue  to  be
         instructed by and to represent the Appellant.  They did not seek to
         come off the record.  An  adjournment  having  been  refused,  they
         should have attended the hearing.

      9. The Judge at the outset  caused  enquiries  to  be  made  of  those
         solicitors who confirmed that the sponsor was currently abroad  and
         would be returning on Monday.  The solicitor with whom the Tribunal
         clerk spoke indicated that no-one could attend  the  hearing,  that
         the solicitors were still instructed but not funded.

     10. The Judge noted at [11] to [13] of the Decision the  background  to
         the adjournment request.  He applied the correct rule  at  [14]  of
         the Decision (rule 28) - the relevant test being whether it was  in
         the interests of justice to proceed in the Appellant's absence.  He
         noted at [15]  Rule  2  of  the  2014  Rules  which  sets  out  the
         overriding objective and the obligation to deal with  cases  fairly
         and justly.  He reiterated his concern that the Appellant  and  his
         solicitors had been given a number of months to provide evidence to
         the Tribunal which they had singularly failed to do.   Although  he
         noted that the Appellant's brother was to return to the UK  on  the
         following Monday, he was unable to  establish  that  the  Appellant
         would be in a position  to  proceed  for  any  subsequent  hearing,
         taking into account particularly the failure  to  provide  evidence
         and the solicitor's indication that they were without  funds.   The
         Judge therefore resolved to determine the matter in the Appellant's
         absence.

    Submissions

     11.  Mr  Solomon  directed  my  attention  to  the  case   of   Nwaigwe
         (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  and  the  headnote
         thereto as follows:-

             "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,
             such decision could in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in
             several respects: these include a failure to take into account
             all    material    considerations;    permitting    immaterial
             considerations to intrude; denying the party a  fair  hearing;
             failing to apply the correct test;  and  acting  irrationally.
             In practice, in most cases the question will  be  whether  the
             refusal deprived the affected party of his  right  to  a  fair
             hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on
             fairness grounds,  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness: was there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

     12. Mr Solomon focussed squarely on the question of  fairness,  as  did
         the grant of permission.  The  question  for  me  was  whether,  by
         refusing to adjourn on the basis that the Appellant's  brother  was
         unable to attend, the Judge had deprived the Appellant  of  a  fair
         hearing.  The Appellant's brother was present at the hearing before
         me and ready to proceed with the appeal.  The adjournment  was  the
         first sought and there  was  no  prejudice  to  the  Respondent  in
         adjourning.  He pointed to the bundle of documents  which  has  now
         been submitted by the solicitors.

     13. I asked Mr Solomon what difference the presence of the  Appellant's
         brother could have made if he had attended (bearing  in  mind  that
         his absence was the only reason given for the adjournment  sought).
         Although there is now a witness statement from both the Appellant's
         brother and the Appellant himself, neither of those were  available
         before the Judge.  The basis of the Respondent's refusal  also  had
         nothing to do with the Appellant's brother; this  was  not  a  case
         where the Appellant's brother was paying for the  visit  and  where
         his own circumstances were at issue.  The crucial evidence was that
         of the Appellant himself.  Mr Solomon was unable  to  point  me  to
         anything specifically, although in reply he  did  submit  that  the
         brother's  evidence  could  corroborate  the  genuineness  of   the
         Appellant's visit.  He simply submitted that  the  Appellant  would
         have had someone there on his behalf had his brother been  able  to
         attend.  The same though is true of the position if his  solicitors
         had attended.  It appears that they were unable to  do  so  because
         they were not funded.  However, that was a  matter  for  which  the
         Judge (and I) had no explanation and it did not form the  basis  of
         the adjournment request.

     14. I also directed Mr Solomon's attention to the very limited ambit of
         the  appeal  particularly  since  the   matters   raised   in   the
         Respondent's refusal and with which issue was taken in the  witness
         statements now before me went to the question  of  the  Appellant's
         compliance with the Rules.  There was no ground of appeal available
         to  the  Appellant  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
         accordance with  the  law  or  the  immigration  rules.   The  only
         available ground was that the Respondent's  decision  breached  the
         Appellant's Article 8 rights and the evidence did not appear to  be
         directed at that issue.  Mr Solomon submitted that the question  of
         whether the Appellant is a genuine visitor  had  to  be  approached
         through the lens of Article 8.  He directed  my  attention  to  the
         cases of Mostapha (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112
         (IAC) and Abbassi and another (visits - bereavement  -  Article  8)
         [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC).

     15. Mr Tarlow submitted that Mr Solomon was approaching the  lawfulness
         of  the  Decision  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight.    From   the
         perspective of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  he  was  aware  that
         there was no  bundle  from  the  Appellant,  that  the  Appellant's
         solicitors were without funds and that the Appellant's brother  was
         not present.  Those were all matters which the Judge  was  entitled
         to take into account when determining whether the appeal  would  be
         able to  proceed  on  a  future  occasion  if  he  acceded  to  the
         adjournment request.  That was relevant to determining  whether  to
         proceed with the appeal hearing in the absence of  the  Appellant's
         brother would be unfair to the Appellant.

     16. Both representatives accepted that, if I found an error of law  and
         the error was material so that the Decision had to  be  set  aside,
         the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
         making.

    Discussion and conclusions

     17. I accept Mr Solomon's submission that the issue for  me,  based  on
         Nwaigwe is whether  the  refusal  to  adjourn  had  the  effect  of
         depriving the Appellant of a fair hearing.  In circumstances  where
         I now have the benefit of the evidence on which the Appellant would
         have relied if his appeal bundle had been before the Judge, if  his
         brother (and/or  his  solicitors)  had  been  present  and  if  the
         adjournment had been granted, it becomes much easier  to  determine
         this issue than it was for the Judge at the stage when he made  the
         Decision.

     18. When determining the question whether the adjournment  refusal  has
         deprived the Appellant  of  a  fair  hearing,  it  is  relevant  to
         consider the nature of this appeal.  The only ground  available  to
         the Appellant is that the refusal of entry clearance  breaches  his
         Article 8 rights.

     19. I have read carefully  the  cases  to  which  Mr  Solomon  drew  my
         attention.  Those set out the  principle  that  Article  8  can  be
         engaged in entry clearance cases and that, if it is,  the  question
         of whether a person can meet the requirement  of  the  Rules  is  a
         relevant factor to the issue of proportionality.  However,  as  the
         case of Abbassi makes clear, the question of whether Article  8  is
         engaged in the first place depends on "the fact  sensitive  context
         of the particular case".  In that case, Article 8 was engaged by  a
         visit  intended  to  allow  the  Appellants  to  mourn   at   their
         grandparents' graves which were in the UK with  their  family  also
         based in the UK.  In  Mostafa  the  circumstances  were  a  husband
         seeking to visit his British citizen wife. However, in Adjei (visit
         visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC), the Tribunal made  clear
         that the prior question is whether Article 8  is  engaged  at  all.
         The headnote reads as follows (so far as relevant):-

             "The first question to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all.  If it is not, which will not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  rules  and
             should not do so.  If article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition".

     20. The factual circumstances in Adjei could not be more different than
         the present case.  That case concerned a person  seeking  to  visit
         her father, stepmother and step-sibling with whom she had lived  as
         a family unit until 1994.   That  visit  was  the  purpose  of  the
         application for entry clearance.  Nonetheless, on the facts of that
         case, the Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant had shown ties
         of a kind which would even engage Article 8.  Compliance  with  the
         Rules as a visitor simply did not become relevant.

     21. In this case, the position is even starker.  The Appellant seeks to
         enter for a visit of approximately one week.  He intends to come as
         a tourist and whilst he says that he would spend a couple  of  days
         with his brother, he was not proposing to stay with his brother but
         rather would stay in a hotel and the Appellant was himself  funding
         the visit; it is not a  case  where  the  Appellant's  brother  was
         funding the visit so that the siblings could spend  time  together.
         Even if it were, it is doubtful that Article 8  would  be  engaged.
         As it is, the Appellant's case on these facts comes  nowhere  close
         to showing an engagement of his and his brother's Article 8 rights.
           Nor is there any attempt in the witness statements now before  me
         to put forward any positive case based on either the Appellant's or
         his brother's human rights.

     22. For those reasons, it is inconceivable that  the  Appellant's  case
         could have succeeded on the only ground which was available to him.
          Whatever his brother might or might not have said,  based  on  the
         nature of the application and  the  statement  of  the  Appellant's
         intentions at that time (which were  the  only  matters  which  the
         Judge could consider as this was an entry clearance appeal), it  is
         inconceivable that the Judge could have found that  Article  8  was
         engaged. The Appellant was not therefore deprived of a fair hearing
         by the refusal to adjourn.  His case could not have benefitted from
         the presence of his brother because, in reality, on its facts,  his
         appeal could not succeed on the only ground which was available  to
         him.

     23. I note as an aside that the Judge has erred in finding at  [22]  to
         [23] of the Decision that the Appellant's grounds  in  relation  to
         whether the Respondent's decision was in accordance with the law or
         the Rules should be dismissed.  Those were not  grounds  of  appeal
         available to the Appellant (as the Judge has  rightly  observed  at
         [6] of the Decision).  Accordingly, the Judge should not have  gone
         on to determine those grounds but should have found that there  was
         no right of appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  on  those
         grounds.  However, that error of law is not material and could  not
         avail the Appellant.  As I have already noted,  on  the  facts  and
         evidence in this case, the only possible outcome on the only ground
         available to the Appellant was that Article 8 was not even engaged.



     24. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the refusal  to  adjourn
         was not such as to deprive the Appellant of the  right  to  a  fair
         hearing for the simple  reason  that  the  only  issue  which  that
         hearing could have determined  was  one  which  would  be  entirely
         unaffected by the presence or absence of the  Appellant's  brother,
         bearing in mind the purpose of the Appellant's visit as  stated  in
         the application for entry clearance.  In the alternative, even if I
         had found an error of law in the  Judge's  refusal  to  adjourn,  I
         would not have set aside the Decision.  As already noted, the  only
         ground available to the Appellant is  that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance breached his Article 8 rights.  On the evidence which  is
         now before me, and the purpose of the entry  clearance  application
         (to come to the UK as a tourist albeit including spending a  couple
         of days with his brother), a challenge on that basis could not  get
         off the ground.

     25.  If  the  Appellant  wished  to  challenge  the  substance  of  the
         Respondent's decision under the  Rules,  his  remedy  was  to  seek
         judicial review.  As noted in  the  headnote  in  Adjei,  in  which
         similar circumstances arose as in this case, any findings  of  fact
         made by the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal appeal should  not  be
         considered as binding.   The  Judge  should  not  have  made  those
         findings at all in the circumstances of this case.

     26. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no material
         error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 9 March  2016  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal is dismissed.

Signed            [pic]    Date   24 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
