
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01753/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 October 2016                 |On 24 October 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                      SEYED ALI AYATOLLAH ZADEH SHIRAZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCEOFFICER -Kuwait
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, solicitor Advocate instructed by Aman
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Pacey promulgated on  24  March  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 12 June 2008 and is a national of Iran.

4. On 17 February 2015 the Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application
for a visit visa.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Pacey ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 30 August  2016  Judge  Fisher  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3.  In her decision, the Judge correctly  reminded  herself  that  the
    right of appeal was limited to section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
    It is arguable that she then erred in directing herself that there  had
    to be compelling circumstances before article 8 was engaged at all.  In
    paragraph 11 of her decision, she  refers  to  the  decision  in  Adjei
    [2015] UKUT 261, but it is arguable that she  failed  to  give  initial
    consideration to the issue of whether article 8 was engaged.  There  is
    some tension between paragraph 2  of  the  decision,  where  the  Judge
    stated that the appeal  proceeded  by  way  of  submissions  only,  and
    paragraph 20, where the Judge makes reference to the sponsor's evidence
    at the hearing. It is arguable that consideration  of  the  first  four
    Razgar questions in paragraph 24 of the decision is inadequate."


The Hearing

7. (a) For the appellant, Mr Ali moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told  me
that at [12] the Judge materially erred in law by misinterpreting the  ratio
of SS Congo and finding that compelling  circumstances  must  be  identified
for article 8 to be engaged. He told me that  the  Judge  has  confused  the
test which applies in appeals  relating  to  leave  to  remain  outside  the
immigration rules, and this case  relates  to  a  visit  visa  with  limited
rights of appeal.

(b) Mr Ali told me that at [19] of  the  decision  the  Judge  records  that
counsel representing the appellant at the First-tier did not pursue  a  line
of argument, when counsel insists that the line of argument was pursued.  Mr
Ali told  me  that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  evidence  and
submissions, and provides no reasons for rejecting those submissions.

(c) Mr Ali then took me to [20] of the decision,  where  the  Judge  records
that the sponsor was present and gave evidence, when  in  fact  the  sponsor
was not present  &  the  case  proceeded  on  submissions  only  (which  was
correctly recorded at [2] of the decision)  he  told  me  that  the  Judge's
error is indicative of a lack of care and indicates that the  appellant  did
not have a fair hearing.

(d) Mr Ali then moved to [22] of the decision and told  me  that  there  the
Judge failed to take account of evidence placed before her and  proceeds  on
an assumption, rather than on evidence-based fact-finding. He then  took  me
to [24] and told me that there is a conflict between [24] and [12]. At  [12]
of the decision the Judge says that article 8 is not  engaged,  a  [24]  the
Judge jumps straight to the last of the Razgar questions.

(e) Mr Ali told me that the decision was undermined by a series of  material
errors in law. He asked me to set the decision aside.

8. (a) For the respondent Mr Bramble  told  me  that  the  majority  of  the
points plead by the appellant amount to  little  more  than  a  disagreement
with the facts as the Judge found them to be.  He  did,  however,  say  that
there might be some force in the criticisms of self-direction  contained  in
[12] of the decision. He did not concede the appeal, but said  that  of  all
the points made by the appellant that was the strongest. He told me that  if
I was to find that the Judge has applied the wrong test, then that would  be
a material error of law requiring the decision to be set aside.

(b) Mr Bramble told me that the was no substance in  the  remaining  grounds
of appeal. He argued that the decision would read better if the  Judge  made
it clear that her finding was that article 8 was not  engaged  and,  in  the
alternative (if it was  engaged)  then  the  respondent's  decision  is  not
disproportionate, however a fair reading  of  the  decision  indicates  that
that is what the Judge's findings were - even  though  she  has  spread  the
findings across 12 paragraphs rather than  concisely  stating  the  findings
before discussing the merits of the case.

(c) Mr Bramble urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

9. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112  (IAC)  it  was
held that in appeals against refusal of entry clearance under  Article,  the
claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules is not the  question  to
be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of  being  a  weighty,  though
not  determinative,  factor  when   deciding   whether   such   refusal   is
proportionate to the legitimate aim of  enforcing  immigration  control.  At
paragraph 9 it was said that where the ground of appeal is limited to  human
rights

    "Clearly there can be no question of entertaining an appeal on  grounds
    alleging that the decision was not in accordance with the  law  or  the
    immigration rules. These are not permissible grounds. However if ...the
    claimant has shown that refusing him entry ... does interfere with  his
    ...family life then it will be necessary to assess the evidence to  see
    if the claimant meets the substance of the rules.  This  is  because...
    the ability to satisfy the rules illuminates the proportionality of the
    decision to refuse him entry clearance"

10. In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)  it  was  held
that (i) The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal  to
grant entry clearance as a visitor  where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is  not,
which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction
to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules  and
should not do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at
the extent to which the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
balancing exercise that must follow. Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)
[2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any  contrary  proposition;  (ii)
As compliance with para 41 of HC 395  is  not  a  ground  of  appeal  to  be
decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning  that  will  carry  little
weight, especially if based upon arguments advanced only by  the  appellant.
If the appellant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the
ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard to the assessment  carried  out
by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to treat the  appellant
as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
requirements of paragraph 41.

11. In Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 was held  that  (i)
In visit appeals the Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot  be  made  in  a
vacuum.   Whilst  judges  only  have  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  the
decision is unlawful under s.6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (or  shows
unlawful discrimination) (see Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]
UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit  visas  -  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  0261
(IAC)), the starting-point for deciding  that  must  be  the  state  of  the
evidence  about  the  appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  requirements   of
paragraph 41 of the immigration  rules;  (ii)  The  restriction  in  visitor
cases of grounds of appeal to human rights does not  mean  that  judges  are
relieved of  their  ordinary  duties  of  fact-finding  or  that  they  must
approach these in a qualitatively  different  way.  Where  relevant  to  the
Article 8 assessment, disputes as to the facts must be  resolved  by  taking
into account the evidence on both sides: see Adjei at [10] bearing  in  mind
that the burden of proof rests on the appellant; (iii) Unless  an  appellant
can show that there are individual interests at stake covered by  Article  8
"of a particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise to  a  "strong  claim
that compelling circumstances may exist to justify the  grant  of  leave  to
enter outside the rules": (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  at  [40]  and
[56]) he or she is exceedingly unlikely to succeed.  That  proposition  must
also hold good in visitor appeals.

12.  The self-direction set out at  [12]  of  the  decision  is  wrong.  The
passage form SS (Congo)  quoted  by  the  Judge  there  relates  to  appeals
against refusal of leave to  remain  in  the  UK  out-with  the  Immigration
Rules. This case concerns an application for entry  clearance  as  a  family
visitor. It was incumbent ton the Judge to consider whether or  not  article
8 ECHR is engaged. I have to decide whether or not that error of  law  is  a
material error of law.

13. At [11] the Judge sets out a correct self-direction, relying  on  Adjei.
A fair reading of the decision shows that  there  is  no  damaging  conflict
between [11] & [12]. In reality, the Judge poses  the  correct  question  in
law at [11], and then starts to answer that question in [12].  The  decision
would be clearer if the Judge had repeated headnote (iii) of Adjei at [12]

    "Unless an appellant can show that there are  individual  interests  at
    stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as to
    give rise to a "strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist to
    justify the grant of leave to enter outside the rules": (see SS (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]) he or she is exceedingly unlikely
    to succeed.  That proposition must also hold good in visitor appeals."

14. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the correct legal  test
has been applied, and that the Judge has found in fact  that  in  this  case
article 8 ECHR is not engaged.

15. The remaining criticisms of the decision do not set out material  errors
of law. It is clear that the Judge has carelessly recorded that the  sponsor
gave evidence at the hearing  ([20]  of  the  decision)  despite  accurately
recording at [2] that

    "The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only."

16. [20] contains an inaccuracy, but that is not a material  error  in  law,
as it does not affect the Judge's decision. It is  clear  from  an  holistic
reading of the decision that the  Judge  took  account  of  the  documentary
evidence and the submissions. It is not argued that there is any  inaccuracy
in the interpretation of the evidence placed before the Judge, so  that  the
careless slip which screams out from [20] does not taint the decision.

17. Counsel for the appellant disagrees with the Judge's recording  at  [19]
that a submission was not pursued. That disagreement does  not  establish  a
material error of law, because it is clear that,  whether  pursued  or  not,
the Judge considered the submission before dismissing it.

18. It is argued that the Judge failed  to  take  account  of  s.55  of  the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The appellant is a child.  It
is clear from the decision that the Judge knew  she  was  dealing  with  the
application of a child. The Judge narrates the appellant's  date  of  birth,
and accurately sets out his family relationships  and  the  purpose  of  his
visit.

19. In AJ (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department;  SP  (India)
v Secretary of State for the Home Department; EJ (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 the Court of Appeal  held
that provided that the substance of the decision makes  it  clear  that  the
interests of the child has been treated  as  a  primary  consideration  then
absence of specific reference to section 55 is not fatal.

20. The grounds of appeal touch on questions of fairness and  perversity.  A
full reading of the decision indicates that this  appeal  proceeded  on  the
documentary evidence and submissions. The documentary evidence was  analysed
by the Judge in the light of those submissions. There is  no  merit  in  the
plea that the appellant has not had a fair hearing.

21. In Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct  approach)  [2016]
UKUT 00028 the Tribunal held that  in  error  of  law  appeals  relating  to
findings of fact, the Upper Tribunal should apply the principles in Edwards
v Bairstow [1956] AC 14. In Edwards  v  Bairstow [1956]  AC  14  Viscount
Simonds said

    "For it is universally conceded that, although it is a pure finding  of
    fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have been stated in  various
    ways but are, I think, fairly  summarised  by  saying  that  the  court
    should take that course if it appears that the commissioners have acted
    without any evidence or upon a  view  of  the  facts  which  could  not
    reasonably be entertained."

22.  In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 Lord  Justice  Brooke  noted
that perversity represented a  very  high  hurdle.   It  embraced  decisions
which were irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

23. The decision is far from perfect. It contains a number of  errors,  but,
for the reasons  already  given,  I  find  that  those  errors,  even  taken
cumulatively, do not amount to a material error of law.

24. I  therefore  find  that,  although  brief  and  although  the  decision
contains errors, the decision is adequate because it focuses on the  central
area of dispute, there is no actual misdirection in  law,  and  the  Judge's
fact-finding exercise  is  sufficient.  The  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

25. As the decision does not contain a material error of law,  the  decision
stands and the appeal is dismissed.

CONCLUSION

26.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

27.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 20
October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

