
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/01680/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 14 November 2016             | On 14 December 2016            |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT ON BEHALF OF THE VISA
                             OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              JASMIN CHOWDHURY
                           REZA SALIQUR CHOWDHURY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sammad of Sammad & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Visa Officer against a judgment of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Birk, promulgated on the 20 May 2016  following
        a hearing at Birmingham, in which the appeal was allowed  on  human
        rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal in the following terms:


         4. I am satisfied, for the reasons set out in the grounds, that  it
         is arguable the Judge may have  materially  erred  in  relation  to
         whether compelling circumstances  existed  such  as  to  mean  that
         article 8 should even be considered, and whether  there  existed  a
         family life that went beyond electronic  communication.   Whilst  I
         have less sympathy with the final ground as the  family  appear  to
         meet the immigration rules, namely whether  temporary  interference
         with their family life whilst a  fresh  application  was  made  was
         proportionate to the need to retain the  integrity  of  immigration
         control, all grounds may be argued.

Background

     3. The appellants  are  a  husband  and  wife  who  are  nationals  of
        Bangladesh. They applied for a visa to enable them to enter the  UK
        for a period of six weeks to see their son. The date of the refusal
        is the 4 February 2015. The Visa  Officer  was  not  satisfied  the
        appellants has shown they met the requirements of paragraphs 41 (i)
        and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.
     4. The appellants appealed the decision asserting a breach their human
        rights.
     5. The Judge considered the written and oral evidence. Although  there
        is no right of appeal against the refusal under the Rules the Judge
        was entitled to consider  this  element  as  part  of  the  overall
        assessment, leading to the finding at [16] that:


         16. I find that both Appellants have very strong ties to Bangladesh
         in terms of financial support, family  including  a  daughter,  who
         reside with them.  I find that there is no evidence to suggest that
         the Appellants would not return after this family  visit.   I  find
         that all of the criteria in Paragraph 41 is met by the Appellants.


     6. The Judge thereafter  considered  the  Article  8  element  of  the
        appeal. The Judge found that family life recognised  by  Article  8
        existed and that it was  a  case  in  which  the  matter  warranted
        consideration as  a  result  of  the  medical  condition  of  their
        grandson who has been diagnosed with Autism. The  Judge  considered
        the proportionately of the decision and at [24-25] states:


         24. I find that there is no other reasonable or  realistic  way  of
         travelling to Bangladesh for him and his family  save  through  air
         flights.  I find  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  be
         contained and maintained on a plane for such a journey for  all  of
         those reasons identified by his class teacher in  this  letter.   I
         also find that  it  would  not  be  possible  for  his  parents  to
         contemplate leaving him and/or his sibling whilst they visited  the
         Appellants as this would not be a short trip for them. I find there
         is a significant interference with this family life and that  there
         is no other way for this family life to be  effectively  maintained
         without allowing the Appellants to enter the UK.  The  continuation
         of Skype or the phone is of limited value as a way  of  maintaining
         the familial bonds in light of the mental  health  conditions  that
         Zain suffers and that the most effective way  would  have  face  to
         face contact.  I find that there are no other  means  e.g.  writing
         letter and cards, which would assist  in  maintaining  this  family
         life.I do find that these re very unusual circumstances.


         25. Having balanced all of the relevant factors, I  find  that  the
         decision  to  refuse  the   Appellants   application   is   not   a
         proportionate one and that there is a real  risk  of  a  breach  of
         Article 8.


Error of law

     7. The Judge was considering the merits  of  the  appeal  outside  the
        Immigration Rules by reference to Article 8 ECHR. Settled  guidance
        for the way in which such an assessment should  be  undertaken  has
        been provided in  the  case  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   It  is
        necessary to considered the questions set out by  Lord  Bingham  in
        paragraph 17 of the judgement are which are:


         (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well- being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?


     8. The Judge refers at [6] to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        Kaur [2015] UKUT 487 which states that the  starting  point  in  an
        appeal of this nature is to consider the appellants ability to meet
        the Immigration Rules which it is said "may be highly  material  as
        to whether there is family life within the  meaning  of  Article  8
        and/or the issue of whether there are strong  family  life  reasons
        for the visit that are to be weighed in the balance pursuant to the
        issue of proportionality as explained in paragraphs 13-15,  27  and
        31".
     9. The Judge at [18] finds:


         "The  Appellants'  family  visit  includes  visiting  their   adult
         children and minor grandchildren.  As a central part of their visit
         they would visit their son, Mr Bodiuz Zaman who has a  son  ,  Zain
         Abbyan Zaman who is  aged  8  and  a  daughter  aged  1.  Zain  was
         diagnosed in 2012 as a child with Autism and severed  developmental
         delay.  Zain visited and stayed with the appellant in Bangladesh in
         2012 before he was diagnosed and since then he  has  been  able  to
         keep in touch and maintain his bond with his grandparents by way of
         Skype. I find that taking  into  account  the  case  of  Singh  and
         Another [2015] EWCA Civ 74  that this constitutes family  life  for
         the purposes of Article 8(1).  I find that the strongly  compelling
         circumstances that have been  identified  are  in  respect  to  the
         medical condition of their grandson whom they  wish  to  visit.   I
         find that this is not a situation or circumstance which is  covered
         by any of the Immigration Rules."


    10.  Whether family life recognised by Article 8 exists, as opposed  to
        family life per se, is a  question  of  fact.  Although  the  Judge
        refers to part of the judgement of the Upper Tribunal in Kaur there
        is a failure to consider other  relevant  parts  of  that  decision
        including, in particular, paragraph 39 where it is stated "We  bear
        in mind that ties between a parent and adult children or between  a
        grandparent and children will not as a rule constitute family  life
        for Article 8(1) purposes unless there is dependency over and above
        normal emotional ties: see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  and  Singh
        and Another [2015] EWCA Civ 74.
    11.  The Judge also appears to have found Article 8 family life  exists
        with the grandchild with no analysis of the  other  family  members
        positions, although this may not be a material issue.
    12.  Mr Bates also raised the lack of consideration of the  ability  to
        make  a  fresh  application  as   part   of   the   proportionality
        assessment.
    13.  The failure to properly consider whether family life recognised by
        Article 8 exists is a material error for this is at  the  heart  of
        the first of the Razgar questions.
    14.  The determination shall be set aside. The findings in relation  to
        the  circumstances  of  the  individual  family  members  are   not
        challenged. The decision shall be remade as follows.

Discussion


    15.  The Article 8 rights in issue are those of the UK based family  as
        they  are  within  the  territory  under  the  control  of  the  UK
        government. Those family are  identified  as  adult  non  dependant
        children and grandchildren one of whom has special needs.
    16.  It is suggested that the refusal of the visit visa interferes with
        any family life that exists. I  find  it  not  made  out  that  the
        refusal interferes with the current arrangements  as  there  is  no
        evidence the current indirect arrangements will have to change.  So
        far as these form the private life of the individuals concerned, it
        has not been shown the decision gives rise to consequences of  such
        gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8.
    17.  In relation to family life recognised by  Article  8  (1),  it  is
        accepted that it is not necessary for all the family to be  in  the
        same country as recognised in Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  INLR  170  in
        which it as said that it is not essential for members of  the  same
        family to be in the same country for family life  to  exist  albeit
        that Arden LJ thought that it would "probably be  exceptional"  for
        family life to exist in such circumstances.
    18.  Also in Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of  Appeal  said
        that, in order to establish family life, it is  necessary  to  show
        that there is a real committed or effective support or relationship
        between the family members and the normal emotional ties between  a
        mother and an adult son would not, without more, be enough.
    19.  In the more recent decision of Singh v Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 Sir  Stanley  Burnton  said  "I
        point out that the approach of the European  Commission  for  Human
        Rights  cited  approvingly  in  Kugathas  did   not   include   any
        requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on  the  facts.  The
        love and affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
        will not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to
        be something more.  A  young  adult  living  with  his  parents  or
        siblings will normally have a family life  to  be  respected  under
        Article 8. A child enjoying a family life with his parents does not
        suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight  as  he  turns  18
        years of age. On the other hand, a young adult living independently
        of his parents may well not have a family life for the purposes  of
        Article 8."
    20.  I find it has not been made out on the facts of this case that the
        nature of the relationship between the adult family members in  the
        UK and the appellants involves more than the normal emotional ties.
        Family life recognised by Article 8 has not been made  out  between
        the appellants and this group.
    21.  In relation to the grandchildren, there are a number  of  relevant
        cases such as Dasgupta (error of law -  proportionality  -  correct
        approach) [2016] UKUT 28 in which the First-tier Tribunals  finding
        that there was family life as  between  an  85  year  old  and  his
        daughter and two  grandchildren  of  17  and  16  was  upheld.  The
        Appellant in that case had visited his daughter's family in England
        almost annually since 2007 for periods of between  three  and  five
        months and had developed  a  strong  close  relationship  with  his
        grandchildren. The Upper Tribunal found that the  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal that there was a family life was  one  open  to
        the Tribunal although also noting that family life had not been  in
        dispute.
    22.  In Dasgupta the Tribunal held that the question of whether  there
        is family life in a child/grandchild context requires a finding  of
        something over and above normal emotional ties and will  invariably
        be intensely fact sensitive.
    23.  The fact the appellants' and their grandchildren  are  related  is
        not sufficient. In S v UK [1984] 40 DR 196 Sedley LJ made it  clear
        that "Neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
        ordinarily go with  them  are,  by  themselves  altogether,  in  my
        judgment enough to constitute family life. Most of  us  have  close
        relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or  who
        visit us, from time to time; but none of  us  would  say  on  those
        grounds alone that we have a family life with  them  in  any  sense
        capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8".
    24.  An example of when  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  a
        grandparent and grandchild was  found  to  amount  to  family  life
        recognised by Article 8 is the case of Dasgupta where it was  found
        at paragraph 14 "The unchallenged evidence is that by the  time  of
        the grandmother's death in 2007, a very close and loving  bond  had
        been established between  grandparents  and  grandchildren  through
        visits from India to the United  Kingdom  and  vice-versa,  coupled
        with family reunions in the  United  States,  where  the  sponsor's
        brother  resides;  since  2007  the  Appellant  has   visited   his
        daughter's family in England almost annually, each sojourn  lasting
        three - five months; the Appellant has developed a strong and close
        relationship with his grandchildren; and there are robust  ties  of
        mutual love and affection. In short, the  Appellant  has  gradually
        assumed a special position  in  the  lives  of  his  grandchildren.
        Simultaneously,  the  father/daughter  relationship   between   the
        Appellant  and  the   sponsor   has   continued   and   flourished,
        notwithstanding the factors of distance and marriage  and  has,  if
        anything, strengthened during recent years following the demise  of
        the  Appellant's  wife  and  in  conjunction  with  his   gradually
        deteriorating health.
    25.  In relation to the appellants grandchildren there is  no  evidence
        of such close ties, the  indirect  contact  and  occasional  family
        visits to see the appellants' being all that has occurred.
    26.  The Judge refers to the diagnosis of Zain and  the  problems  with
        the child coping with a trip on an aeroplane.  It is accepted  that
        Zain's condition gives rise a great deal of sympathy  for  him  and
        his parents but sympathy alone does not give rise to the  existence
        of family life or make an otherwise weak case where family life is
        not made out any better.
    27.  It is accepted that in Marckx v Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330  it  was
        held "Respect" for family life implies an obligation for the  State
        to act in a manner  calculated  to  allow  these  ties  to  develop
        normally. Domestic case law on this issue includes Mostafa (Article
        8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) in which  it  was  held
        that the decision in  Shamin  Box  [2002]  UKIAT  02212  is  to  be
        followed and that the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote
        the family life of those  affected  by  the  decision,  whereas  in
        Gupta, JR Petition from UT [2015] CSOH 9 it was held  that  a  host
        state's positive obligation to respect  family  life  in  terms  of
        Article 8 of  the  ECHR  did  not  generally  extend  to  reuniting
        families separated by voluntary relocation (paras 18 - 19).
    28.  In Shamin Box the Tribunal said that in entry cases,  Adjudicators
        should not treat the Article 8 question as "one  of  whether  there
        had been an unjustified interference with the right to private  and
        family life",  but  should  consider  whether  there  had  been  an
        unjustified lack of respect for private and family life;  and  that
        the focus should be on  whether,  in  the  light  of  the  positive
        obligations on the UK to facilitate family reunion, there has  been
        a failure to act in the particular circumstances of the case.
    29.  It is not the case that it is impossible for  Zain  to  visit  his
        grandparents but that it may not be fair upon the child to put  him
        through such a  journey  unless  he  is  adequately  prepared.  His
        presentation as observed by his class teacher is  set  out  in  the
        letter from his school. The National Autistic Society, however, has
        produced guidance 'Holidays: preparation  and  Practicalities',  in
        which they state "Once you have decided on your destination, it  is
        advisable to tell your  child  about  the  trip.  Individuals  with
        autism can find change difficult, and this may lead to high anxiety
        and, possibly, challenging behaviour. However,  by  preparing  your
        child as much as possible, any fears will hopefully be  kept  to  a
        minimum." It has  not  been  made  out  that  Zain  was  adequately
        prepared in 2012 which may  have  been  because  he  had  not  been
        diagnosed and his parents were unaware of his condition or what was
        required to assist him on such a journey. It has not been made  out
        that with  adequate  preparation  any  future  visit  will  not  be
        possible. It has not been made out  that  the  positive  obligation
        enshrined in Article  8  places  a  duty  upon  the  respondent  to
        facilitate  a  family  visit  to   these   grandchildren   on   the
        facts.
    30.  It is also important to note that in order to succeed in  a  claim
        outside the visitor rules, a  claimant  must  show  a  particularly
        pressing need so  as  to  give  rise  to  compelling  circumstances
        justifying a departure from the rules. This is an instance  of  the
        operation of the two stage approach: see e.g. SS (Congo).  In  this
        case it has not been made out that  the  refusal  would  result  in
        unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individuals concerned such
        that refusal of the application would not be proportionate.
    31.  I find it has not been made out that  family  life  recognised  by
        Article 8 (1) exists in this case.
    32.  In the alternative, had family  life  been  found  to  exist,  the
        appeal would still be dismissed as it has  not  been  shown  to  be
        unreasonable or disproportionate to expect the appellants' to  make
        a fresh application for entry clearance on the basis of  the  facts
        as found by the Judge. No prejudice of adverse impact of  doing  so
        has been made out.



Decision

    33.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    34.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the      7 December 2016

