
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/01033/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 March 2015                     |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD JAMIL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The sponsor, Mrs Parveen Ashfaq, and her husband Mr
                    Ahmed Ashfaq.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO),  for
    convenience I will refer to the parties in the  determination  as  they
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the ECO of 16 January 2014  to  refuse
    his application for entry clearance to visit the  UK  for  four  weeks.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Drabu allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. The appellant's right of appeal in this case is limited to the  grounds
    that the decision is unlawful on race discrimination grounds  or  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. There is no allegation of  race
    discrimination in the appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or elsewhere. The issue for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    therefore whether the decision to refuse entry clearance  breaches  the
    appellant's right to private life or family life with his relatives  in
    the UK.

 4. According to the application, the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and what the sponsor told me the  appellant  has  a  wife  and
    children and a clothing business in Pakistan which he runs  along  with
    his two brothers. He applied for entry clearance to visit  his  sister,
    the sponsor, and her family in the UK. In his application form he  said
    that the main purpose of his visit was to see his nephew, the sponsor's
    son, who was at that time  suffering  from  cancer  and  was  therefore
    unable to travel to Pakistan to visit his family there.

 5. The ECO refused the application not being satisfied that the  appellant
    met the requirements of paragraph 41 (i) and (ii)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because he was not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  provided  was
    sufficient to show that the  appellant's  business  and  income  is  as
    claimed and that the appellant had given an  accurate  account  of  his
    circumstances in Pakistan. The ECO also relied on a discrepancy between
    the application form and the sponsorship declaration to  conclude  that
    the appellant had not given an accurate account  of  the  circumstances
    surrounding the visit. The ECO therefore was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or that he intends to
    leave the UK at the end of his visit.

 6. The Judge dealt with the appeal in four short paragraphs. He said  that
    the reasons given by the ECO 'are  somewhat  banal',  he  concluded  at
    paragraph 3 that, having seeing the sponsors and read the statements;

         "...  the   refusal   of   this   compelling   application   is   a
         disproportionate interference in the family life  of  the  sponsor,
         her husband and the appellant. I find that there  exists  a  family
         life between them and I am satisfied that  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsors are decent law abiding  and  credible  people.  They  have
         sponsored relatives in the past and all have kept to the terms upon
         which they had been admitted. I am satisfied that no  more  than  a
         short family visit is intended and that the  appellant  is  leaving
         behind  his  wife  and  children.   The   appellant   fulfils   all
         requirements relevant to family visit."

 7. The ECO's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material misdirection of law  in  that
    he failed to give reasons for his  decision  that  family  life  exists
    between the appellant and the sponsor given that they are  all  adults.
    It is  contended  that  the  proportionality  assessment  is  'woefully
    inadequate' as it does not explain why the refusal of a temporary  visa
    is a disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights. It is further
    contended that the Judge made no assessment  of  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Error of law

 8. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his approach
    to this appeal. The only ground of appeal which he could  consider  was
    Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  An  assessment  under  Article  8  involves
    consideration of the 5 stages set out by Lord Bingham in the case of  R
    v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.  Lord  Bingham  set  out  the
    following five questions to be addressed where removal is  resisted  in
    reliance on Article 8 as follows, these questions equally apply in  the
    case of a decision to refuse entry clearance;

         (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or family life?

         (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

 9. The first question requires a finding as to whether family life  exists
    between the parties. In this case the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found
    that family life exists between the  appellant,  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband. However he gave no reason for that finding. This is  important
    because all of the parties here are adults.  Even  if  the  appellant's
    nephew had been considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge he  too  is
    an adult, he was 19 at the  date  of  the  decision.  In  the  case  of
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the Court of Appeal said that there  is  no
    presumption of family  life  between  adult  family  members  and  that
    "relationships  between  adults...would  not  necessarily  acquire  the
    protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence  of  further
    elements of dependency, involving more than the normal  emotional  ties
    "[14]. The Judge undertook no examination of the circumstances  of  the
    appellant and the sponsors and gave no reason for concluding that  they
    have a family life capable of being protected by Article 8. This  is  a
    material error.

10.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  that   the   decision   is   a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  family  life   between   the
    appellant, the sponsor and her husband.  However,  again,  he  gave  no
    reason for so finding. There is no examination of the relevant  factors
    and no weighing of the family life against the public interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control. Whilst the Tribunal said in Mostafa
    (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC)  that  the
    appellant's ability to meet the Immigration  Rules  can  be  a  weighty
    factor in considering proportionality, it is not determinative. In  any
    event the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  give  reasons  for  his
    finding that the appellant met  the  Immigration  Rules.  Further,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the  provisions  of  section
    117B in assessing the proportionality of the decision.  As  this  is  a
    statutory requirement his failure to do so is a material error.

11. In these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made material errors of law in considering Article 8  and  I  set
    aside his decision in its entirety.

Remaking the decision

12. As set out above the only ground of appeal relevant  in  this  case  is
    that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The relevant provision of the European Convention on Human Rights
    is Article 8 which protects the right to private and  family  life.  As
    set out above the first stage  is  to  establish  whether  family  life
    exists between the appellant and his family in the UK.  I  accept  that
    the sponsors are genuine and that they have  previously  sponsored  the
    appellant's two brothers, who are his business partners, and they  have
    returned to Pakistan after their visits to the  UK.  I  accept  on  the
    basis of the oral evidence from the sponsor's husband that the sponsors
    and their son went through a difficult time when their  son  was  going
    through cancer treatment, that their son is now in remission  and  that
    they are close to the appellant and are in regular contact with him.

13. However I do not accept that this relationship is enough  to  establish
    that the appellant and the sponsor's family have ties  over  and  above
    the normal emotional ties between adult siblings and their families.  I
    accept Mr Kandola's submission that the appellant  has  a  wife  and  5
    children in Pakistan and therefore has his own family  life  there.  In
    these circumstances I do not accept that the decision  of  the  ECO  to
    refuse to grant entry clearance interferes with the appellant's  right,
    or that of the sponsor or  her  family,  to  private  or  family  life.
    Article 8 is not therefore engaged in this appeal.

14. I note that the  sponsor  was  unhappy  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's mistake has led to a waste of time for him and his family. This
    is an unfortunate consequence for the appellant and the sponsor and her
    family. The only option open to the appellant, should he still wish  to
    visit the UK, is to make a fresh application  addressing  the  concerns
    raised by the ECO.

15. I find that the appellant has not demonstrated that the decision of the
    ECO interferes with his private or family life. I therefore dismiss the
    appeal.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by dismissing it.



Signed      Date: 20 April 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

