

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01145/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 17 November 2015                   |                   On 18 November 2015|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                WAQAR NAVEED
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Bajwa, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of Pakistan born on 29 July
      1943. The appellant is the ECO, who has appealed with  the  permission
      of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Monaghan, allowing the  respondent's  appeal  against  a
      decision of the ECO made on 28 January 2014 refusing  his  application
      for a family visit visa by reference to paragraphs 320(7B)  and  41(i)
      and (ii) of the Immigration Rules, HC395.


   2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Mr Naveed from now  on
      as "the appellant" and the ECO as "the respondent".


   3. The background is important. On 26  October  2010  the  appellant  was
      refused a visit visa to visit his cousin  by  reference  to  paragraph
      320(7A) of the rules. The decision was upheld on appeal. Judge Rintoul
      found that the appellant had made a dishonest statement  in  his  visa
      application form. On 25 July 2012 the appellant was  refused  a  visit
      visa to visit his sister who  was,  at  the  time,  seriously  ill  in
      hospital. The decision was made by reference to paragraph 320(7B)  and
      41(i) and (ii) of the rules. The appellant appealed that decision.  In
      a determination dated 26 February 2013 Judge  Coutts  found  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the law in that the respondent had
      not considered her policy[1] before making a decision under  paragraph
      320(7B). The policy required the respondent to consider whether  there
      were any exceptional compelling circumstances which would justify  the
      issuance of entry clearance. In the view of Judge Coutts, it was clear
      to everyone that the decision was likely to produce a harsh result for
      the sponsor (the appellant's niece) and her  mother  (the  appellant's
      sister). The latter was terminally ill  with  cancer  and  there  were
      medical  letters  confirming  this.  Other  than  the   sponsor,   the
      appellant's sister had no other relatives and, being unable  to  cope,
      the sponsor wished the appellant to visit the UK to  assist  her  with
      looking after her mother. Judge Coutts regarded time as being  of  the
      essence.


   4. The decision now under appeal appears to have been made in response to
      Judge Coutts's decision and further representations made.  The  notice
      of decision stated that no  updated  medical  evidence  regarding  the
      appellant's sister's health had been provided.


   5. Judge Monaghan found there were exceptional  compelling  circumstances
      when the appellant was first  refused  entry  clearance  on  deception
      grounds relating to the appellant's sister's battle with  cancer.  The
      judge noted the decision stated that no  evidence  had  been  provided
      regarding the appellant's  sister's  condition  since  Judge  Coutts's
      decision  and  therefore  there  were  no   compelling   compassionate
      circumstances. However, the respondent should have had regard  to  the
      findings  made  by  Judge  Coutts  about  the   appellant's   sister's
      condition. Applying Chomanga (binding effect of unappealed  decisions)
      Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00312 (IAC),  she  considered  herself  bound  by
      Judge Coutts's decision. She allowed the  appeal  because  the  policy
      should have been applied in the appellant's favour.


   6. The respondent applied for permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that
      entry  clearance  officers  do   not   routinely   refer   cases   for
      consideration under the policy but only if they  consider  that  there
      are exceptional compassionate circumstances. No  further  evidence  of
      the appellant's sister's condition had been provided so  the  decision
      was re-made. The judge erred in her application  of  Chomanga  because
      she failed to recognise that Judge Coutts had only allowed the  appeal
      to the limited extent that the decision was not in accordance with the
      law. No findings were made to reverse Judge  Rintoul's  decision  that
      the appellant had used deception.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal.


   8. A handwritten response has been filed  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
      asserting that there are exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  as
      the close (sic) whom the appellant wishes to visit is  seriously  ill.
      The earlier finding of dishonesty no longer  stood.  It  was  hard  to
      imagine a greater miscarriage of justice. Mr Bajwa did  not  associate
      himself with the response.


   9. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.


  10. Mr Tufan argued the judge had failed to consider paragraph 41  of  the
      rules so should not have allowed the appeal in any event. There was no
      medical evidence justifying a finding  that  compelling  compassionate
      circumstances existed.


  11. Before asking Mr Bajwa to reply, I raised with the representatives the
      question of whether  the  judge  was  entitled  to  allow  the  appeal
      outright or whether the exercise of discretion was for the ECO.


  12. Mr Bajwa argued that the effect  of  the  policy  was  that  paragraph
      320(7B) was not mandatory in the circumstances that there was evidence
      of exceptional compelling circumstances, as there clearly were.  There
      was evidence in the respondent's bundle that  the  appellant's  sister
      was in hospital with cancer. If  there  were  such  circumstances  the
      omission of reference to paragraph 41 was immaterial. He asked  me  to
      find there was no error in the judge's decision.


   Error of law


  13. After considering the grounds and the oral submissions made to  me,  I
      have decided that the judge's decision is vitiated by  material  error
      of law. The judge misunderstood the effect of Judge Coutts's  decision
      and the  meaning  of  Chomanga.  That  case  was  concerned  with  the
      circumstances in which  the  respondent  ignored  the  findings  of  a
      tribunal and issued a second  decision  circumventing  the  tribunal's
      decision. The respondent was bound by the findings of the tribunal. In
      this case, Judge Coutts did not make a finding that paragraph  320(7B)
      did not apply. He found there were circumstances which the  respondent
      was aware of which, on the face of them, engaged the policy such  that
      a decision which failed to give effect  to  that  policy  was  not  in
      accordance with the law. Judge Coutts carefully limited the extent  of
      his decision, stating at [11]: "I make no finding in  respect  of  the
      circumstances here being exceptional compassionate ones  because  that
      was not a matter which was argued before me. However, in my view,  the
      correct approach is to remit this matter back to  the  respondent  for
      her to consider this issue with any further representations or medical
      information provided by the appellant."


  14. In Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC),  the
      Upper Tribunal explained the limits  of  the  tribunal's  jurisdiction
      under the 2002 Act in  discretionary  cases.  There  is  an  important
      distinction between  the  circumstances  in  which  the  tribunal  can
      exercise discretion differently itself and cases in which  it  can  do
      not more than find a decision unlawful on Abdi lines[2].  The  current
      case is plainly of the latter variety. The tribunal cannot review  the
      decision not to apply a policy not to employ a  mandatory  ground  for
      refusal and allow an appeal outright  on  the  basis  that  discretion
      should have been  exercised  favourably.  If  she  was  persuaded  the
      circumstances gave rise to a need for  the  respondent  to  apply  the
      policy and to consider not making a mandatory refusal  then  the  most
      the judge could do was, like Judge Coutts had done, allow  the  appeal
      on the limited basis that the decision was not in accordance with  the
      law.


  15. It is also right to say that the appeal should not have  been  allowed
      outright without full consideration being given to paragraph 41 of the
      rules.


  16. I set aside the decision of Judge Monaghan.


   Re-making the decision
  17. In terms of re-making the decision, there was  no  attendance  by  the
      sponsor and the most recent medical evidence is more than a year  old.
      Mr Bajwa could only say he was instructed that the appellant's  sister
      is still alive and therefore there is still a  justifiable  basis  for
      pursuing the point.


  18.  In  my  view,  there  was  evidence  of  compassionate  circumstances
      justifying Judge Coutts's decision when he  made  it.  Judge  Monaghan
      took the view that there was evidence before the respondent justifying
      a referral under the policy when the  decision  was  made  in  January
      2014. Mr Bajwa argued that there were  medical  documents  before  the
      respondent in any event. However, as Judge  Monaghan  pointed  out  at
      [17], the respondent  stated  in  the  notice  of  decision  that  the
      appellant had not provided up to date evidence  and  no  evidence  was
      provided to show documents had been sent  but  had  gone  astray.  The
      evidence which was before Judge Coutts was a year old by the  date  of
      decision. In sum, it cannot be said the respondent's decision was  not
      in accordance with the policy because there was no up to date evidence
      justifying a referral. Judge Coutts had made  it  clear  that  further
      medical information was to be provided. If nothing had  been  provided
      since Judge Coutts's decision then the respondent cannot be criticised
      for not referring the case.


  19. In these  circumstances,  the  rules  provide  for  mandatory  refusal
      because Judge Rintoul's decision upholding  the  original  refusal  on
      deception grounds has not been  overturned.  The  correct  outcome  is
      therefore to substitute a decision dismissing  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules.


  20. The appellant has not appealed on human rights grounds.


  21. In view of the sad circumstances behind this case, I would like to add
      that the fact there was no evidence justifying  a  decision  to  refer
      which was before the entry clearance officer at the date  of  decision
      does not mean there were not circumstances in existence  warranting  a
      referral or, indeed, that such circumstances do not  currently  exist.
      If there are such circumstances  because  the  appellant's  sister  is
      still alive and her daughter still requires help,  the  appellant  can
      make a fresh application and he must ensure that up  to  date  medical
      evidence is provided with his application.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    her decision allowing the appeal is set aside. The  following  decision
    is substituted:

         The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.



                               Signed                 Date 17 November 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] The policy is helpfully set out in  paragraph  3  of  Judge  Monagahan's
decision. In effect, the ECO must  consider  whether  there  are  any  human
rights  grounds  (in  particular  article  8  grounds)  or  any  exceptional
compelling circumstances which would justify entry clearance. If there  are,
the case should be referred to the  Referred  Cases  Unit  for  a  decision.
Otherwise refusal was mandatory.
[2] SSHD v D S Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148.

