
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: VA/01045/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On November 6, 2015                  |On November 11, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR AZIZ MOUSTAKIM
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Clarke, Sponsor's son


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national of Morocco and  he  applied  for  a  family
    visit visa to visit his mother and  sister  who  both  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom. The respondent refused his application  on  October  1,
    2014 because she was not satisfied the appellant would return to Canada
    where now lived based on a lack of financial documents.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 20,  2015  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  O'Malley  on
    August 3, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on  August  21,  2015  she
    allowed his appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent applied for permission to appeal on  September  2,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred by allowing the appeal without making
    a finding on whether the rules were met and failing to give reasons for
    finding there was family life.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes on September 29, 2015 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  the
    Tribunal  had  erred  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    permission.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Kotas submitted that the Tribunal  had  failed  to  make  a  finding
    regarding the appellant's source of income and  personal  circumstances
    and by failing to do so the Tribunal had materially erred because  this
    was a matter the Tribunal would have to have regard to when considering
    Article 8. The Tribunal had also failed to explain why family life  was
    engaged between mother and adult child. Whilst the  appellant's  mother
    may be ill and unable to travel the Tribunal had failed to explain  why
    there was such a level of dependency that Article 8 was  engaged.  This
    amounted to a material error.

 8. Mr Clark had  been  assisting  his  mother  and  wife  throughout  this
    process. He had submitted lengthy submissions but in summary he  argued
    that as a Canadian resident  appellant  had  clearly  demonstrated  his
    circumstances on his  application  form  and  on  appeal  had  provided
    additional  evidence  that  predated  the   date   of   decision   that
    demonstrated that he was working as claimed. The respondent had refused
    the application on the basis he would not return but evidence submitted
    showed that he had every incentive to  return  because  he  would  lose
    multiple rights by overstaying in the United Kingdom. While he accepted
    the appellant had not submitted the financial documents that  had  been
    requested there was sufficient evidence before the Tribunal for  it  to
    make a positive finding. As regards Article 8 he submitted  that  ample
    evidence was given to the  Tribunal  but  he  accepted  the  Tribunal's
    decision did not set out the evidence or reflect what  took  place.  He
    argued that there was family life and the Tribunal  had  accepted  that
    argument. He urged me to find no material error

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 9. Permission to appeal had been granted to the respondent on the basis it
    was arguable that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  by  finding  family  life
    existed.  I have considered the Tribunal's decision and note  that  the
    Tribunal had before it documents relating to the appellant's employment
    and at paragraph [42] of its decision was satisfied that the  appellant
    had addressed the issues raised in the refusal letter. I  am  therefore
    satisfied there was no error in respect of the first ground of appeal.

10. As regards the second ground of appeal I accept that  having  indicated
    the appeal should be considered  under  Article  8  the  Tribunal  went
    immediately to a balancing act rather than assessing whether there  was
    family life for the purposes of Article 8.

11. Although there was some consideration of the personal circumstances  in
    paragraph [41] the Tribunal failed to explain why there was family life
    between mother and adult child.  Case  law  such  as  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 made it clear that blood ties were  insufficient  to
    constitute family life because most of us have close relations of  whom
    we are extremely fond and whom we visit but on their own they would not
    amount to family life. There was no evidence in the decision that  this
    issue was addressed and accordingly I find an error in law.

12. I explained to Mr Clarke that I would proceed to deal with  the  appeal
    afresh.

13. He had submitted various statements and documents  that  addressed  the
    concerns raised in the respondent's refusal letter and  the  Tribunal's
    decision. He confirmed that the appellant had looked after  his  mother
    for fifteen years and he and his Canadian wife  had  lived  in  Morocco
    until his wife had to return to Canada whereupon  he  accompanied  her.
    Arrangements were then made for the appellant's mother to go  and  live
    in the United Kingdom with her daughter but the appellant continued  to
    financially support. Until about twelve months ago she  had  no  income
    and now only received attendance allowance.

14. The appellant's daughter was in receipt of disability living  allowance
    and her husband, Mr Clarke, was her carer.

15. Mr Clarke's argument was that the level of dependency went  above  that
    expected of a mother and son and satisfied the Kugathas test.

16. I raised with Mr Kotas whether he wished  to  cross-examine  Mr  Clarke
    about anything contained in his documents and he indicated that he  did
    not. He very fairly accepted that if  all  this  information  had  been
    contained in the original decision then an appeal  may  not  have  been
    made but I suspect that was mere speculation.

17. I enquired from Mr Clarke how long the appellant wished to visit and he
    stated the appellant wish to visit for two weeks as this  was  all  the
    time he could afford  away  from  his  own  business.  His  purpose  in
    visiting was to see his mother and sister.

18. Having considered all of the available submissions and evidence  I  was
    satisfied that Article  8  was  engaged  and  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated, through his representative, that family life existed over
    and above the normal emotional ties.

19. In reaching that finding I took into account the fact the  sponsor  had
    been supported by the appellant directly for over 15 years  before  she
    came to the United Kingdom and that since she had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom  there  was  evidence  that  he  had  continued  that   support
    financially by sending funds and emotionally/physically by speaking  to
    her on a daily basis. There was evidence that  the  appellant's  mother
    was ill and was unable to travel to visit him in Canada and  there  was
    evidence that the appellant's sister was also unable to travel  easily.
    I also had regard to the fact that the appellant will  be  entitled  to
    Canadian citizenship next year and this will enable him  to  travel  to
    and from the United Kingdom at will.

20. I took into account the  circumstances  set  out  above  and  concluded
    refusing entry would be disproportionate.

21. The appellant seeks a two-week visa and in those circumstances I  would
    recommend that a limited Visa be issued to enable  this  trip  to  take
    place. A period of no more than two months should be allowed.

22. I indicated to the parties in court that  grants  under  Article  8  on
    visit visa applications are few and far between because of the  various
    hurdles that have to be overcome. However, in light  of  the  available
    evidence I was satisfied this was one of  the  exceptional  cases  that
    merited a grant under Article 8.

23. Accordingly, whilst I find there has been a material error I set  aside
    the original decision I make it clear having reconsidered  all  of  the
    available evidence that this is a case where the  appellant  should  be
    granted a visa to enable him to visit the United Kingdom under  Article
    8 ECHR.

    DECISION

24. There was a material error.  I set  aside  the  original  decision  and
    remake the decision and allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
