
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01384/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                          JATINBHAI RAJNIKANT PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BOMBAY
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Julian Norman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated
    9 September 2014.

Background

 2. The background  is  as  set  out  in  paragraph  2  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination:
        "2.  The Appellant applied for entry clearance as a family visitor.
              The application was refused on 10.2.14 because the  Respondent
             contended that the Appellant  had  previously  contrived  in  a
             significant way to frustrate the intention of  the  Immigration
             Rules as set out  in  paragraph  320  (11);  and  that  he  had
             previously used deception in an application for entry clearance
             as  specified  in  paragraph  320  (7A)  and  that  any  future
             applications may be refused  under  paragraph  320  (7B)  until
             10.2.24; and further that the Respondent was not satisfied  the
             Appellant intended to leave the U.K. at the end of any visit he
              might make".


 3. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was limited to  the  decision
    being unlawful in terms of Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act.   The
    appellant relied on Article 8 which was therefore before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. For the purposes of the appeal before us  the  only  material  findings
    were these:

        "10. No evidence has been placed before me to suggest there  exists
             more than normal emotional ties  between  the  two.   Both  are
             adults.  I therefore did not find that the Appellant has proved
             that Family Life subsists between himself and his sister".


        and, at paragraph 12:


        "12. Even if I had  found  that  Family  Life  exists  between  the
             parties, I would not have found  that  I  had  jurisdiction  to
             decide these matters when  the  only  permissible  grounds  are
             human rights".


 5. On the basis of the foregoing findings the  appeal  on  Article  8  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The appellant sought to appeal to this court and permission  to  appeal
    was initially refused before the First-tier Tribunal but thereafter was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal.  The material  parts  of  the  grant  of
    permission are as follows:

        "2.  However I grant permission on the other  grounds  advanced  on
             behalf of the Appellant; it is arguable that the judge did have
             jurisdiction to hear the appeal with effect from 25th June 2013
             Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended Section 88A
             of the 2002 Act so there was no right of appeal against refusal
             of entry clearance in a family visit case except on the grounds
             alleging the decision showed  unlawful  discrimination  or  was
             unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998.   The
             Appellant relied upon the second aspect  of  human  rights  and
             therefore Article 8 of the ECHR was before the  judge.   Whilst
             the judge did not find that there was family life  between  the
             Appellant and sibling, the evidence upon  which  that  decision
             was reached was not set out in the determination and  therefore
             it is not possible to see how he reached that decision  on  the
             evidence.  The Tribunal  had  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
             obligation imposed by Article 8 to promote family life of those
             affected by the decision (see Shamin Box [2002]  UKIAT  02212).
             In other words, whether  the  UK  authorities  were  under  any
             obligation to promote family life between  adult  siblings  and
             that  was  the  issue  to  consider  on  the  evidence  and  in
             particular the nature and quality of the relationship asserted,
             noting that adult siblings of course are not like  husband  and
             wife.


          3. The grounds contend that evidence  was  given  at  the  hearing
             concerning these issues of family life  but  as  they  are  not
             recorded in the determination  it  is  difficult  to  make  any
             assessment of whether family life was engaged and there was the
             obligation imposed by Article 8.


          4. For those reasons I grant permission.  In  those  circumstances
             it may also be arguable that it would be necessary to  consider
             issues under Paragraph 320 when conducting   a  proportionality
             balance if, of course,  it  was  found  that  family  life  was
             engaged".

Error of Law

 7. At the outset of the hearing we advised the parties that on reading the
    case we had arrived at a preliminary view that it was very difficult to
    sustain the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  of  the
    various points articulated within the  permission  to  appeal.   Having
    advised parties of our preliminary  position  Mr  Bramble  did  not  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State seek to seriously  counter  that  view
    and did not put forward any detailed arguments as to why  the  decision
    should be upheld.

 8. We were satisfied that there were clear  and  material  errors  in  the
    determination  as  articulated  in  the  permission   to   appeal   and
    accordingly the decision required to be set aside.

 9. We thereafter moved to re-make the decision.

Evidence

10. We heard evidence  from  a  single  witness,  namely:  the  appellant's
    sister.  The summary of her evidence was that she was very, very  close
    to the appellant.  She spoke to him almost every day on the phone.  She
    had been in the UK for 28 years.  The appellant had been here illegally
    for about ten years during that time but had returned to India in about
    2003.  In 2006 he had come  to  this  country  for  about  four  weeks.
    Thereafter she had visited India every year.  She said  she  very  much
    wanted to see the appellant, she was missing seeing nephews and  nieces
    and he had not been to see her in a long time.  She said that he  would
    return to India if he were allowed entry to the UK and  she  emphasised
    that it had taken eight years for him to apply for a visa.   In  cross-
    examination she  stated  that  during  the  period  he  had  been  here
    illegally he had not told her that his position in this country was not
    lawful.

11. Our attention was also directed to two witness statements: one from the
    appellant's brother-in-law.  In this statement,  however,  he  made  no
    reference to family life.


12. The other statement to which reference was made was one  given  by  the
    appellant and all he said in relation to the issue of family  life  and
    in particular his relationship with  his  adult  sister  was  this  (at
    paragraph 10):

        "I have family in the UK too - my sister lives here with her family
        - and I want to be able to visit them - for  my  children  to  meet
        them and to see the UK with me".

13. Counsel for the appellant also advised us that it was the position of a
    niece of the appellant who lived in this country that  she  wished  the
    appellant to give her away at her wedding.  Further  a  grandmother  in
    India, if she wished to come to this country, wanted the  appellant  to
    accompany her, although she had made no application to come here.

14. We then proceeded to hear submissions.

Submissions for the Respondent

15. Mr Bramble submitted that on the evidence there was nothing  more  than
    normal emotional ties between the appellant  and  his  sister.   He  in
    particular referred to the appellant not confiding in his  sister  that
    he was here illegally  until  he  was  found  by  the  authorities  and
    submitted that that showed a relationship which was not very close.

16. He directed our attention of Mostafa (Article  8  in  Entry  Clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  In particular he drew our  attention  to  the
    observations of the Upper Tribunal in paragraph 24.  He submitted  that
    having regard to these observations that this case did  not  reach  the
    threshold to engage Article 8.

Submissions in reply on behalf of the Appellant

17. Ms Norman submitted that on the whole evidence  there  was  clearly  an
    unusually close relationship between the appellant and his sister.

18. She submitted that on the whole evidence there were  more  than  normal
    emotional ties between the siblings and that Article 8 was  accordingly
    engaged.

19. She accepted that the decision in Mostafa gave her  a  hill  to  climb.
    However, she submitted that she had climbed that hill and that in  fact
    there was certain support for her position by reference to paragraph 16
    of Mostafa.

Discussion

20. The core issue in this appeal is this: is the relationship between  the
    appellant and his sister (adult  siblings)  of  such  a  nature  as  to
    attract the protection of Article 8 ECHR?

21. In considering that question the observations of the Court of Appeal in
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  are  of  relevance.   This  case
    involved an adult's relationship with his mother  and  adult  siblings.
    The court of Appeal were of the view that the following passage in S  v
    United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196 was still relevant:

        "... generally, the protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
        involves  co-habiting  dependents,  such  as  parents   and   other
        dependant  minor   children.    Whether   it   extends   to   other
        relationships depends on the circumstances of the particular  case.
        Relationships between adults ... would not necessarily acquire  the
        protection of Article 8  of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of
        further  elements  of  dependency,  involving  more   than   normal
        emotional ties".

22. Certain further helpful  observations  have  been  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal with respect to the issue of the threshold  of  engagement  of
    Article 8 in entry clearance cases in Mostafa.   At  paragraph  25  the
    Upper Tribunal says this:

        "... we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
        particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
        of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
        come within its scope.  We are, however, prepared to  say  that  it
        will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
        a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
        clearance comes within the scope of  Article  8(1).   In  practical
        terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
        is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
        parent and minor child ...".

23. The above observations leave open that in a case of two adult  siblings
    there may be unusual circumstances, sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,
    however, in this case we can identify no such  circumstances.   We  are
    persuaded that there is nothing beyond the ordinary and natural ties of
    affection that would normally accompany a  relationship  between  adult
    brother and sister.

24. In coming to this view we have considered all of the evidence which was
    placed before us and in particular would refer to  the  following:  the
    appellant says nothing in his  statement  about  any  particular  close
    relationship with his sister and on looking to his statement  there  is
    nothing therein which shows anything other than normal  emotional  ties
    between an adult brother and sister.

25. When the appellant's sister's evidence is considered it  again  amounts
    to no more than showing that there are normal emotional ties between an
    adult brother and sister.  Her evidence in essentials came to this: she
    kept in touch with the appellant and would like to see him.  These  are
    the  ordinary  and  natural  ties  of  affection  that  accompany   the
    relationship of an adult brother and sister.  It appeared somewhat  odd
    to us that if as she  claimed  there  was  a  very  close  relationship
    between her and the appellant he had not told her  at  an  early  stage
    that he was staying illegally in this  country.   Ms  Norman  submitted
    that we should not take such an inference from this piece  of  evidence
    and  submitted  that  it  could  just  as  well  show  a   very   close
    relationship, in that where there was such a relationship  he  was  not
    prepared to admit  that  he  was  acting  unlawfully.   We  prefer  the
    opposing view.  Also, if they were especially close  why  did  it  take
    eight years for the family to get the appellant to apply for a visa?

26. The evidence that the niece would like to have the appellant  give  her
    away at her  wedding  and  that  the  grandmother  would  like  him  to
    accompany her to the UK if she made an  application  to  come  to  this
    country we are satisfied add nothing in relation  to  the  question  of
    family life.

27. For the foregoing reasons we hold we hold that no family  life  existed
    and Article 8 was accordingly not engaged.

28. For the foregoing reasons having reconsidered the matter we dismiss the
    appeal.

29. We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date






Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
