
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01248/2015
                                                               VA/01249/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 November 2016                        |On 21 November 2016             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                               Muhammad Ramzan
                               Mehfooz Akhtar
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                    The Entry Clearance Officer Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr N Khan, sponsor
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rodger  promulgated  22.6.16,  dismissing  their  linked
    appeals against the decision of the respondent to refuse  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as family visitors.  The Judge heard the  appeal  on
    15.6.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    28.10.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 18.11.16 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. The role of Mr Khan as sponsor is somewhat peculiar. He is said to be a
    family friend and financial sponsor. He admitted to Judge  Rodger  that
    he did not have any family life with the appellants.  Mr  Walker  found
    within his file the two  previous  appeal  decisions  relating  to  the
    appellants, both of which were allowed. Mr Khan was  also  named  as  a
    sponsor in those appeals, but there may have  been  some  confusion  in
    those appeals as the respective judges  thought  that  Mr  Khan  was  a
    family member and was found to be a credible witness.

 5. I am not satisfied that Mr Khan is a sponsor at all. He told me that he
    is a lawyer acting on behalf of the appellants, and is a family  friend
    of Mr Imran. However, I was prepared to hear  his  submissions  on  the
    appeal.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Rodger to be set aside.

 7. The appellants have only a limited right of appeal against the decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer. Effectively, they can  only  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds.  Merely  claiming  that  there  is   a   family
    relationship is insufficient, as clearly all family visit  applications
    are to visit family members in the UK.

 8. In dismissing the appeal, Judge Rodger found at [36] that  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was family life sufficient  to  engage  article  8
    ECHR between the appellants and the sponsor Mr M Imran. It is not clear
    to me why, accepting that the family is close, the judge considered the
    matter should be considered under private life. However,  at  [40]  the
    judge found that the decisions did not  adversely  interfere  with  the
    private life of the appellants, or either Mr Khan or Mr Imran.

 9. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    not take sufficient account  of  the  fact  that  the  appellants  were
    visiting family in the UK.

10. In granting permission to appeal, Judge  Macdonald  found  it  arguable
    that the judge did not take  into  account  what  is  said  in  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance cases) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC),  to  the
    effect that the applicant's ability to satisfy the immigration Rules is
    a weighty factor when deciding whether the refusal was proportionate.

11. Proportionality is only relevant if the appellants cross  the  previous
    requirements under the Razgar stepped approach. It  is  clear  that  at
    [46] the judge found that this appeal failed at  the  first  hurdle,  a
    failure to demonstrate  that  the  decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer engaged article 8 ECHR. Whilst there is family life, the  judge
    was not satisfied that the interference to family life  by  refusal  of
    the decision, particularly when it is open to the appellants to make  a
    fresh application addressing the reasons for refusal, and  that  visits
    can  be  made  by  family  members  in  the  UK  to  Pakistan,  was  an
    interference of such consequence and gravity as to  engage  article  8,
    either in respect of private or family life.

12. In the circumstances, any error in  failing  to  take  account  of  the
    extent to which the appellants might meet the requirements of the Rules
    in a  proportionality  balancing  exercise  is  not  material,  as  the
    proportionality balancing exercise  stage  does  not  arise  where  the
    appellants have failed to demonstrate that article 8 is engaged at all.



Conclusions:

13. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    material point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal of each appellant remains dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeals of the appellants have been dismissed  and  thus  there
can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

