

                                     [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
VA/01825/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                 |Promulgated                       |
|On 24 May 2017                   |          On 25 May 2017          |
|                                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MISS ANASTASIIA KOZIUK
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs V Gallacher, sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 12 April
           2017 against the decision and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Feeney who had allowed the Respondent's appeal against the
           Entry Clearance Officer, Warsaw's  decision  dated  11  February
           2015 to refuse to grant the  Respondent  entry  clearance  as  a
           visitor to the United Kingdom.  The  decision  and  reasons  was
           promulgated on 10  November  2016  following  a  hearing  on  29
           September 2016.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Ukraine, born there on  29  June
           1993.  Her application for a visit visa was made under paragraph
           41 of the Immigration Rules (since replaced by Appendix  V)  and
           was refused under paragraphs 41(i), 41(ii) and paragraph 320.


      3.    Judge Feeney allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
           Unfortunately no Home Office Presenting Officer had been present
           at  the  hearing  to  remind  the  judge  that  the   First-tier
           Tribunal's jurisdiction in visit appeals has been limited  since
           25 June 2013 to human rights (Article 8 ECHR) and  Equality  Act
           2010 issues.  The judge omitted to consider Article  8  ECHR  at
           any stage.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant  (the  Secretary  of  State)  was  granted  for  those
           reasons.


      5.    Standard directions were made by the Upper  Tribunal  indicating
           that the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error
           of law were found. No rule 24 notice was filed on behalf of  the
           Respondent.




      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Duffy for the Secretary of State relied on  the  grounds  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  In summary he submitted that
           the judge's errors were manifest.  The starting point had to  be
           whether the decision interfered with  the  family  life  of  two
           adult siblings, i.e., the Appellant and her sponsor, her sister.
            No emotional or other form of dependency had been suggested  by
           the evidence.  The appeal fell at the first hurdle. The decision
           and reasons could not stand and should be set aside, remade  and
           dismissed.


      7.    Mrs Gallacher was present on behalf of  her  sister.   Her  main
           concern had been the paragraph 320 refusal, which prevented  the
           possibility  of  future  visits.   Making  a  fresh  visit  visa
           application was not otherwise a problem.


      The error of law finding


      8.    At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
           accepted Mr Duffy's submissions and found  that  the  judge  had
           fallen into all of the material  errors  of  law  of  which  the
           Secretary of State complained and in respect of which permission
           to appeal had been granted.  The judge had  misdirected  herself
           as to the tribunal's powers.


      9.    There was no evidence before the tribunal  of  any  relationship
           between the Appellant and her sister beyond that of  the  normal
           ties between siblings.  The Appellant was 22 years of age at the
           date of submitting the  entry  clearance  application.   She  is
           leading an independent life  as  a  university  student  in  the
           Ukraine, where indeed she has a partner.  There was no  evidence
           of dependency, whether emotional  or  otherwise  on  her  senior
           married sister.  Article 8 ECHR was not engaged.


      10.   There was no  basis  for  the  judge  to  go  further  in  those
           circumstances.   Had  the  judge  found  evidence  of  emotional
           dependency  beyond  the  normal   adult   relationship   between
           siblings, then the Article 8 ECHR appeal would have had to  have
           been approached through the lens of the Immigration Rules.  Even
           then there would have been  difficulties,  because  at  [7]  the
           judge  referred  to  Section  E-ECP  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
           Immigration Rules, which has nothing to do  with  paragraph  41,
           although confusingly  the  judge  then  set  out  extracts  from
           paragraph 41 and paragraph 320(7A).  It  was  a  decision  which
           gave the  appearance  of  carelessness  and  had  few  redeeming
           features.




      Submissions - fresh decision


      11.   For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
           original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.


      12.   Mrs Gallacher was understandably concerned that  the  favourable
           paragraph 320(7A) findings were preserved.  Fortunately they can
           be, because it is expressly stated in the permission  to  appeal
           application at [4]: "For the  avoidance  of  doubt  the  Judge's
           findings in relation to paragraph 320(7A) are no[t] challenged."


      13.   Mr Duffy relied on his previous submissions.


      The fresh decision


      14.   The burden of proof in this appeal lies on the  Appellant.   The
           scope of this appeal is limited as  indicated  above.   As  also
           indicated, the Respondent accepts that the judge  was  right  to
           find that paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules incorrectly
           applied by the Entry Clearance Officer.  That finding stands  by
           concession.


      15.   The appeal is otherwise dismissed because Article 8 ECHR was not
           shown to be engaged.  The Appellant is of course free to make  a
           fresh entry clearance application at any time.   No  doubt  when
           doing so she will  have  in  mind  the  other  reasons  why  her
           application  was  refused,  and  will  refer  closely   to   the
           provisions of Appendix V and the useful guidance offered by  the
           Home Office on its website.  A  future  application  appears  to
           have good  prospects  of  success,  given  her  past  record  of
           compliance,  although  it  will  be   considered   against   the
           circumstances which exist at the date of any  such  application.
           The present appeal must, however, be dismissed.


      16.   There was no need identified for an anonymity direction in  this
           appeal and no submission to any such effect.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.   The  tribunal  allows  the  onwards  appeal  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department, sets  aside  the  original
      decision and remakes the original decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      as follows:

      The appeal is DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated 24 May 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE RESPONDENT:
      FEE AWARD


      There is no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated 24 May 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
