
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01746/2014
     VA/01747/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 May 2015                           |On 23 June 2015                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between


                    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT Appellant

                                     And
                                                                   Claimants
                               ms kamrun nesa
                             master jahed ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent: Mr B Amunwa (Counsel instructed by Schneider Goldstein
Immigration Law)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
(for the Entry Clearance Officer) against a decision made by the  First-tier
Tribunal (Judge Finch) (FTT) allowing the appeal of the Claimants against  a
refusal of their applications for entry clearance for  a  family  visit,  on
human rights grounds under section 84 (1) (b) & (c) 2002 Act.

2.     For the sake of convenience the parties will be referred to  in  this
decision and reasons  as  "the Entry Clearance officer (ECO) "  who  is  the
appellant in this matter and to the "Claimants."

3.  The Claimants are related as grandmother and grandson, and are  citizens
of Bangladesh.

4.    The background to this matter  is  that  the  Claimants  have  made  2
applications/appeals as family visitors.  The first  appeal  was  determined
on the papers; there was no appearance by  the  Claimants  and  no  evidence
produced.  The decision was promulgated on 16th April  2012  by  FTT  (Judge
O'Garro)  ("The  first  Tribunal")  and  the  appeal  dismissed  under   the
paragraph 320(7A) Immigration rules.  At that time there was  a  full  right
of appeal. Their current (second) applications were refused relying  on  the
previous determination in which the  Tribunal  found  that  false  documents
were used as shown in a document verification report (DVR) dated  17.10.2011
with reference to the Immigration  Rules   at  paragraph  320(7B).  The  DVR
established that a bank statement in the name of  Faro  Ahmed  and  numbered
1008, purportedly issued by Janata bank, was false. The  account  showed  no
transactions for the period from 20.7.2011 - 2.10.2011 as compared with  the
bank statement relied on which showed high balances for transactions on  the
said dates [14 &15].  Following the refusal the Claimants submitted  further
financial evidence which was considered in a second DVR dated 24.1.2012.  On
25.1.2012 the ECM reviewed the decision and found the  new  material  to  be
genuine,  but  concluded  that  a  fresh  application  needed  to  be  made.
However, the ECO maintained the original refusal grounds that the  Claimants
used false documents under paragraph 320(7A).  The Claimants  submitted  the
current application which was refused under Paragraph 320(7B).

5.     At the hearing before FTT the Claimants argued in  their  grounds  of
appeal that in the ECM review dated  25.1.2012,  it  was  accepted  that  no
deception occurred.  Neither that review nor the two DVRs were  in  evidence
before the FTT. The FTT relied on a letter dated  29th  November  2011  from
the Janata Bank explaining that checks made of the bank statements with  the
banks own records established that the figures in  the  statements  produced
were accurate and true.  The  original  bank  letter  was  produced  at  the
hearing and no challenge was raised by the representative for the  ECO.   In
addition documents (bank paying in slips and cheque books) were produced  by
the sponsor which the FTT relied on [10].  The  FTT  took  as  its  starting
point the findings made in the first determination.  It considered that  the
first Tribunal did not have either the Janata bank  letter  nor  heard  oral
evidence that was  available  to  the  FTT.   The  FTT  concluded  that  the
evidence now produced showed that the first Tribunal wrongly concluded  that
deception was used [12].

6.   The FTT went on to consider Article 8 and found that  family  life  was
established, recognising that it could exist between adult  relatives  [13].
The FTT found evidence to show that it was a large and  close  knit  family.
At [14] the FTT found interference with  family  life  taking  into  account
factors such as the first Claimant's age, the untimely death of her  husband
which prevented him  from  seeing  his  grandchildren  in  the  UK,  medical
evidence establishing that the Claimant's brother  was  ill  and  unable  to
travel, and that the second Claimant, who had been brought up by  the  first
Claimant,  had  never  met  his  cousins.  The  FTT  placed  weight  on  the
prohibitive cost in the event of the UK  family  travelling  to  Bangladesh,
given the number and ages of the grandchildren. Having  concluded  that  the
previous decision was unlawful following  the  misapplication  of  paragraph
320(7B), the FTT concluded that there was a breach of Article 8(1) and  this
was not justified under Article 8(2).

Grounds of application

7.   The ECO applied for permission to appeal on the grounds,  firstly  that
the FTT erred in law by making a material misdirection of law in  concluding
that family life as between adults relatives was established  under  Article
8 (MS (Article 8 -  family  life  -  dependency  -  proportionality)  Uganda
[2004]  UKAIT  00064.  The  second  ground  was  that  the   proportionality
assessment was inadequately reasoned and relied on immaterial matters.    It
was further argued that the FTT was wrong to conclude that  there  had  been
no deception without the evidence of  the  ECM  review  dated  25th  January
2012, which accepted that the solvency letter dated 15.11.2011 was  verified
by the bank. The review maintained that the solvency letter dated  2.20.2011
and bank statements dated 3.4.2011 - 2.10.2011 contained discrepancies.  The
review maintained the refusal element under paragraph 320(7A).

Permission to appeal

8.  Permission was granted by Designated FtT  Judge  Zucker  on  15th  April
2015 who found that it was arguable that although the FTT did not  have  the
ECM Review( in breach of standard directions),  it may have been  misled  by
the Appellant's submission that no deception occurred.  The  proportionality
assessment was arguably flawed in the circumstances.

Error of law hearing

9.  Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of appeal  and  produced  the  two  DVR
dated  17.10.2011  and  24.1.2012  together  with  the  ECM   review   dated
25.1.2012.  Mr Amanwa provided the Claimants bundle for  the  hearing  which
included the Janata bank letter dated 25th November 2011.


Submissions

10. Mr Bramble submitted that the Upper Tribunal  should  consider  firstly,
the FTT's approach to Article 8(1) and only if it was concluded  that  there
was no error in finding family life, to go on  to  the  second  ground  with
reference to paragraph 320(7B) Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended).   Mr
Bramble submitted that the question addressed by the FTT at [13]  failed  to
consider the basis for which it concluded that family life  was  established
under Article 8(1). The FTT found a close knit  family  but  there  were  no
other facts and reasons relied on in support.  In particular  there  was  no
consideration of emotional ties beyond the normal level in  the  context  of
adult relationships.  The Secretary of State's position  was  reinforced  by
that adopted by Senior Immigration Judge Perkins in Mostafa  (Article  8  in
entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) [24].

11.  As to the second ground under paragraph 320(7B),  Mr  Bramble  referred
to the two document verification reports and the Entry  Clearance  Manager's
(ECM) review.  He submitted that the  FTT  had  clearly  not  seen  the  ECM
review. That review stated that certain  documents  were  considered  to  be
genuine but that concerns as to the reliability of the documents  originally
produced with the first application remained.   The  FTT  proceeded  on  the
basis that there had been an acceptance that  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
made a positive response regarding the financial documents in favour of  the
Claimants, including  those  submitted  with  the  first  application.    In
finding that the first Tribunal wrongly found  that  forged  documents  were
used, the FTT's proportionality assessment was flawed.

12.  Mr Amunwa had not previously seen the DVRs, nor was he aware  that  the
Secretary of State's case was articulated in terms that  the  first  set  of
documents were forged and that there had been  a  second  set  of  documents
produced which were accepted as genuine in the review.   He  submitted  that
in adopting this position the Secretary of State appeared to  be  attempting
to re-litigate matters in circumstances where the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
had already had two opportunities to make a decision.

13. He submitted that the FTT found a close knit family and took account  of
oral evidence and the skeleton argument.  The  wider  circumstances  of  the
family and the fact that the grandfather died whilst  waiting  for  a  visit
visa to the UK, were relevant issues and compassionate  factors  which  took
the case into the exceptional category (Etti-Adegbola  V  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
civ 1319).

14. For visit visa appeals each case was fact sensitive  (Singh  v  ECO  New
Delhi [2004] EWCA CIV 1075 [20 to  21]  and  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)).   As  regards   the   proportionality
assessment the arguments under paragraph 320 and Article 8  stand  and  fall
together.  The ten year ban was a serious interference with family life.

Discussion and decision

15. The appeal before the FTT was limited to grounds under Section  84(1)(c)
Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  namely   human   rights.
Accordingly the approach of the FTT ought to have been to focus  firstly  on
whether Article 8 was engaged and thereafter to follow the Razgar  approach.
And in the proportionality assessment to consider the issue under  paragraph
320(7B) by reference  to  the  first  determination  as  a  starting  point.
Although post dating this matter Adjei (Visit  visas  -  Article  8)  [2015]
UKUT 0261 IAC endorses such an approach.  The head note states:

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as visitor where only  human  rights  grounds
         are available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the Rules and should not do  so.   If  Article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  is  not
         authority for any contrary proposition.

         As in Mostafa at [24] the Tribunal stated it is the very essence of
         Article 8 that it lays down fundamental  values  that  have  to  be
         considered in all relevant cases.  It would therefore be  extremely
         foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given the intensely  factual
         and contextual sensitivity of every case.   Thus  we  refrain  from
         suggesting that, in this type  of  case,  any  particular  kind  of
         relationship would always attract the protection of Article 8(1) or
         that other kinds of relationship would never come within its scope.
          We are however prepared to say  that  it  will  only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Article  8(1).   In  practical  terms  this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partner or a parent and  minor
         child and even then it will not necessarily be  extended  to  cases
         where, for example the proposed visit is based on a  whim  or  will
         not add significantly to the time that the  people  involved  spend
         together."

16.   In concluding that Article 8 was engaged the FTT [13] found  that  the
first Claimant had three children and seven grandchildren living in  the  UK
and that it was a close knit  family  despite  the  distance  between  them.
Significance was placed on a visit made by UK relatives in circumstances  of
serious family  illness  and  on  the  fact  that  the  first  Claimant  had
effectively brought up second Claimant, whose mother had  died  and  he  had
not had the opportunity to meet his cousins.  At  [14]  the  FTT  also  took
into account that the first Claimant's  husband  died  without  having  been
able to visit his children and grandchildren in  the  UK.   The  FTT  placed
weight on medical evidence that the first Claimant's brother was not fit  to
travel to Bangladesh. The FTT further  took  into  account  age,  number  of
grandchildren, income and the cost of the  UK  family  visit  to  Bangladesh
would be prohibitive.

17.  In analysing family life I find that the  FTT  failed  to  specifically
consider either the issue or the evidence in  relation  to  family  ties  as
between adult  siblings.   There  was  no   identification  of  evidence  of
dependency over  and  above  the  normal  emotional  ties.   The  FTT  cited
Ghising,  AA  v  UK  and  Etti-Adegbola   cases  relevant  to   visit   visa
applications and appeals where  it  was  recognised  that  family  life  may
continue between a parent and an adult child and that  each  case  was  fact
sensitive.  However, the reasoning behind  the  FTT's  decision  focused  on
general factors such as  age,  number  of  grandchildren,  income  and  cost
rather than any close  analysis  of  the  family  ties  and  nature  of  the
relationships between each appellant  and  their  UK  relations.   In  short
there was no specific consideration or  analysis  of  what  constitutes  the
family life including   previous visits and methods of communication.

18.  The existence  of  an  extended  close  knit  family  is  by  no  means
exceptional. The fact that the grandfather died pending  the  outcome  of  a
visit visa application whilst amounting to a compassionate circumstance,  is
not an event which on the evidence before the  FTT  took  this  out  of  the
realms of normal family life.  I am satisfied that  in  considering  Article
8(1) the FTT failed to address the relevant issues  and/or  with  sufficient
detail so as to conclude that family life exists as  between  adults  beyond
the range of normal emotional ties. I find that the FTT materially erred  in
law in its assessment under Article 8(1).

19.  I briefly consider the 320(7B) issue notwithstanding  that  this  issue
does not now  come into play given my  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  FTT
decision under Article 8(1). I am satisfied that the starting point for  the
FTT (following Devaseelan) was  the  findings  and  decision  of  the  first
Tribunal  (Judge  O'Garro)  which   dismissed  the  appeal  under  paragraph
320(7A). I have considered both  DVRs  and  I  find  no  evidence  that  the
findings and  decision  made  by  the  first  Tribunal  were  wrong.   I  am
satisfied that the FTT erred by placing reliance  on  an  assertion  in  the
Claimant's grounds of  appeal  that  the  ECM  accepted  that  no  deception
occurred.  The DVRs were not before the FTT and reliance  was  placed  on  a
letter dated 29 November 2011 from the manager of the bank  confirming  that
figures were accurate and true.  I am satisfied that the FTT in  relying  on
the assertion in the grounds and the bank letter failed to fully  grasp  the
concerns raised as to the financial evidence relied  on  by  the  Claimants.
Furthermore, without reference to the relevant DVRs and the review  the  FTT
misunderstood the position that the  financial  evidence  produced  for  the
second application and accepted as genuine, was in fact different from  that
produced in support of the first application.  I further find that  had  the
relevant documentary evidence  been  considered  at  the  FTT  hearing,  the
outcome would have been different.  It may well be that  subsequent  to  the
refusal,  the  Claimants   did   indeed   provide   reliable   and   genuine
documentation that was accepted by the ECM at the review stage, however  the
FTT was mislead into reaching a finding that the evidence before  the  first
Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) was not false.  I conclude that the  FTT  erred  in
reaching the conclusion that the decision to refuse the  applications  under
paragraph  320(7B)  was  not  lawful.   Consequently   the   assessment   of
proportionality under Article 8(2) is flawed.

Re making the decision
20.  Having found that the FTT materially erred in  law  I  set  aside  that
decision.  I now remake that decision. I am  satisfied  that  there  was  no
evidence on which to conclude that Article 8  family  life  is  established.
There is no evidence  to  show  that  the  relationship  between  the  first
Claimant and her adult relatives discloses any aspect of  dependency  or  is
any different from what might normally be expected between  such  relatives.
There is no evidence of any particularly  strong  relationship  between  the
Claimant and her extended family.  Other than  financial  constraints  there
is no evidence to show why those relationships cannot be maintained  in  the
way that relatives who have chosen to live in different countries manage  to
do so.  Otherwise there is no good reason why the UK based relatives  cannot
visit the claimants in Bangladesh if they wish to  do  so  albeit  that  the
cost for the entire family would be prohibitive for all of  them  to  travel
at the same time. The evidence suggests that there have been visits made  by
the UK relatives to Bangladesh on past occasions and  that  family  life  is
maintained.  To fall within  the  scope  of  Article  8  the  evidence  must
disclose  that  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong  tie  as  between   adult
relatives.  Further the evidence in respect of the second Claimant,  who  is
a minor, shows that he has established his own  family  life  in  Bangladesh
with his grandmother and uncle separate from the  relatives  in  the  United
Kingdom.  (Advic v UK 20 EHRR CD125 and Kugathas v IAT [2013] EWCA  Civ  31.


Summary of Decision

21.  The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision to  allow
    the appeal is set aside.

22.  I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                       Date 19.6.2015




GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                                 Date: 19.6.2015




GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

