
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: VA/01346/2015
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    VA/01348/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2016                    |On 23 January 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                mustaf gaxha
                               antoneta gaxha

                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                         the entry clearance officer
                                   warsaw
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Nova Legal
Services

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (at the  Taylor  House  hearing  centre)  in  June  2016,
    dismissing their appeals against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    them a family visit visa, on the basis that  the  son  whom  they  were
    seeking to visit had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  was
    here unlawfully, and further, that  they  had  failed  to  disclose  an
    earlier refusal on 28 January 2014, thereby engaging paragraphs 320(7A)
    and (7B) of the Rules.  The appellants' son  has  since  been  given  5
    years' leave to remain, in October 2016, as a spouse.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself at [2]-[6] of the  decision,
    having regard to the guidance given in particular at  paragraph  57  in
    the decision of this Tribunal in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department (ETS: evidence: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT  00229
    (IAC) because the judge directed himself that the burden of proof is on
    the appellant to establish all material facts and issues.

 3. In SM and Qadir, the President of this Tribunal, Mr Justice  McCloskey,
    said this concerning the standard and burden of proof:

         "56.         The legal principles  engaged  are  set  forth  below.
         While we are content to proceed on  this  basis,  we  observe  that
         there may be scope for further argument on the correct approach  in
         law in some future case. We thus observe on account of two  factors
         in particular. First, the Secretary  of  State,  in  all  of  these
         cases, is making the  positive  case  that  the  student  concerned
         dishonestly obtained the English language qualification by the  use
         of a proxy test taker. Second, the Secretary of State seeks to make
         good this allegation to  the  requisite  standard  by  adducing  in
         evidence, in addition to the generic evidence noted above, a flimsy
         spreadsheet emanating from ETS which, in a single  line,  contains,
         in substance, only the  name  of  the  student  concerned  and  the
         categorisation of either "questionable" or "invalid".

         57.         Both the applicable principles  and  the  jurisprudence
         were  reviewed  by  this  Tribunal  in  its  recent   decision   in
         Muhandiramge (Section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC),  at  [9]  -
         [11]. ...In this context, we highlight what was stated at  [11]  of
         Shen:

             " At the end of the day the SSHD bears the  burden  of  proof.
             This is a proposition which is uncontroversial  and  has  been
             confirmed on many occasions."

         We record here the submission of Mr Biggs on behalf of  the  second
         Appellant, with which we agree, that, doctrinally, a  legal  burden
         of proof does not "shift".

         58.         It is well established that proof of dishonesty on  the
         part of the immigrant concerned is required in order  to  establish
         either  "  false  representations"  or  "  false  documents"  under
         paragraph 321A of the Rules: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ  773,  at  [44]  and  [51]
         especially.  Following  the  consumption  of  large  quantities  of
         judicial ink, the legal rule which has  emerged  with  unmistakable
         clarity is that in civil proceedings there is but one  standard  of
         proof, namely proof on the balance of  probabilities.  One  of  the
         clearest expositions of this rule  is  found  in  the  judgment  of
         Richards LJ in R (N) v  Mental  Health  Review  Tribunal  (Northern
         Region) [2006] QB 468, at [62]:

             "Although there is a single civil standard  of  proof  on  the
             balance of probabilities, it is flexible in  its  application.
             In particular, the more serious the  allegation  or  the  more
             serious the consequences if  the  allegation  is  proved,  the
             stronger must be the evidence before a  court  will  find  the
             allegation proved on the balance of  probabilities.  Thus  the
             flexibility of the standard lies not in any adjustment to  the
             degree of probability required for an allegation to be  proved
             (such that a more serious allegation has to  be  proved  to  a
             higher degree of probability), but in the strength or  quality
             of the evidence that will  in  practice  be  required  for  an
             allegation to be proved on the balance of probabilities."

         ...In short, as emphasised by Lord Carswell in Re D [2008] UKHL 33,
         at [28], the fundamental judicial task is to decide whether, having
         regard to the  context,  the  evidence  adduced  is  of  sufficient
         cogency to warrant the conclusion that the burden of proof has been
         discharged to the civil standard."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not direct his mind to  the  question
    whether the respondent had established that the appellants' failure  to
    disclose the January 2014 refusal was dishonest, because he  considered
    that the burden of proof of honesty lay solely on the appellants.  That
    was an error of law, and such error is plainly material.

 5. As the appeal has been approached on an incorrect legal basis there  is
    no alternative  but  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The decision in this appeal will be re-made  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                         Date: 20 January 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

