

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01383/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 12th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            MR MUHAMMAD ALI MIRZA


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Appellant, a Pakistani national who had been reused leave to  enter
         the UK as a family visitor for three weeks to visit his cousin.


    2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davies  on  7th
         August 2014 when the Appellant was not represented and the  Sponsor
         did not attend. The Sponsor   did not attend before me  either.   A
         letter was received by the Tribunal saying  that  a  Rashid  Arshad
         could not attend and asking for a new date and a transfer to London
         here he lives.  That however is not the Sponsor on the court record
         who lives in Ashton-under-Lyne  and  in  any  event  there  was  no
         explanation given as to  why  that  person  could  not  attend.   I
         therefore proceeded with the matter.


    3.   Permission to appeal having been granted it is my task  to  decide
         if whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  if  so
         whether and to what extent the determination should be set aside.


    4.   Judge Davies dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction as  the
         decision attracted only a limited right of appeal - on Human Rights
         or Race Relations grounds.  Judge Davies said  that  there  was  no
         indication that the appeal was on that basis.


    5.   In that the Judge erred as the grounds  of  appeal  clearly  raise
         both.  I thus set aside his determination and proceed  to  redecide
         it.


    6.   Although the grounds of appeal make the claim that the decision is
         discriminatory and a breach of Human Rights, no evidence or  detail
         is contained in the very lengthy grounds or  in  the  bundle.   The
         detail is all about whether or not the Appellant meets paragraph 41
         of the Immigration Rules and that  is  not  within  the  Tribunal's
         jurisdiction.


    7.   The appeal is dismissed.






    Signed                 Dated 9th January 2015






          Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
