
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
VA/01609/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 September 2017                     |    On 13 October 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Ibrahim Kyari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Walsh, Counsel instructed by Luqmani Thompson &

     Partners, Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal  allowing  an  appeal  by  the  respondent  (hereinafter  "the
claimant") against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  an  Entry
Clearance Officer,  to  refuse  his  application  for  leave  as  a  student
visitor.

The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal "under the Immigration Rules  and
on human rights grounds".

Although I have found it necessary to consider the decision and the  grounds
in some detail, Mr Walsh was quick to accept  that  the  appeal  should  not
have been allowed under the Immigration Rules.  There was no power to  allow
the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The appeal could  only  be  brought
on human  rights  grounds  and  any  contrary  decision  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal was plainly wrong.  The First-tier Tribunal clearly  erred  in  law
in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  I  set  aside  that
part of the decision.

The challenge to the decision to allow the appeal on  human  rights  grounds
requires rather more analysis and thought.

I begin by considering the decision made by the Secretary of State.   It  is
dated 10 February 2015 and relies on paragraph  320(7A)  of  HC  395.   This
obliges the decision maker to refuse entry clearance if:

  "false representations or documents are used (whether or not material  to
  the application and whether or not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge),  or
  material facts are not disclosed in relation to the application".

The Secretary of State  noted  that  the  claimant  had  said  on  his  Visa
Application Form  in  answer  to  question  28  that  he  had  not  made  an
application to the Home Office to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
previous ten years, whereas he had in fact applied to the  Home  Office  for
asylum on 13 October 2015.  The sole reason for refusing  the  decision  was
paragraph  320(7A)  even  though  the  case  notes  show  that  the   asylum
application was withdrawn due to the claimant leaving the United Kingdom.

The claimant's bundle includes (page 97) a Home Office record created on  19
November 2014 referring to a "withdrawal request received" in  the  Document
Return and Investigations Team e-mail box and the details  of  that  request
are summarised in the following way:

  "October application recorded in error; applicant has  medical  condition
  (evidence supplied).  Applicant needs to withdraw erroneous appln,  leave
  country and consider entry clearance application in home country asap."

There is then a letter from the claimant's solicitors dated 8 December  2014
referring to their letters of 18 November and 27 November 2014 stating:

  "We clarified that, when an asylum claim appears to  have  been  recorded
  when our client visited the public inquiry office on 22/24 October (prior
  to expiry of his leave on 12 November), that was not  his  intention  and
  any such claim was to be cancelled."

It also referred to medical evidence that had been submitted to explain  why
an application had been made  or  apparently  made  and  then  withdrawn  so
quickly.

At paragraph 70 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal said that  it  found
that the claimant:

  "was not dishonest because he withdrew his asylum claim  and  he  already
  had nearly  fifteen  years  of  history  with  an  excellent  immigration
  record".

It then criticised the Secretary of State for not analysing the  application
in more detail rather than refusing solely  because,  in  the  Secretary  of
State's view, paragraph 320(7A) disposed of the application.

The First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that the Entry  Clearance  Manager  had
done rather better but  "fell  under  the  spell  of  the  initial  decision
without considering the effect of that decision on  all  the  evidence  that
had been presented within the Grounds of Appeal".

The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that,  paragraph  320(7A)  aside,  the
claimant would have satisfied the Immigration Rules.

The judge then reminded herself of the decision in  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and allowed  the  appeal  on  human
rights grounds.

It is necessary to see  precisely  how  this  claim  is  challenged  in  the
Secretary of State's grounds.

The decision to allow the appeal with  reference  to  paragraph  320(7A)  is
challenged at point 11 of the grounds where  the  judge  is  criticised  for
finding that the claimant:

  "Had no proper capacity - and certainly not sufficient capacity  to  form
  the kind of 'criminal' mens rea -  in  terms  of  intention  to  make  an
  operative fraud claim in respect of his answer to Question  25  [...]  on
  the application form' is simply not supported by the medical evidence".

I agree with the Secretary of State.  I can find no  medical  evidence  that
supports the finding.  Further, the finding is contrary  to  the  claimant's
case as set out in his statement.  He said at paragraph 23:

  "As I have said, I did not think my  interview  at  the  Home  Office  in
  October counted because it had been a  misunderstanding  which  had  been
  quickly cancelled before anything happened  to  it.   There  was  a  full
  explanation on the Home Office file.  I honestly thought what I  put  was
  the correct answer.  I  had  no  intention  to  deceive.   The  reason  I
  returned to Nigeria and did not use my existing  5-year  visit  visa  was
  because I wanted to do exactly the right thing."

There is no suggestion there that the claimant was  unaware  of  his  having
made an asylum claim.  He said that he did not think  it  was  deceitful  to
say he had not made a claim when he had made it in  the  circumstances  that
he did and withdrew it and left the  United  Kingdom  soon  afterwards.   Mr
Walsh has reminded me of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  A  v  SSHD
[2010] EWCA Civ 773.  The Rules, although in clear  terms,  are  aspects  of
policy that are themselves qualified  by  policy  and  an  extra  regulatory
policy statement has to be read with the Rules so that it is  clear  that  a
person's conduct is not within the scope of paragraph 320(7A) unless  it  is
dishonest.

Although I  disagree  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that  the
claimant was not dishonest because he was too poorly  to  form  the  intent,
and I set aside that decision, when I remake the  decision  I  too  conclude
that dishonesty has not been established.  As a matter  of  strict  fact  an
asylum claim that is made and then withdrawn is an  asylum  claim  that  has
been made.  If that were not  the  case  then  there  would  be  nothing  to
withdraw.  However, the asylum claim was never determined and  the  claimant
left the United Kingdom.  An allegation of dishonesty must be proved by  the
Secretary of State and I am not satisfied  that  it  is  probable  that  the
claimant was acting dishonestly when he indicated that he  had  not  made  a
claim when in truth he had made a claim that had been withdrawn after a  few
days and before it had been decided and shortly  before  the  claimant  left
the United Kingdom.  I find that the claimant was  objectively  entitled  to
think that a claim that was withdrawn in  these  circumstances  was  not  of
interest to the Secretary of State and so was not within the  ambit  of  the
question.

It follows that I conclude that  the  claimant  is  not  dishonest  and  the
application should not have been refused under paragraph 320(7A) of HC  395.


It is, I find, rather concerning that the Secretary of State was willing  to
regard the claimant  as  dishonest  in  these  circumstances  when  her  own
records state  "application  recorded  (note,  "recorded",  not  "made")  in
error". I do not say that she should, as a matter of law, have made  further
enquiries because I do not have to decide  that  point  but  common  decency
suggests that a  little  more  thought  before  besmirching  the  claimant's
character would not have been amiss.

I now turn to the challenge to the finding that the  decision  was  contrary
to the claimant's rights under article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights.

Here I find the Secretary of State's  grounds  completely  miss  the  point.
Ground 10 asserts that there are "No reasons are given for  finding  private
life."

The judge said at paragraph 94:

"The [claimant] has resided in the UK from 1999 until 2010  and  again  from
2014 until he returned to Nigeria to apply for a further  Visa  from  there.
That is a significant period of time."

The judge concluded from this that the claimant does have a private life  in
the United Kingdom.  Much is made in the Decision and Reasons  of  the  case
of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC).   It  is
quite a short decision and it might have been helpful if  the  parties,  and
particularly the  Secretary  of  State,  had  considered  what  we  said  at
paragraphs 23 and 24.  I set them out below:

  "23.   We have considered carefully the effect that this  decision  could
  have in other cases. Plainly this will mean that the underlying merits of
  an application and the ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules, although
  not the question before the Tribunal, may be capable of being  a  weighty
  factor in  an  appeal  based  on  human  rights  but  they  will  not  be
  determinative. They will only become relevant if the interference is such
  as to engage Article 8(1) ECHR and a finding  by  the  Tribunal  that  an
  appellant does satisfy the requirements of the rules will not necessarily
  lead to a  finding  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
  disproportionate to the proper purpose of enforcing immigration  control.
  However it may be capable of being  a  strong  reason  for  allowing  the
  appeal that must be weighed with the others facts in the case.

  24.         It is the very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
  fundamental values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.   It
  would therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
  the intensely factual and contextual sensitivity of every case.  Thus  we
  refrain from suggesting that, in this type of case, any  particular  kind
  of relationship would always attract the protection of  Article  8(1)  or
  that other kinds of relationship would never come within its  scope.   We
  are, however, prepared to say that  it  will  only  be  in  very  unusual
  circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be  able  to
  show that the refusal of  entry  clearance  comes  within  the  scope  of
  Article 8(1).  In practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases
  where the relationship is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life
  partners or  a  parent  and  minor  child  and  even  then  it  will  not
  necessarily be extended to cases where, for example, the  proposed  visit
  is based on a whim or will not add significantly to  the  time  that  the
  people involved spend together.  In the  limited  class  of  cases  where
  Article 8 (1) ECHR is engaged the refusal of entry clearance must  be  in
  accordance with the law and proportionate.  If a  person's  circumstances
  do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not acted in  a  way  that
  undermines  the  system  of  immigration  control,  a  refusal  of  entry
  clearance is liable to infringe Article 8."

Given this it might have been expected that the  Secretary  of  State  would
have challenged the finding that this case came  within  the  protection  of
Article 8.  Mr Walsh in his preparation had anticipated that  challenge  and
had prepared a skeleton  argument  justifying  his  position.   He  said  at
paragraph 11:

  "That the [claimants'] claim comes within Article 8(1) is hardly in doubt
  in view of his long association with the UK, his  long  residence  there,
  his attendance at education institutions.  He resided in the UK from 1999
  to 2010 and again from 2014 when he returned to Nigeria to  apply  for  a
  further visa from there."

I find that Mr Walsh's use of the phrase "hardly  in  doubt"  owes  more  to
optimism than strict legal analysis.  Nevertheless, it  was  supported  with
reference to Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368, and  Niemietz  v  Germany  (Application
No. 1370/88) where the European Court of Human Rights emphasised  the  width
of the protection coming from Article 8.  In short there was reason for  the
judge's decision that the claimant's private life was protected.   This  was
clearly in the judge's mind because he has relied on phrases that appear  to
be drawn, perfectly properly, from Mr Walsh's skeleton argument.

The contention that there was  no  reason  for  "finding  private  life"  is
demonstrably wrong.  The rest of the  grounds  that  criticise  the  implied
finding that there was family life are irrelevant.  This case  was  not  put
on the basis that it was a "family life" case and the judge did  not  decide
it on that basis.

I may have taken a very different view about  this  appeal  if  the  finding
that the private life recognised  by  the  judge  was  something  which  the
Secretary of State was obliged to  promote  and  within  the  protection  of
Article 8(1) had been challenged but that challenge was not brought  in  the
grounds.

However I wish to make it clear to anyone interested in this  decision  that
I have not decided that  the  private  life  recognised  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal came within the scope of  the  Convention.   I  have  decided  that
there was some private life and the finding to that effect was supported  by
the evidence.  The grounds relied upon have not been made out.

It follows therefore that although I find fault I have remade  the  decision
and uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The claim is now very stale.   I  give  no  directions  consequent  on  this
decision.  I doubt very much if the claimant has the slightest  interest  in
returning to the United Kingdom on a student visit visa  in  the  reasonably
near future.  Certainly the reasons that he advanced for wanting  to  do  so
has long since passed.  It may be that it would be  quite  inappropriate  to
grant him entry clearance as a result of this decision.  That  is  something
that will have to be considered if it arises.

Notice of Decision

I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent that I rule  that  the
appeal should not have been allowed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  that
the reason for  finding  that  the  claimant  had  not  been  untruthful  is
perverse.

I remake the decision and I find that the claimant  did  not  make  a  false
statement within the meaning of paragraph 320(7A) of HC 395.

I dismiss the appeal against the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
rights grounds.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 12 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |



