
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons               |
|On 14 April 2016                           |On 28th July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD AKRAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Graham sitting at Birmingham on 3  September
    2015) dismissing on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse him  entry
    clearance as a family visitor for a period of fifteen days.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 14 March 2016 Upper Tribunal Reeds granted the appellant  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   Whilst this was a case in which jurisdiction was restricted to
             human rights considerations, in the light of the  decision  of
             Kaur (Visit appeals:  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487  it  is
             arguable that the judge erred in the consideration of  Article
             8 in the context and against the background of the evidence of
             the Appellant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules.

         2.   Furthermore, as the grounds set out, the judge arguably  erred
             in law by not considering the evidence submitted  in  relation
             to his wish to visit his  grandmother  in  the  light  of  the
             evidence provided both with the application  and  subsequently
             and as to whether the interests covered by Article 8 were of a
             'particularly pressing nature' so as to give rise to a 'strong
             claim that compelling circumstances may exist to  justify  the
             grant of leave to enter outside of the Rules'.  (See  decision
             in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and  decision  in  Kaur  (as
             cited)).

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose  date  of  birth  is  15
    October 1979.  In his application form for a visit  visa,  he  said  he
    planned to arrive in the UK on 30 December 2014 and to  stay  here  for
    fifteen days.   He  would  be  staying  with  his  brother,  Mr  Ramzan
    Muhammad, at his brother's home in Coventry.  In part 5, he  was  asked
    to give details of his family in the UK, and  whether  he  intended  to
    visit them or stay with them.  In the box at question 65 the  appellant
    entered details about his brother, and also about his  grandfather,  Mr
    Yunis Muhammad.  The implication of the details entered  was  that  his
    grandfather lived with his brother at the family home in Coventry.

 4. At  part  7,  he  was  given  the  opportunity  to  provide  additional
    information.  He was asked whether  there  was  any  other  information
    which he wished to be considered as part of his application.   He  left
    this blank.

 5. Earlier in the application  form,  the  appellant  was  asked  to  give
    details about his father and mother.  He said his father had been  born
    in Rawalpindi on 1 January 1919,  and  his  mother  had  been  born  in
    Rawalpindi on 5 June 1923.

 6. The ECO bundle contains an undated letter from Dr Kaye of  Chelsea  and
    Westminster Hospital in London SW10.  This stated  that  Saleema  Begum
    (D.O.B. 1 January 1935) was  currently  an  inpatient  at  Chelsea  and
    Westminster Hospital.  She was unable to travel and  her  family  would
    like to come and visit given her condition.




The Reasons for Refusal

 7. On 28 December 2014 an Entry Clearance Officer in Abu  Dhabi  gave  his
    reasons for refusing the appellant's application to visit  his  brother
    in the UK for a period  of  fifteen  days.   He  stated  he  was  self-
    employed, running Moon Motors, and that he earned  100,000  PKR  (�636)
    per month.  As evidence, he had submitted  his  bank  statement.   This
    document in isolation  did  not  demonstrate  evidence  of  an  ongoing
    business or that the business  was  owned  by  him.   Furthermore,  the
    deposits into the bank account were in excess  of  his  stated  monthly
    income.  The document submitted in support of the application  did  not
    provide evidence of the  origin  of  the  funds  going  into  his  bank
    account.  So he was  not  satisfied  that  the  bank  account  actually
    represented his financial circumstances.

 8. He stated his sponsor would maintain and  accommodate  him  during  his
    visit.  But the documents he submitted in support  of  his  application
    did not demonstrate this.

 9. Given all the above, he was not satisfied he had actually presented his
    circumstances or intentions in wishing to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.
    This meant he was not satisfied he was genuinely  seeking  entry  as  a
    family visitor for a limited period or that he intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of the period of the visit as stated by  him;
    or that he could maintain and accommodate himself in the United Kingdom
    without recourse to public funds or employment; or that he  could  meet
    the cost of the return or onward journey.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant said he had applied to come  to
    the  UK  as  a  family  visitor  on  compassionate  circumstances   and
    humanitarian grounds.  His grandmother was seriously sick in the UK due
    to her old age, and he directed the Entry Clearance Officer's attention
    to "her doctor's letter" which he had attached.

11. No further mention was made of the grandmother  in  the  remaining  and
    extremely lengthy grounds of appeal, which ran to nine pages in  total,
    almost entirely directed at the appellant's circumstances in  Pakistan,
    and hence the merits of the refusal under the Rules.

The Entry Clearance Manager's Appeal Review

12. On 28 April 2015 the Entry  Clearance  Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decision.  As the appellant  had  applied  for  a
    family visit visa after 25 June 2013, he had  been  correctly  afforded
    only a limited right of appeal.  He alleged in his  grounds  of  appeal
    that the decision breached the Human Rights Convention, but no  details
    on why he considered this to be the case had been provided.  There  was
    no reason to believe that the appellant had any family life with his UK
    sponsor.  But if he had, he had not  shown  any  interference  with  it
    because he could continue to enjoy that family life in the same way  he
    had done hitherto.  No satisfactory reason had been put forward  as  to
    why the appellant's relative in the UK was unable to travel to Pakistan
    or to a third country to be with the appellant.

13. It was for the appellant to discharge the burden of proof.  In response
    to the concerns raised by the Entry Clearance Officer  in  the  refusal
    decision, the appellant stated that due to the nature of  his  business
    his income fluctuated on a monthly  basis.   He  had  provided  several
    documents in relation to his business which were not  provided  at  the
    time of the application.  He provided a letter from his accountant  and
    his tax document to show  that  the  business  had  an  income  of  PKR
    1,275,000.  But he was unable to distinguish the  appellant's  personal
    income from his business  income.   The  appellant  had  also  provided
    invoices in an attempt to justify the large deposits into his  account.
    But these were just printed A4 receipts which had been  initialled  and
    could have been produced at any time.  So he was  still  not  satisfied
    that the appellant's circumstances in Pakistan  were  as  claimed,  and
    this led him to question his intentions in  travelling  to  the  United
    Kingdom now.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appellant did not request an oral hearing, and so  his  appeal  was
    determined by Judge Graham on the papers.  In her subsequent  decision,
    Judge Graham gave her reasons for dismissing the appeal  in  paragraphs
    10 to 15, which I reproduce verbatim below:

         "10. The Appellant made an application to visit his brother in  the
             United Kingdom for  a  period  of  fifteen  days.   Since  the
             refusal and reconsideration of this application by  the  Entry
             Clearance Manager the  Sponsor  submits  a  witness  statement
             dated 8th August 2015 in which he states that the  Appellant's
             grandmother has serious medical problems in the United Kingdom
             and is suffering from heart failure and  continues  to  be  at
             high risk of cardiac events.   The  Sponsor  states  that  the
             purpose of the Appellant's visit was for compassionate reasons
             as  stated  in  his  application  form  (Part   7   Additional
             information).    The   Respondent's   bundle   contains    the
             application form but there  is  no  Part  7  included  in  the
             Respondent's   bundle.    There   is   no   indication    that
             compassionate circumstances relating to the  grandmother  were
             considered by either the Entry Clearance Officer or the  Entry
             Clearance Manager and  there  is  no  evidence  before  me  to
             confirm that the Appellant and Mrs Saleema Begum  are  related
             as claimed or at all.  I am satisfied that this aspect of  the
             Appellant's Appeal can  be  dealt  with  by  way  of  a  fresh
             application  where  the  circumstances  of   the   Appellant's
             relationship with Saleema Begum can be fully considered.

         11.  In respect of the Appellant's relationship with the Sponsor in
             the United Kingdom I have considered whether  the  Appellant's
             right to respect for their family life under Article 8 ECHR is
             engaged by refusing him entry clearance to the UK to visit his
             relatives.  I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  cannot  bring
             himself within the Immigration Rules.  I have  considered  the
             relationship between the Appellant and his family in the UK.

         12.  I have considered the Strasburg case of  Advic  v  The  United
             Kingdom  1995]  ECHR  57  where  the  Commission  said  '...in
             accordance with the Commission's case-law, the exclusion of  a
             person from a country in which his close relatives reside  may
             raise an issue under Article 8 of the Convention.  However, in
             examining cases of this nature the Commission's first task  is
             to consider whether  a  sufficient  link  exists  between  the
             relatives concerned to give rise to the protection of  Article
             8 of  the  Convention.   Although  this  will  depend  on  the
             circumstances of each  particular  case,  the  Commission  has
             already considered that the protection of Article  8  did  not
             cover links between adult brothers who had been  living  apart
             for a long period of time and who were not dependent  on  each
             other.  Moreover, the relationship between  a  parent  and  an
             adult child would not necessarily acquire  the  protection  of
             Article 8  of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of  further
             elements  of  dependency,  involving  more  than  the   normal
             emotional ties....'

         13.  The Court also stated in Mokrani v France [2003] 40  EHRR  123
             that 'relationships between adults do not necessarily  benefit
             from protection under Article 8 of the Convention  unless  the
             existence of additional  elements  of  dependence  other  than
             normal emotional ties can be proven'.  In Kugathas [2003] EWCA
             Civ 31 the  Court  of  appeal  reiterated  the  dicta  of  the
             Strasburg  cases  but  added  that  the  further  element   of
             dependency did not have to be  economic  and  stated  that  it
             would be necessary  to  show  that  ties  of  support,  either
             emotional or economic were in  existence  and  go  beyond  the
             ordinary and natural ties of affection that would accompany  a
             relationship of that kind.  In the Court of Appeal case of  JB
             (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 234 it was said that the  approach  in
             Kugathas must be applied to the question whether 'family life'
             for the purposes of Article 8  subsists  between  parents  and
             their adult children.  There must be 'elements  of  dependency
             going beyond the normal emotional ties'.  If  such  dependency
             is not found then the refusal to admit members of  the  family
             simply does not constitute interference with family life.   In
             the later case of AAO [2011] EWCA Civ 840 the Court of  Appeal
             gave guidance on the point and stated that family  life  would
             not normally exist between parents and adult  children  within
             the meaning of Article 8 in the absence of further elements of
             dependency which went beyond normal emotional ties.  The Court
             also  said  that  Financial  dependency  was  not  in   itself
             sufficient to create a strong family bond under Article 8.

         14.  I am satisfied that each case must be determined on its facts.
              In this Appeal the Appellant wishes  to  visit  his  brother.
             There is no evidence before me which would lead to  a  finding
             that the Appellant was in poor health or that his relationship
             with his adult sibling involved any emotional  dependency.   I
             am bound to find that the Appellant does not  have  a  'family
             life' with his brother in the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore
             refusing him entry clearance cannot be  an  interference  with
             family life.  Therefore Article  8  is  not  engaged  in  this
             Appeal.

         15.  Accordingly I find that Article 8 ECHR is not engaged in  this
             Appeal and the appeal is dismissed."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. In his reasons for appealing the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellant said that he had referred  to  his  ailing  grandmother's
    condition in his VAF in answer to questions 80 and 84, and he had  also
    stated her  name  in  answer  to  questions  81  and  82.   His  infirm
    grandmother was close to death, and there was no other route  by  which
    the appellant could visit his ailing grandmother.  The whole  plan  and
    intent of the appellant  had  been  taken  away  and  thwarted  by  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

The Error of Law Hearing

16. Although the  appellant  asked  for  an  oral  hearing,  there  was  no
    appearance  before  me  by  either  his   UK   sponsor   or   a   legal
    representative.  He was clearly  aware  that  the  hearing  was  taking
    place, as the day before someone had faxed to the Upper Tribunal on his
    behalf a copy of Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement - Article  8)
    [2015] UKUT  00463  (IAC)  for  me  to  take  into  consideration  when
    evaluating the appellant's error of law challenge.

17. On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Ms Sreeraman  submitted  that
    the appeal should be dismissed.  She relied  on  the  contents  of  the
    appellant's application form, which she had produced  pursuant  to  the
    direction of Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.  She also relied on  the  Rule
    24 response settled by her colleague, Mr Chris Avery of the  Specialist
    Appeals Team.  At paragraph [10] the judge found there was insufficient
    evidence before her to establish the relationship between the appellant
    and Mrs Saleema Begum.  Given this finding, it was difficult to see how
    she  could  have  taken  the  Article  8  consideration  any   further.
    Furthermore, even if she had, it is difficult to see how any  protected
    Article 8  right  could  have  been  established,  given  the  apparent
    circumstances of the case.

Discussion

18. In Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    said at paragraphs [28]  to  [30]  that  there  was,  on  analysis,  no
    conflict  between  Mostafa  and  Adjei.   The  Tribunal  continued   in
    paragraph [31]:

         "In any event, even  if  we  are  wrong  in  our  analysis  of  the
         reasoning in these two cases, we consider it beyond doubt that  (i)
         evidence relating to the  ability  of  an  appellant  to  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 41 must be relevant to the assessment  of
         whether there is a violation of Article 8; (ii) this means that  it
         is essential for a Tribunal Judge deciding the Article  8  question
         to make any findings on the basis of all the evidence in the  case.
         If an appellant is contending that the ECO was wrong about  matters
         of  evidence,  relating  to  intention,  finances  etc.,  then  the
         Tribunal Judge must decide whether this is in fact so.   He  cannot
         simply rely on the ECO's findings, but neither can he (as  happened
         in Adjei) simply rely on what an appellant avows."

19. Earlier, at paragraph [27] the Tribunal said as follows:

         "Overall, unless an appellant can show that  there  are  individual
         interests at stake covered by Article 8 'of a particularly pressing
         nature' so as to give rise  to  a  'strong  claim  that  compelling
         circumstances may exist to justify the grant  of  LTE  outside  the
         Rules'; (see SS (Congo)  at  [40]  and  [56]),  he  is  exceedingly
         unlikely to succeed.  That  proposition  must  also  hold  good  in
         visitor appeals."

20. In the light of Kaur, Judge Graham left herself vulnerable to an  error
    of law challenge by avoiding taking the factual  situation  as  regards
    the ability of the appellant to  meet  paragraph  41  as  her  starting
    point.  Nonetheless, a failure to do so will not  be  material  if  the
    judge has given adequate reasons for finding that Article 8(1)  is  not
    shown to be engaged.

21. There was no satisfactory evidence before the judge to  show  that  the
    appellant had asserted in his application that one of the purposes,  or
    the main purpose, of his fifteen day visit to the United Kingdom was to
    visit his ailing grandmother in Chelsea and Westminster  Hospital.   It
    was asserted by the sponsor that the topic had been addressed in part 7
    of the application form, but the version of the form that  was  in  the
    ECO bundle was missing two pages; and so. as the judge said, there  was
    no part 7 included in the  ECO  bundle.   Accordingly,  she  could  not
    verify the sponsor's claim.

22. Although the version of the application  form  provided  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal shows that part 7 was left blank, and also that there  was  no
    mention of a grandmother in the remainder  of  the  application,  there
    remains an evidential gap as the version of the  completed  application
    form in the ECO bundle is a more extended version than that  which  has
    been produced to me.  It may be that this is because the version in the
    ECO bundle is the version which the appellant signed, and  handed  over
    in person, whereas the version produced  by  Ms  Sreeraman  reflects  a
    parallel online application.  But  at  all  events,  the  versions  are
    different in that the version in the ECO  bundle  has  more  questions.
    The last question in the version produced by Ms Sreeraman  is  question
    67 arising under part 7, whereas the last question and answer shown  in
    the application form in the ECO bundle is question  79,  which  is  the
    last question in part 4.

23. So there is the possibility of the sponsor being correct  in  asserting
    that in one version of the application form the appellant mentioned his
    grandmother.  However, overall I  consider  this  is  unlikely,  having
    regard to the absence of any mention of her in the other version of the
    application form, and also because of the way she is introduced in  the
    notice of appeal.  She is introduced as a  reason  for  expediting  the
    appeal.  It is not suggested at this juncture that the Entry  Clearance
    Officer has ignored what the appellant said in his application form, in
    particular in part 7.

24. The Entry Clearance Manager in his review  clearly  ignored  the  (new)
    claim that the purpose of the visit was for the appellant to visit  his
    grandmother who was seriously sick in a hospital in London.   The  fact
    that the Entry Clearance Manager ignored the potential implications  of
    this did not relieve the  judge  of  the  obligation  to  evaluate  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  So to  that  it  extent  it  was  not  an
    adequate response on the part of the judge to say that this  aspect  of
    the claim could be dealt with by way of a fresh application.

25. However, the judge made a parallel finding which means that  any  error
    in her approach is not material.  Her parallel finding is that there is
    no evidence before her to confirm that the appellant  and  Mrs  Saleema
    Begum were related as claimed or at all.  This was a finding which  was
    clearly open to the judge on the evidence that  was  before  her.   Mrs
    Begum had not been mentioned in the application (so far  as  the  judge
    could see) and the letter from the doctor was undated.   Moreover,  the
    brother with whom the appellant was going to stay  lived  in  Coventry,
    whereas Mrs Begum was in a hospital in West London.   Furthermore,  the
    date of birth assigned by the doctor to Mrs Begum meant  that  she  was
    younger than the appellant's parents, and so she could not  be  related
    to him as a grandmother.

26. In the light of this sustainable finding,  the  Article  8  claim  fell
    away.  The appellant had not  shown  that  Article  8(1)  was  engaged,
    either by reference to  his  putative  relationship  with  Mrs  Saleema
    Begum, or by reference to his undisputed  fraternal  relationship  with
    his UK sponsor.  Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not
    disclose a material error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.






Signed                              Date 28th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


