
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  VA/01792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2014                |On 19th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS AZAR MIRMOHAMMAD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Mrs Zari Nazari (The Sponsor in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission, by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in relation to  a  Determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Osborne) promulgated on 24th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant had sought entry clearance to the UK as a family visitor.
     The application was refused on 2nd April  2014  with  only  a  limited
    right of appeal.

 3. The matter came to be decided on the papers by the First-tier Tribunal.
     In her determination Judge Osborne set out the reasons for refusal and
    dealt with the Appellant's arguments.  She accepted that the  Appellant
    is a genuine visitor and allowed the appeal.  In so doing she failed to
    take into account  the  limited  grounds  available  to  the  Appellant
    (discrimination or Human Rights).  She dealt with paragraph 41  of  the
    Immigration Rules but not discrimination or  Human  Rights  and  in  so
    doing made an error of law.  As that was the  basis  for  allowing  the
    appeal I set aside the decision and remake it.

 4. While I have sympathy  for  the  Appellant  who  wishes  to  visit  her
    daughter in the UK and help her to care for her child  on  a  temporary
    basis, the decision does not amount to a disproportionate breach of the
    Article 8 rights of the various family members.  When  families  choose
    to live across continents from each other it is that  which  interferes
    with family life and as was made clear to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    to me, the Sponsor can and does visit her mother in Iran.

 5.  There  was  no  evidence  or  submission   that   the   decision   was
    discriminatory.

 6. The Appellant can make a further application  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and the Appellant may wish to include a copy of Judge Osborne's
    determination and this one with the application.  While  Judge  Osborne
    was not entitled to allow the appeal, her  findings  remain  valid.  It
    does appear to be the case that this Appellant and Sponsor were  denied
    a visa because they were honest in giving the reason for the  visit  at
    that time rather than simply saying it was a family visit.  I note that
    this Appellant has been a frequent visitor in the past.


 7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed such that  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 18th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
