
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2015                       |On 1 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KK (cameroon)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Yeo, Counsel instructed by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (post reference ACCRA\818681)  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing on Article 8 grounds the  claimant's  appeal  against
    the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance as a family visitor to the United Kingdom for a period of two
    months.  The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction,  and  I
    consider that it is appropriate for the  claimant  to  continue  to  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 10 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cooper) promulgated
             on 19 January 2015 whereby it allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
             against the decision of an entry  clearance  officer  refusing
             clearance for a visit.

         2.   The grounds asset that family life  will  not  normally  exist
             between adult siblings, parents and  adult  children.   If  it
             does not exist then Article 8 will not  normally  be  engaged.
             It is argued that the decision does not interfere with  family
             life.  The decision  does  not  interfere  with  the  existing
             pattern of family and private  life  and  the  proportionality
             assessment carried out by the Judge is inadequate.  Because he
             could not allow the appeal under the Rules, he used Article  8
             as a general dispensing power.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge's  conclusion  in  paragraph  35
             that family life exists is inadequately reasoned.   Permission
             is therefore granted."



The Background

 3. The background to this appeal is that the claimant  is  a  national  of
    Cameroon, whose date of birth is [ ] 1959.  In  her  application  form,
    she said she was a self-employed subsistence farmer earning 75,000 FCFA
    per month from all sources of employment or occupation after tax.   She
    said  she  wished  to  travel  to  the  UK  to  visit   her   daughter,
    grandchildren and her partner since they could  not  come  to  Cameroon
    themselves.

 4. In an invitation letter which was enclosed with the application, T said
    he was inviting the claimant, the mother of his partner, to  visit  the
    UK for a brief period of  time.   He  was  a  recognised  refugee  from
    Cameroon.  Before he left Cameroon, he was married  to  the  claimant's
    daughter and they had a child together.  His wife and child had  joined
    him in the UK under family reunion rules.  His wife had given birth  to
    a second child, who had been born in the UK on  24  August  2013.   The
    claimant now wished to visit and  spend  time  with  her  daughter  and
    grandchildren.  He continued:

         "Please  note  that  given  the  circumstances  which  led  to  our
         departure from Cameroon it is impractical for us to return.   Hence
         the only way [the claimant] can see her daughter and  grandchildren
         is to visit the UK.  I would thus be grateful if you can adequately
         consider the human rights aspects of this application."

 5. On 12 March 2014 the Entry  Clearance  Officer  gave  his  reasons  for
    refusing to issue the claimant  with  entry  clearance.   She  did  not
    provide any evidence to demonstrate her circumstances in Cameroon.  She
    had failed to demonstrate that she had sufficient ties to Cameroon.  He
    recognised that her sponsor had proposed  to  bear  the  costs  of  her
    visit.  But he had to take  into  account  her  personal  and  economic
    circumstances  in  her  home  country,  in  the  absence   of   further
    documentation, he was not satisfied she had  accurately  presented  her
    circumstances or intentions in wishing to enter the UK.  He refused the
    application by reference to sub-paragraphs (i), (ii), (vi) and (vii) of
    paragraph 41 of the Rules.

 6. In the grounds of appeal she said that the decision violated her  human
    rights under Article 8 ECHR.  She had six children.  She had  not  seen
    her eldest daughter since she had left Cameroon in early 2011  to  join
    her husband, who had been  granted  refugee  status  in  the  UK.   The
    circumstances which led them to leave Cameroon were very unpleasant and
    inhospitable, and the threats against them still persisted.  Thus  they
    could not return to the Cameroon.  Family life existed between her  and
    her daughter because of their strong family bond.  They  are  regularly
    in touch by telephone, and they sent her money  for  her  upkeep.   The
    refusal of a visa prevented  her  from  visiting  the  UK  to  see  her
    daughter and grandchildren, and they could not travel  to  Cameroon  to
    visit her.  This would lead to them losing touch forever.  The decision
    was  also  not  proportionate  to  the  need  to   maintain   effective
    immigration control because her daughter and her husband were gainfully
    employed in the UK, and they had a home with sufficient room  for  her,
    and they would pay for her return travel expenses.  Also, she  intended
    to leave the UK at the end of her short visit.   As  explained  in  her
    visa application, she was married to her  husband,  and  she  also  had
    other grown up children and lots extended family in Cameroon,  as  well
    as her private life and social activities.  She was  not  used  to  the
    ways of the western world and she did not speak English.  She said  she
    would not be able to relate to life in the UK or  want  to  live  there
    long term.

 7. On 10 September 2014 the Entry Clearance Manager gave his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal  decision.   The  claimant  stated  she  received
    financial support from the sponsor.  The  evidence  provided  with  the
    ground of appeal did not corroborate such support, nor did  it  confirm
    her claimed circumstances in Cameroon.  Article  8  did  not  give  the
    claimant an automatic right to pursue her family and  private  life  in
    the UK and there appeared to be no obstacle to them meeting in a  third
    country.

 8. The claimant asked for the appeal to be determined on the papers.   For
    purposes  of  the  appeal,  the  claimant's  solicitors  filed  witness
    statements from the claimant's daughter and son-in-law.  The claimant's
    daughter said that she had moved to the United Kingdom in March 2012 by
    way of refugee family reunion.  Because of the  persecution  which  had
    caused her husband to flee Cameroon (in 2009) she was  afraid  that  if
    she returned to the country she would be victimised by the authorities.
     So she could not return with her two children  to  visit  her  mother.
    She desperately  longed  to  see  her.   She  was  in  touch  with  her
    regularly.  She called her on her mobile phone about twice a week.  Her
    mother did not have access to the internet.  She also  sent  her  money
    and pictures of herself  and  her  children  whenever  she  could  find
    someone travelling to Cameroon.

 9. In his witness statement, T  said  that  he  had  applied  for  refugee
    protection because of the persecution he had suffered at the  hands  of
    the police and government authorities in Cameroon.  He was out on  bail
    and had been charged with criminal offences when he fled the country.

10. In his subsequent decision, the judge noted  that  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal the claimant said that as a result of her son-in-law's  problems
    in Cameroon, he was always unavailable.  So her daughter  and  grandson
    lived with her for extended periods for their safety, and as  a  result
    she grew to develop a special affection for them.

11. The judge went on to make the findings which I have  set  out  verbatim
    below.

         "31. Although the relevant Immigration Rule is  that  contained  in
             paragraph 41, the Appellant only has a right of appeal against
             the Respondent's decision on human rights and  race  relations
             grounds.  Consequently the issue  for  determination  in  this
             appeal is whether the decision by the Respondent breached  the
             rights under Article 8 of the ECHR of  the  Appellant  or  any
             other person.

         32.  I find the content and  tenor  of  the  application  form  and
             supporting letter, the grounds of appeal and,  in  particular,
             the three witness statements attached to the Notice of  Appeal
             to be convincing and credible.

         33.  I note that the Respondent  has  not  challenged  any  of  the
             factual claims made, such as the fact that the  Sponsor  is  a
             refugee or that his wife and elder child joined him under  the
             family reunion provisions relating to refugees.   Consequently
             I accept that the Sponsor himself cannot be expected to return
             to Cameroon.  Whilst no details  have  been  provided  of  the
             circumstances which  led  to  the  Sponsor  acquiring  refugee
             status, the proposition that the Sponsor's wife  and  children
             could not safely return to Cameroon themselves seems to me, on
             the  balance  of  probabilities,  to  be  legitimate;  it   is
             commonplace that where a person subject to persecution is  out
             of the reach of his persecutors, he can be attacked indirectly
             through his immediate family members.   I  conclude  therefore
             that there is no realistic  possibility  for  the  Appellant's
             daughter and children to return to Cameroon to enable  her  to
             spend time with them, and in the case of the younger child  to
             see him for the first time.

         34.  Whilst the appeal is not specifically about  whether  all  the
             requirements of paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration  Rules  were
             met, I am satisfied on the evidence before me that they  were.
             Given my findings as to credibility above, I am satisfied that
             the Appellant is a genuine visitor who will return to Cameroon
             at the end of her stay, and can be maintained and accommodated
             in the United Kingdom  without recourse to public funds.

         35.   I  accept  that  the  Appellant,   her   daughter   and   her
             grandchildren do enjoy a form of family life, albeit currently
             only by telephone communication, and I am satisfied  that  the
             Respondent's  decision  therefore  engages  Article  8.    The
             decision  is  clearly  lawful  and  made  in  pursuit  of  the
             legitimate aim of maintaining effective  immigration  control.
             So the question is whether the decision  is  proportionate  in
             pursuit of that aim.

         36.  I accept that he decision does not interfere in a  direct  way
             with the family life as it is currently enjoyed,  in  that  it
             does not make a difference to its continuation in  that  form.
             However there is also an obligation on a state to show  proper
             respect for family life.  In this case, given the inability of
             the Appellant's daughter and children to come to  Cameroon  to
             see her, and  given  my  findings  that  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules had in fact been met,  I
             consider in these particular circumstances that  the  decision
             to deny the Appellant the opportunity to visit  her  daughter,
             the  Sponsor  and  their  children  in  the   United   Kingdom
             demonstrates a disproportionate lack of respect for the rights
             of all those parties to enjoy family life, and is therefore in
             breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."



The Error of Law Hearing

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble relied on the argument advanced in
    the application for permission to appeal.  Article 8 was  not  engaged,
    because there was no interference of family life.  There needed  to  be
    further elements of dependency involving more than emotional  ties  for
    there to be family life between an adult child and his parents.   Also,
    the refusal of entry clearance did  not  interfere  with  the  existing
    pattern of family and private life.  The proportionality assessment was
    inadequate.  It did not explain why the refusal of a  visa  which  only
    allowed the parties to be together temporarily was  a  disproportionate
    interference  with  her  Article  8  rights.    Also   there   was   no
    consideration that the claimant and the sponsors might meet in a  third
    country.

13. Mr Kandola relied on Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT
    00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC).

14. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Yeo referred me to his Rule 24  response.
    He  submitted  that  Adjei  did  nothing  to  undermine   the   judge's
    conclusions on the facts of this case.  Whether family life exists  for
    the purposes of Article 8 is a flexible and  fact  sensitive  exercise.
    Adjei was distinguishable on the facts.  Mr Yeo  took  me  through  the
    various authorities contained  in  an  additional  authorities'  bundle
    which he had  compiled,  including  Singh  v  Secretary  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  At paragraph 25, Sir  Stanley  Burton,
    giving the leading the judgment to the court said:

         "However, the debate as to whether an applicant has or  has  not  a
         family life for the purposes of Article 8 is liable to be arid  and
         academic.  In the present case,  in  agreement  with  Solomon  LJ's
         comment when refusing permission to appeal,  the  issue  is  indeed
         academic, and clearly so.  As the European Court  of  Human  Rights
         pointed out in AA, in the judgment which I found most helpful,  the
         facts are to be examined in order to assess proportionality are the
         same regardless of whether family or private life is engaged.   The
         question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal and the court  is
         whether  those  factors  lead  to  the  conclusion  it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove the applicant from the  United  Kingdom.
         I reject Mr Malik's submission  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality was flawed because she, on  his  case
         wrongly, based it on the appellant's private life  rather  than  on
         their family and private  life.   In  my  judgment,  she  took  all
         relevant factors into account, and a conclusion on  proportionality
         is not able to challenge.  Indeed, I go further, in my judgment, no
         reasonable Tribunal, on the facts found, could properly  have  come
         to a different conclusion."

15. The judge continued in paragraph 26:

         "However, for the sake of completeness, I add that in  my  judgment
         the judge correctly found the appellants had no family life in this
         country to which Article  8  applies.   They  are  independent  and
         working.  Their siblings, who are younger, are in India, and  their
         mother understandably spends as much or more time in India than  in
         this country.  There is no evidence of anything beyond  the  normal
         bonds of affection, part possibly for some financial support of the
         family in India.  That support cannot lead to a finding of a family
         life in this country, which is the only family life for  which  the
         appellants contended."

16. In reply, Mr Kandola submitted that  Singh  assisted  the  respondent's
    error of law challenge.  I note that the judge had not  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that there was family life between the claimant and
    the sponsors.  Love and affection was not  enough.   If  private  life,
    rather than family life, was being relied upon, it was less compelling.
     It was submitted that, consistent with the guidance given by the Court
    of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at 33, the judge needed to,
    but failed) to identify  compelling  circumstances  which  supported  a
    grant of entry clearance to a visitor on Article 8 grounds outside  the
    Rules.



Discussion

17. The conclusion which I draw  from  SS  (Congo)  is  that  the  judicial
    decision maker has a wider discretion to grant Article 8 relief outside
    the Rules in a LTE case than he does in an LTR case.  This  is  because
    there is no Section EX.1 for LTE cases, but whereas there  is  for  LTR
    cases.  Thus, as the court observed at paragraph 34, the LTR Rules  are
    more generous for applicants than the LTE Rules.  Since  the  inability
    to carry on family life elsewhere is not a factor which is  taken  into
    account under the LTE Rules, it  is  potentially  a  compelling  factor
    which comes into play in an Article  8  assessment  outside  the  Rules
    where entry clearance is being sought.  On the other hand, as the court
    also recognised at paragraph 38, the requirements upon the state  under
    Article 8 are less stringent  in  the  LTE  context  than  in  the  LTR
    context.  Refusal of entry clearance maintains the status quo,  whereas
    refusal of leave to remain threatens family life which  already  exists
    and is currently being carried on in the United Kingdom.

18. In Mostafa, the Tribunal held that in appeals brought  against  refusal
    of entry clearance under Article 8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules is not a question to be determined by the
    Tribunal, but is capable of being a weighty, though not  determinative,
    fact when  deciding  whether  such  refusal  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.

19. There is no challenge by way of appeal to the judge's finding that  the
    claimant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41 that  were  put  in
    issue by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The  issue  is  whether  the
    consequences of the refusal decision  of  such  gravity  as  to  engage
    Article 8.

20. Although the claimant's daughter comes into the  category  of  a  close
    relative, as does  the  claimant's  grandchildren,  there  is  not  the
    additional element of dependency which establishes family life for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  The fact the adult sponsors remit money to  the
    claimant in Cameroon is not enough  to  create  dependency,  especially
    when the claimant herself relies on her strong  ties  to  relatives  in
    Cameroon, including her husband and other  children  living  there,  as
    providing her with a sufficient incentive to return to Cameroon on  the
    completion of her short visit.

21. As submitted by Mr Yeo, the present case is distinguishable  from  that
    of Adjei, where  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  made  the  following
    finding at paragraph 15:

         "There is no good reason why the UK based  relatives  cannot  visit
         the claimant in Ghana if they wished  to  do  so.   The  claimant's
         father has visited her on three occasions since he  left  Ghana  on
         1994 to move to London."

22. The fact that the sponsors cannot, as the judge found,  make  a  family
    visit to Cameroon means that the interference  consequential  upon  the
    refusal decision is more serious than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.
    Although meeting in a safe third  country  is  a  possible  alternative
    solution, it would be likely to be very expensive and impractical.  The
    cost for the entire family  staying  in  hotel  accommodation  for  two
    months in a safe  third  country  would  be  considerable,  and  it  is
    unlikely that the adult sponsors could be away from the United  Kingdom
    for that period of time due to work commitments.

23. Although the judge did not discuss meeting in a third  country  in  his
    decision, I do not consider that his decision on Article 8  is  thereby
    flawed.  As Mr Kandola accepted, it was open to the judge  to  find  on
    the facts that Article 8(1) (was engaged, even if  it  was  the  family
    members' private life rights which were being interfered  with,  rather
    than family life in the Kugathas sense: see Singh  supra  at  25.  Once
    that hurdle had been surmounted, it was open to the judge to  find  the
    interference  was  disproportionate,  notwithstanding  the  theoretical
    possibility (which the judge did  not  expressly  consider)  of  family
    reunion taking place in a safe third country.  It was open to the judge
    to find that the decision was disproportionate for the reasons which he
    gave, namely the inability of the claimant's daughter and  children  to
    come  to  Cameroon  to  see  her,  and  given  his  findings  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Rules had in fact been met.

24. In conclusion, having  reviewed  the  relevant  law,  I  find  that  on
    particular facts of this case the judge has given adequate reasons  for
    finding in the claimant's favour under Article  8  ECHR,  and  that  no
    material error of law is made out.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  visit  visa
appeal on  Article  8  grounds  does  not  contain  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and the Entry Clearance  Officer.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 1 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
