
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01117/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2017                           |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        mrs virginia wanjiru kibicho
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Canter, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 21 March  2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blake which allowed the visit visa  appeal  of  Mrs
    Kibicho.


 2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  refer  to  Mrs  Kibicho  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Kenya, born on 1 January 1951.  Her daughter came to the UK  some  time
    ago, married and has children here.   The  appellant  has  visited  her
    daughter and her family on numerous occasions and her daughter and  her
    husband have also visited the appellant in  Kenya  six  times  over  an
    eight  year  period,  including  leaving  their  children  with   their
    grandmother whilst they holidayed elsewhere in Africa.


 4. After being granted a number of visit visas the appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance as a dependent adult relative but this application  was
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 1 August 2014.


 5. The appellant then made a further application for entry clearance as  a
    visitor which was refused in the  decision  under  challenge  dated  21
    January  2015.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  that   the
    appellant's recent refusal in the adult  dependent  relative  category,
    her separation from her husband and her limited circumstances in  Kenya
    suggested that it was her true intention to settle in the UK  and  that
    she was therefore not genuinely intending to visit the UK for  a  short
    period or leave at the end of that visit.


 6. The appellant could only appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on human rights grounds.  In the findings at  [36]  -
    [52] the First-tier Tribunal Judge set  out  clear  findings  that  the
    evidence of the appellant, her daughter and her son-in-law  was  highly
    credible.   At  [52]  the  judge  "accepted  in  full  the  Appellant's
    circumstances as outlined in the evidence given by the Sponsor and also
    the Appellant's other daughter".  The reasons for this  were  that  the
    appellant had explained in her visit visa application that she did  not
    wish to settle in the UK but her circumstances had changed because  she
    had another adult daughter now living with her in Kenya who could  care
    for her and that her health had also improved.  All  of  the  witnesses
    whether in writing or orally were clear that she was only intending  to
    come to the UK temporarily as a visitor and then return to Kenya.


 7. Having considered the evidence in support of the appellant's claim  and
    found it credible,  at  [56]  -  [60]  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant, albeit the appeal could not be allowed on  this  basis,  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of the  decision.
    Following the case of Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Adjei (Visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  0261
    (IAC) the judge factored in the fact of the  Immigration  Rules  having
    been met to the Article 8 consideration.


 8. In order to do so an assessment has to be made of whether  family  life
    for the purposes of Article 8 was engaged.  At  [55]  the  judge  found
    that:


         "... family life did exist between the Appellant, her daughter  and
         her grandchildren.  I was satisfied that the Refusal of the ECO was
         such as to engage Article 8 ECHR.  I therefore consider whether  or
         not the decision taken was proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of
         enforcing immigration control."


 9. The respondent's first challenge  was  that  the  judge  did  not  give
    reasons for finding as to why  family  life  could  exist  between  the
    appellant and her adult daughter.  The correct test from  Kugathas  and
    other Article 8 case law had not been considered or the  evidence  here
    assessed in light of the  principles  of  that  case.   There  were  no
    findings of additional dependency beyond normal emotional ties  between
    the appellant and her daughter.


10. At the hearing before me Mr Canter conceded that the  judge's  findings
    on the issue of the relationship between the appellant and her daughter
    did not contain the requisite assessment of the  evidence  against  the
    test from Kugathas and did not appear to seek  to  argue  that  such  a
    claim could be made out on the material before the First-tier Tribunal.
     However, he maintained on behalf of the appellant that  there  was  no
    challenge in the grounds to the relationship of the appellant with  her
    grandchildren.  He maintained that the evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was of a particularly close relationship between the appellant
    and her grandchildren.  She had visited the UK for an  extended  period
    shortly after the birth of her first grandchild, had seen the  children
    very often thereafter because of the number of visits  either  she  had
    made to the UK or her daughter and the family had made to  Kenya.   The
    closeness of the appellant  with  her  grandchildren  was  particularly
    noticeable where her daughter and son-in-law left their  children  with
    her whilst they took an independent holiday.  There was  also  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal of  the  frequent  contact  between  the
    appellant and her grandchildren by way of skype, telephone and so on.


11. Mr Bramble did not seek to argue that the grounds contained a challenge
    to the appellant's family life with her grandchildren and he  therefore
    proceeded to argue the respondent's second ground. This  was  that  the
    decision did not explain why the refusal of a visa  which  only  allows
    the  parties  to  be  together  temporarily   is   a   disproportionate
    interference with Article 8 rights.


12. It is my conclusion that this  ground  is  made  out.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge materially misstated the  full  ratio  of  the  case  of
    Mostafa. At  [60]  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant  meeting  the
    Immigration Rules as follows:


         "In accordance with the  decision  of  Mostafa  I  found  that  the
         ability to satisfy the Rules  did  illuminate  the  proportionality
         decision to refuse entry clearance."


13. That is a correct summary of the part of the ratio  from  Mostafa.  The
    judge is not correct in stating at [65]:


         "I noted it was recorded  that  if  a  person's  circumstances  did
         satisfy the Immigration Rules and they had not acted in a way  that
         undermined the system of immigration control, a  refusal  of  entry
         clearance was liable to infringe Article 8."


14. That approach to  the  proportionality  decision  fails  to  take  into
    account that the degree of interference was reduced  where  a  6  month
    visit visa was being refused. The  evidence  here  was  also  that  the
    grandchildren could continue to visit the appellant in Kenya, which  to
    some extent continues their direct contact even if it is less than when
    the appellant is also visiting the UK. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    here did not consider those material factors.


15. For these reasons, I found that a material error of law had  arose  and
    set aside the proportionality section of the decision to be remade.


16. I can remake the appeal relatively simple as it is my  conclusion  that
    the interference here cannot be shown to be disproportionate  where  it
    arises only from the appellant's  inability  to  visit  the  UK  for  a
    temporary period and it remains open to the  family  to  visit  her  in
    Kenya. The family life is not reduced to a level that can  be  regarded
    as disproportionate  where  visits  can  continue,  albeit  contact  is
    reduced by the appellant not  being  able  to  visit  the  UK  for  the
    particular period of 6 months for which she applied.


17. It is worth mentioning that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings
    that, contrary to the decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  were
    that the Immigration Rules were met as this appellant had not shown  an
    intention to settle or remain beyond the period of her temporary  visit
    visa. Those findings were not challenged by the Secretary of State  for
    the Entry Clearance Officer here. There are  therefore  clear  judicial
    findings, not opposed by the respondent here, which the Entry Clearance
    Officer will no doubt take  into  account  if  the  appellant  makes  a
    further visit visa application under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses and error on  a  point  of
law to the extent set out above and is set aside.

The appeal is remade as refused on Article 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed: [pic]                       Date: 16 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
