
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01984/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2014                           |On 17 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - beirut

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JOUKI KROUCHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dickinson of Fursdon Knapper Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  Carroll),  allowing  the  Ms  Krouchan's  appeal
    against a refusal to grant her entry clearance as a visitor under  para
    41 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. For convenience, I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a national of Syria.  She and her grandmother  applied
    for entry clearance to visit the appellant's aunt who is  the  daughter
    of the appellant's grandmother.  On 29 November 2012, the  ECO  refused
    the  appellant  and  her  grandmother  entry  clearance  to  visit  the
    appellant's aunt in the UK.

 4. Both the appellant and her grandmother appealed against those decisions
    to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was  determined  without  a
    hearing.  In a  determination  promulgated  on  25  April  2014,  Judge
    Carroll allowed both the appellant's appeal and that of her grandmother
    under the Immigration Rules, namely para 41 of HC 395.

 5.  The  ECO  accepted  Judge  Carroll's  decision  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's grandmother.  However, the ECO sought permission to  appeal
    against Judge Carroll's decision to allow the appellant's appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules on the basis that she only had a right of  appeal
    on human rights or race relations grounds.  The judge had erred in  law
    in allowing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and,  in
    fact, there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. On 12 June 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V  A  Osborne)  granted
    the ECO permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

 7. On behalf of the ECO, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  appellant  was
    seeking to visit her aunt which was not a relationship specified in the
    Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations  2012  (SI  2012/1532)
    (the "Family Visitor" Regulations).  Consequently  the  appellant  only
    had a limited right of appeal on human rights or race relations grounds
    by virtue of s.88A(1) and  (3)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").  Mr Richards submitted  that  it  was
    clear from the notice of appeal that the appellant had not relied  upon
    human rights and therefore the judge had erred in law in  allowing  her
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and he invited me  to  substitute  a
    decision that there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.



 8. On behalf of the appellant,  Ms  Dickinson  relied  upon  her  skeleton
    argument.  She relied upon a sentence in a letter dated 5 January  2013
    written by the appellant's aunt and attached to the  first  appellant's
    notice of appeal as raising the appellant's human rights.  That states:



         "I also want to mention that I cannot go back to Syria  to  see  my
         mother and spend time with her.  That's why I want her to come  and
         visit me for one month."

 9. Ms Dickinson also sought permission to amend the appellant's grounds of
    appeal in accordance  with  rule  14  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230) in  order  explicitly  to
    state that the appellant relied upon Art 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

10. The relevant statutory provision is s.88A of the 2002 Act which, so far
    as relevant, provides as follows:

         "(1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against refusal of
             an application for entry clearance unless the application  was
             made for the purpose of -

             (a)  visiting a person or a class or description prescribed by
                  Regulations for the purposes of this subsection, ..."

              ....

         (3)  Subsection (1) -

             (a)  does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  either  or
                  both of the grounds referred to in  Section  84(1)(b)  and
                  (c), ...."

11. Consequently, a general right of appeal  against  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance only arises if the purpose of the application is to  visit  a
    person described in Regulations.   Those  Regulations  are  the  Family
    Visitor Regulations.  Where the required "family relationship" does not
    exist, then an appeal may only be  brought  on  human  rights  or  race
    relations grounds.

12. The Family Visitor Regulations 2012  provides  in  reg  2,  so  far  as
    relevant, as follows:

         "(1) A person ("P") is of a class or description prescribed for the
             purposes of section 88A(1)(a) of the Nationality,  Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 (entry clearance), if-

             (a)  the applicant for entry clearance ("A") is a member of
                  the family of P; and

             (b)  P's circumstances match those specified in regulation 3.


         (2)  For the purposes of paragraph (1), A is a member of the family
             of P if A is the-

             (a)  spouse, civil partner, father, mother, son, daughter,
                  grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, brother
                  or sister;

             (b)  father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-
                  law;

             (c)  son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or

             (d)  stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
                  stepbrother or stepsister;

             of P."


13. The relationship between the appellant and the sponsor  (her  aunt)  is
    not a relationship specified in reg  2(2).   Therefore,  by  virtue  of
    s.88A(1) and (3), the appellant could only bring  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Judge clearly erred in law in allowing the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

14. Was there a valid appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  brought  on
    human rights grounds?

15. In her notice of appeal (form IAFT-2) the appellant set out her grounds
    of appeal as follows:

         "I am writing to you to explain why I am disagree  (sic)  with  the
         decision of the Home Office for entering the  UK.   I  applied  for
         visitor  visa  to  visit  my  aunt  Rim  Alberni  and  to  help  my
         grandmother Souad Obid as she disable so if she get a visa I  could
         help her on the way to the UK.  The Home Office reffuse me  because
         of two reason:  firstly as it said I am not ties to Syria but if  I
         go to the UK I have to come back to Syria as my mother in Syria and
         I studying computer engeneering in fourth level, so sure  one  year
         left for me to complete my study so I have to  be  back  in  Syria.
         Secondly, there refusal letter mentioned to the  problem  in  Syria
         but it has been 2 years since the situation is bad in Syria and  if
         I am running from my country I could go long  time  to  Lebanon  or
         Jordan but I didn't.  So I just want to visit my Aunt."

16. Ms Dickinson did not place any reliance upon the notice  of  appeal  to
    support her submission that the appellant was "bringing" her appeal  on
    human rights grounds, namely Art 8.  These  grounds  clearly  refer  to
    issues relevant to the Immigration Rules  and  the  ECO's  reasons  for
    refusing her application.  Whilst I accept an individual does not  have
    to explicitly refer to Art 8 in order to be said to be relying upon Art
    8 in their grounds, there must be reliance upon the substance of Art 8.
     In particular, unrepresented appellants are less likely to  adopt  the
    form and rubric of human rights language.  However, simply to argue the
    merits of the ECO's decision under para 41 of the Immigration Rules  is
    most unlikely, in itself, to  raise  human  rights  grounds.   In  this
    appeal, the appellant's grounds of appeal do precisely that and  I  see
    no basis for concluding that she relied upon Art 8  in  her  notice  of
    appeal.

17. Likewise, the passage  in  the  sponsor's  letter  relied  upon  by  Ms
    Dickinson does not, in my judgment, constitute a reliance upon Art 8 of
    the ECHR.  Merely to assert that an individual  wishes  to  spend  time
    with their family member in the UK  does  not  seem  to  me  to  assert
    reliance upon Art 8.  In any event, the relevant passage  is  concerned
    not with the appellant and sponsor but rather with the sponsor and  her
    mother (the appellant's grandmother).

18. One final point.  Section  88A(3)  of  the  2002  Act  allows  for  the
    "bringing of an appeal"  on  human  rights  grounds  where  the  Family
    Visitor Regulations 2012 do not apply.  The reliance upon human  rights
    (or race relations) grounds must, in my judgment, be at  the  point  in
    time in which the notice  of  appeal  is  lodged  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  An invalid appeal (one not brought on human rights  grounds)
    cannot be retrospectively made valid by the  subsequent  reliance  upon
    human rights after the notice of appeal has  been  filed.   The  appeal
    must be valid at the outset.  Consequently, even  if  rule  14  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 applied to  this
    appeal, any amendment of the appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal so as to explicitly rely upon Art 8 of the ECHR could not
    make valid what was at the outset an invalid appeal.   Of  course,  the
    2005 Rules apply only to the First-tier Tribunal's proceedings  and  do
    not apply in an appeal in the Upper Tribunal in any event.



Decision

19. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant did not rely  upon
    Art 8 in her notice of appeal or accompanying documents.  Therefore, by
    virtue of s.88A(1) and (3), there was no valid appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

20. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    allow  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  I
    substitute a decision that there was no valid appeal before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Post-script

21. The appeal of the appellant's grandmother was allowed by Judge  Carroll
    and that decision is not  challenged  by  the  ECO.   In  allowing  her
    appeal, Judge Carroll rejected the basis upon which the ECO had refused
    entry clearance to the appellant's grandmother under para 41.  That, in
    effect, concluded in the appellant's favour the matters relied upon  by
    the ECO in relation  to  appellant.   The  appellant's  grandmother  is
    entitled to the grant of entry clearance as a result of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  Given the implications that has for the  decision
    in relation to the appellant, it would be  desirable  for  the  ECO  to
    reconsider  the  appellant's  application  in  the   light   of   those
    circumstances.




                                                                      Signed





                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

