
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
VA/01840/2015
                                                               VA/01841/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Hatton Cross             |Decision and Reasons promulgated   |
|On 4 September 2017               |On 10 October 2017                 |


                                   Before



                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA





                                   Between



                         MISS ABIGAIL SYLVIA ASAMOAH

                           MR EDMUND KOBBY ASAMOAH

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                      THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-Ghana

                                                                  Respondent





Representation

For the appellant:     not represented

For the respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer






                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department. The respondents are citizens of Ghana born  on  18  September
   1988 and 10 March 1992 respectively. They are brother and sister. I shall
   however for the sake of convenience continue to refer to the  parties  as
   they were referred to before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of
   State remains the respondent and the appellants remain the appellants.

2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision
   of the respondent to refuse their applications  for  entry  clearance  as
   visitors pursuant to paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell allowed the appellants  appeals  under
   Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

4. At the hearing Miss Staunton for the respondent stated that there  is  no
   valid appeal before me to determine because the appeals were not  refused
   under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

5. I consider that to be the correct position and  find  that  there  is  no
   valid appeal before me to determine because the appellants do not have  a
   right of appeal against their refusal as visitors under  the  immigration
   rules. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law in  allowing
   the appeal under the Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights.

6. The appellant's right of  appeal  is  limited  to  human  rights  grounds
   Pursuant to s88A of the 2014 Act only if there is a  decision  to  refuse
   the appellants application under Article 8 of the European Convention  on
   Human Rights. There is no such refusal by the  respondent  and  therefore
   they had no right of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

7. It follows that there was no valid appeal before me to  determine  and  I
   have no jurisdiction in the matter. That disposes of these appeals.


DECISION

Appeals Dismissed as it is not a valid appeal

I make no anonymity directions

There is no valid appeals before me and therefore there can be no fee order



 Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                       Mrs                      S                      Chana
Dated this 8th day of September 2017











