
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01174/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons                      |
|On 21 July 2016                     |On 01 August 2016                       |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       MRS VICTORIA OLUWASEYI DANIYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms Z Ahmed, Specialist Appeals Team, appeared on
                           behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    No appearance by or on behalf of the
respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Clarke
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 12 January 2016) allowing  on  human  rights
    (Article 8 ECHR) grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent to refuse her entry clearance as a family visitor  under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
    make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider  that  the  claimant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the proportionality assessment  is  inadequate;
         it does not explain why the refusal of  a  visa  which  allows  the
         parties  to  be  together   temporarily   is   a   disproportionate
         interference with Article 8 rights.  It is arguable that the  judge
         has not adequately addressed how the claimant has demonstrated that
         the interference with her right to a family  and/or  private  life,
         resulting  from  the  refusal,  has  given  rise  to   such   grave
         consequences as to engage Article 8.  Further, it is arguable  that
         the judge failed to have regard to the  statutory  public  interest
         considerations as required by Section 117B NIA 2002.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth is  9  April
    1960.  On 12 January 2015 an Entry Clearance  Officer  in  Abuja  (post
    reference Abuja/1064440) gave his reasons for refusing her  application
    for entry clearance to visit her niece in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period of six weeks.   He  refused  the  application  by  reference  to
    subparagraph (i) and (ii) of paragraph 41 of the  Rules.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the claimant was genuinely seeking entry  as  a  visitor
    for a limited period not exceeding six months or that she  intended  to
    leave the United Kingdom at the end of the visit.  She stated that  she
    was supported in Nigeria by her husband, but she provided  no  evidence
    of his income or  funds.   So  she  had  demonstrated  she  had  strong
    financial circumstances in Nigeria.   He recognised  that  the  sponsor
    proposed to pay for her visit to the  UK,  but  he  had  to  take  into
    account her own personal and  financial  circumstances  in  Nigeria  in
    order to establish her intentions in the UK.

 4. In her grounds of appeal, the claimant said that her visit  to  the  UK
    was meant to be a holiday treat from a relative who  promised  to  make
    her dream come true by paying for her  to  visit  her  and  her  family
    someday.  She had raised Joyce, the sponsor, as a child after  she  was
    abandoned by  her  mother  following  her  mother's  divorce  from  the
    sponsor's father.  They retained a very close  bond,  and  the  sponsor
    felt she owed it to her to make her dream to come to the UK a  reality.
    It was a thank you to her for being for there for her when she needed a
    mother figure.  The last time Joyce visited them in Nigeria she  had  a
    bad experience with armed robbers and Joyce would rather family visited
    her in the UK where she felt safe.





The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before Judge Clarke, Ms Ahmed appeared on behalf of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and there was no legal representation on behalf
    of the claimant.  The sponsor attended and gave oral evidence.

 6. The judge went on to find that the claimant enjoyed  family  life  with
    the sponsor for the reasons which she gave in paragraphs [20] to  [31].
    The judge went on to address the issue of proportionality at  paragraph
    [36] onwards, and at paragraph [41] the judge referred to the  guidance
    given by the Presidential panel in Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC)  for
    reaching  the  conclusion  at  paragraph  [42]  that  refusal   was   a
    disproportionate interference  with  the  exercise  of  the  claimant's
    Article 8 rights.  For present purposes, it is convenient  to  set  out
    verbatim the judge's findings at paragraphs [20] to [31] and  what  the
    judge said at paragraphs [41] and [42]:

         20.  I found the Sponsor to be  a  credible  witness  who  answered
             every question that was asked of her and  whose  evidence  was
             cogent and persuasive.

         21.  I find the Sponsor's  mother  and  father  divorced  when  the
             Sponsor was young and following the matrimonial breakdown  the
             Sponsor's mother suffered some mental health  difficulties  to
             the extent that the Sponsor's Mother was unable to look  after
             the Sponsor and her 5 siblings.  At that point, the  Appellant
             stepped in and took over the  care  of  the  Sponsor  and  her
             siblings.  I find that the Appellant was like a mother to  the
             Sponsor and her siblings.

         22.  I also find that when the Appellant  went  to  live  with  the
             Appellant she was  aged  13  and  was  unable  to  read.   The
             Appellant ensured that the Sponsor attended  school  and  made
             sure that she  received  an  education.   It  seems  that  the
             Appellant did all she could to help the  Sponsor  academically
             and emotionally as well as providing everything that goes with
             providing a home for her sister's children.

         23.  The Sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 1999 and is  now  an
             English teacher in this country,  is  married  and  has  three
             children of her  own.   Despite  the  fact  that  the  Sponsor
             remains in contact with her biological mother and has had  her
             mother visit her in this country, I find that she regards  the
             Appellant as her mother and feels that she owes everything  to
             her aunt.  I am  satisfied  that  without  the  input  of  the
             Appellant, the Sponsor's life chances  would  have  been  much
             reduced.

         24.  I find that the Sponsor  telephones  the  Appellant  at  least
             twice per week.  They are in regular contact with  each  other
             and since the  Sponsor  came  to  this  country  in  1999  her
             relationship with the Appellant has  always  been  maintained.
             Neither distance  nor  time  has  adversely  impacted  on  the
             relationship.

         25.  I find that the Sponsor up until 2011 returned to  Nigeria  on
             many occasions to visit the Appellant  and  the  rest  of  her
             family.  However, on one of those visits in 2011  the  Sponsor
             was travelling in a car on a highway in Lagos en  route  to  a
             shopping centre.  It was hot and the Sponsor had  the  windows
             of the car down.  There are individuals at  the  side  of  the
             road - called 'hawkers' - who sell various  products  such  as
             fruit.  The Appellant wanted to purchase some apples and  when
             the hawker approached the Sponsor's car he produced a gun  and
             told her that if she did not give him  her  handbag  he  would
             "blow (her) head off".  The Sponsor handed over her bag  which
             contained the equivalent of �1800.00.

         26.  I find that the Sponsor, understandably, has been  traumatised
             by this robbery and had decided that she  cannot  go  back  to
             Nigeria.

         27.  The question that I must turn  to  is  whether  Article  8  is
             engaged.  In making my assessment, I remind  myself  that  for
             Article 8 to be engaged there must be something  more  between
             the Appellant and the Sponsor than normal emotional ties.  The
             Sponsor did not make the  case  that  the  Appellant  has  any
             financial dependence  upon  her.   I  have  no  hesitation  in
             finding that the Appellant is  supported  financially  by  her
             husband in Nigeria.

         28.  However, I find that the relationship between the Sponsor  and
             the Appellant does go beyond the normal emotional ties between
             an aunt and a niece.  I find the Sponsor's  evidence  credible
             that she feels she should look upon her aunt  as  her  mother.
             The relationship between the Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  was
             forged in adversity.  The Appellant was approximately 28 years
             of age when she took the Sponsor and her 5 siblings  into  her
             home when the Sponsor's mother had  a  mental  breakdown.  The
             care and nurture provided by the Appellant for the Sponsor and
             her siblings, the Appellant's intervention in their  lives  in
             difficult circumstances, the manner in which she  provided  an
             education  for  the  Sponsor   and   their   continued   close
             relationship all persuade me that there are more  than  normal
             emotional ties.  The Sponsor feels she owes everything to  the
             Appellant and her life achievements can be attributed to  what
             the Appellant provided.

         29.  Moreover, the Sponsor's move to the United Kingdom in 1999 has
             not diminished the closeness between  the  Appellant  and  the
             Sponsor.  The Appellant up until 2011 has returned to  Nigeria
             on a regular basis, even though she has  her  own  family  and
             work commitments in the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor has never
             forgotten her aunt's kindness and  influence.   She  maintains
             twice weekly contact with the Appellant.

         30.  I also find that it is  entirely  credible  that  the  Sponsor
             feels she cannot return to Nigeria after  she  was  robbed  at
             gunpoint.   It  is  not  possible  for  the  Sponsor  and  the
             Appellant to enjoy family life in Nigeria.

         31.  I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there  are
             more than normal emotional ties between the Appellant and  the
             Sponsor and that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  enjoy  family
             life.  For all these reasons, I find that this is one of those
             few  cases  involving  adult  relatives  where  Article  8  is
             engaged.

         ...

         41.  I remind myself of the Presidential Pane's comments in Mostafa
             (Article 8 in entry clearance) v The Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC):

                  "....    the ability to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules,
                      although not the question before the Tribunal, may be
                      capable of being a weighty factor in an appeal  based
                      on human rights but they will not  be  determinative.
                      They will only become relevant if the interference is
                      such as to engage Article 8(1) ECHR and a finding  by
                      the Tribunal  that  an  appellant  does  satisfy  the
                      requirements of the rules will not  necessarily  lead
                      to a  finding  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
                      clearance is disproportionate to the  proper  purpose
                      of enforcing immigration control.  However it may  be
                      capable of being a strong  reason  for  allowing  the
                      appeal that must be weighed with the other  facts  in
                      the case.

                  24.  It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down
                      fundamental values that have to be considered in  all
                      relevant cases.   It  would  therefore  be  extremely
                      foolish to attempt  to  be  prescriptive,  given  the
                      intensely factual and contextual sensitivity of every
                      case.  Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in  this
                      type of case, any  particular  kind  of  relationship
                      would always attract the protection of  Article  8(1)
                      or that other kinds of relationship would never  come
                      within its scope.  We are, however, prepared  to  say
                      that it will only be in  very  unusual  circumstances
                      that a person other than a  close  relative  will  be
                      able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
                      comes within the scope of Article 8(1).  In practical
                      terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the
                      relationship is that of husband  and  wife  or  other
                      close life partners or a parent and minor  child  and
                      even then it will  not  necessarily  be  extended  to
                      cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based
                      on a whim or will not add significantly to  the  time
                      that the people  involved  spend  together.   In  the
                      limited class of cases where Article 8  (1)  ECHR  is
                      engaged the refusal of entry  clearance  must  be  in
                      accordance with the  law  and  proportionate.   If  a
                      person's circumstances  do  satisfy  the  Immigration
                      Rules  and  they  have  not  acted  in  a  way   that
                      undermines  the  system  of  immigration  control,  a
                      refusal of entry  clearance  is  liable  to  infringe
                      Article 8.'

         42.  When I weigh up the competing interests, I am  satisfied  that
             when I take the evidence in the  round  that  the  balance  is
             tipped in favour of the Appellant and that the  refusal  is  a
             disproportionate interference with the exercise of her Article
             8 rights.  It follows that I allow the appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, there was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  claimant.   There
    was also no Rule 24  response  on  file.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor, who is the claimant's nominated representative in the UK,  had
    been given adequate notice of the hearing, and that  it  was  therefore
    appropriate to proceed with the hearing in her absence.

 8. Ms Ahmed  developed  the  argument  advanced  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, and submitted that  the  only  outcome  that  was
    reasonably open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  to  find  that  the
    claimant and the sponsor did not enjoy family life for the purposes  of
    Article 8, and therefore Article 8 was not engaged.

Discussion

 9. The passage from Mostafa cited by the judge at paragraph [41] is highly
    material to the central question which the  judge  had  to  resolve  in
    order to decide whether questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should  be
    answered in the claimant's favour.  But  by  the  time  the  judge  had
    reached paragraph [41] of his decision, he  had  already  decided  this
    issue in favour of the claimant. Thus the judge did not engage with the
    fact that the relationship between the claimant and  the  sponsor  fell
    outside the limited  class  of  relationships  which  would  ordinarily
    attract the protection of Article 8(1) as they were both adults leading
    independent lives and they were not partners.

10. Although it was open to the judge to find that the claimant  had  acted
    as a surrogate mother to the sponsor, both  of  them  were  now  mature
    adults (the sponsor having been born in Lagos on 4 August 1975).   Each
    of them had been leading an independent life for many years.  There was
    no evidence that either of them was emotionally dependent on the other.
     The concept of there being more than  normal  emotional  ties  between
    adults imports an element of dependency.  It is  not  enough  that  the
    relationship  between  adult  child  and   adult   parent   should   be
    particularly  close,  and  a  fortiori  it  is  not  enough  that   the
    relationship  between  an  adult  niece  and  her  aunt  should  be   a
    particularly close one because of their  shared  past.   As  stated  in
    paragraph [20] of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31

         ...  neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and  affection   that
         ordinarily go with them  are,  by  themselves  or  together  in  my
         judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most of us  have  close
         relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or  who
         visit us, from time to time; but none of  us  would  say  on  those
         grounds alone that we share a family life with them  in  any  sense
         capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8.

11. The upshot of this is that the judge has not given adequate reasons for
    finding that Article 8(1) is engaged.  Accordingly, the  decision  must
    be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

12. In accordance with the standard directions, there is a presumption that
    in the event of the Upper Tribunal deciding that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is to  be  set  aside  as  erroneous  in  law,  the
    remaking of the decision will take place at the same hearing.  A  fresh
    decision will normally be based on the evidence which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  There was no  application  by  either  party  for
    further evidence to be admitted.  So  I  remake  the  decision  on  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, which is canvassed in
    the largely un-contentious primary findings of fact made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

13. As illuminated by the passage in the judgment of Sir Stanley Burnton in
    paragraphs [24] and [25] of Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630, which are
    cited by Judge Clarke in his decision at  paragraph  [17],  it  is  not
    essential that an applicant's right to respect for his  or  her  family
    life should be engaged, as distinct from his or her private life.

14. But the private life  claims  of  the  claimant  and  the  sponsor  are
    relatively weak.  It is well recognised that Article 8 does not  confer
    on a married couple the right to reside in the country of their choice,
    and so a fortiori Article 8 does not confer on  relatives  a  right  to
    meet and spend time together in the country of their choice.  While  it
    is understandable that both the sponsor and the claimant  would  prefer
    to meet and spend time together in the UK, particularly as the  sponsor
    had a bad experience on her last visit to Nigeria in  2011,  there  are
    not insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor visiting  the  claimant  in
    Nigeria; and it is not shown that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect
    her to do so from an objective standpoint.  For example,  no  objective
    evidence has been put forward to show that the crime rate in the region
    of Nigeria where the sponsor resides is so high that there  is  a  real
    risk of the claimant undergoing a similar bad experience in the future.
     Alternatively, there is no reason to suppose that the claimant and the
    sponsor could not take measures  to  enhance  the  claimant's  personal
    security in Nigeria in the future by not stopping the car to buy  goods
    being sold at the side of the road; and/or, for example, by choosing to
    enjoy a holiday together within a resort complex which is controlled by
    security guards.

15. Another possibility is the claimant and the sponsor meeting in  another
    country.  It is not the case that  only  the  claimant  can  visit  the
    sponsor, rather than the other way round; and it is not the  case  that
    the United Kingdom is the only safe or convenient country in  which  to
    meet.

16. Accordingly, I answer the second question of the Razgar test in  favour
    of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   I  do  not  consider   that   the
    interference consequential upon the refusal decision  has  consequences
    of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8,
    ECHR.

17. Even if I am wrong about that, I  consider  that  the  interference  is
    proportionate on the facts of this particular case.  In  reaching  this
    decision, I do not disturb the judge's finding that the claimant did in
    fact meet the requirements of sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of  paragraph
    41 of the Immigration Rules.  But this does not detract from  the  fact
    that it was reasonable for the Entry Clearance Officer  to  refuse  the
    application on the evidence which had been provided.

18. As is acknowledged in the grounds  of  appeal,  the  claimant  did  not
    provide any documentary evidence to show that she was being  adequately
    supported by her husband. The explanation which has been given for this
    gap in the evidence is confused and internally contradictory.   On  the
    one hand, the claimant said that her husband's rental income  was  paid
    to him in cash at the end of every month, and her husband did not "run"
    a bank account to  this  effect.   On  the  other  hand,  the  claimant
    indicated she could have produced her husband's  bank  statements,  but
    she did not see the need to include them with her original  application
    as her husband was not sponsoring her visit to the UK.

19. A third explanation was advanced  at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which was that the claimant's husband (who  has  other  wives
    whose needs have to be met as well - see the grounds  of  appeal)  was
    asked for copies of his bank statements but refused to disclose them.

20. The inconsistent explanations given  for  the  absence  of  documentary
    evidence of the husband's finances mean that the claimant has acted  in
    a way that undermines the system of immigration  control,  and  so  the
    refusal of entry clearance does not infringe her rights  under  Article
    8, ECHR. On the contrary the refusal was proportionate to the  need  to
    maintain firm and effective immigration controls.

21. It is open to the claimant to make a  fresh  application  for  a  visit
    visa, relying on the positive findings of fact made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in respect of her compliance with sub-paragraphs (i) and
    (ii) of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal on  human  rights  (Article  8,  ECHR)  grounds  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
