
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01293/2014
     VA/01294/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2015                         |On 9th March 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               Mrs Sadaf Qamar
                       Muhammad Awais Ameer (a minor)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sheikh - Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Miss Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  born  respectively  on  5th
    February 1978 and 20th August 2010.  The second Appellant is the  minor
    son of the first Appellant and his appeal rises and falls  on  that  of
    the first Appellant.  Unless specifically stated  all  references  made
    herein are to the first Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant made application for a visit visa.  The  length  of
    the visit proposed was merely ten days and the Appellant's  application
    was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 11th February 2014 on the
    grounds that the Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The second Appellant's application was dismissed on the  same  date  on
    the grounds that he did not meet the requirements of paragraph  46A  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 11th November 2014 on the papers.  In a detailed determination
    the Appellants' appeals were allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State on 1st December 2014 lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the  Upper  Tribunal  stating  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear the  appeal.   On  12th  January  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission to appeal noting at paragraph
    2 of his reasons for decision that it appeared that the judge had acted
    without jurisdiction in allowing the appeals and pointing out that  the
    available Grounds of Appeal are in respect of  race  and  human  rights
    only and that no such findings were made by the judge.

 6. It is on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The Appellants appear by their Sponsor Mr Sheikh.  Mr Sheikh
    is a family member, the Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Miss Fujiwala.

 7.  The  Rules  for  family  visitor  appeals  are  now  governed  by  the
    Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012.  These Rules now
    stipulate that unless allegations are made of breaches of human  rights
    or race under the Equality Act 2010 then there is no  right  of  appeal
    from the Entry Clearance Officer to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I
    am satisfied having looked in considerable detail at  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he erred in hearing this appeal  and
    consequently as I have advised to Mr Sheikh I have no  alternative  but
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to  allow  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

 8. This matter is however worthy of a further paragraph.  I have  had  the
    benefit of hearing from Mr Sheikh who is a local businessman and a  man
    of some substance.  I have no reason to doubt his credibility.  I  have
    also briefly heard from his daughter who has  just  completed  the  LPC
    course as a law student.  Mrs Qamar is the sister of Mr Sheikh's  wife.
    I understand that she is resident in Spain and that she is  a  habitual
    traveller to the United Kingdom.  As far as I am aware this is the only
    occasion where she has ever been refused entry clearance.  The  correct
    approach now is for a fresh application for a visit visa  to  be  made.
    It would seem to me that there may be merit when  such  application  is
    made in drawing to the attention of the Entry Clearance Officer by  way
    of attaching the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Keane  and  my
    decision herein.  It is not the role nor wish of the Secretary of State
    to prevent genuine visits to the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  of  course
    difficult for an Entry Clearance Officer who  is  faced  with  numerous
    applications exclusively on the papers to sometimes determine the wheat
    from the chaff.  It is  not  for  this  Tribunal  to  predetermine  the
    outcome of any future application but bearing in mind  the  credibility
    of the Sponsor, the Appellant's previous excellent immigration  history
    and the findings of Judge Keane it is to be hoped  that  these  factors
    will be given further due consideration by any future  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in the event that a further application is submitted.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
in that there was no jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  hear
the appeal.  In such circumstances the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is set aside and the Respondent's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

