
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2016                           |On 7 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MRS lu yang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lam, Counsel, instructed by Ashtons Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, (Judge Robison) ("FTT"), promulgated on 8 July
    2016 in which the appeal was allowed against a decision to refuse leave
    to enter as a family visitor.  In this decision I shall  refer  to  the
    parties as the "Secretary of State" who is the  appellant  and  to  Mrs
    Yang as the "Claimant." The reasons for  refusal  relied  on  paragraph
    320(7B) arguing that in a previous application deception had been  used
    by the Claimant.  It was contended that the Claimant used deception  in
    that it was her intention at the time  the  application  was  made,  to
    marry when visiting her partner in the UK.

2.   In the grounds of application for permission to  appeal  the  Secretary
    of State argued that the FTT failed to consider whether Article  8  was
    engaged or whether there was an interference in the family  life  of  a
    husband and wife following the refusal of the application for  a  short
    visit to the UK.  The main ground argued was  that  the  FTT  erred  in
    finding that paragraph 320(7B) did not apply.

3.   In a full and  reasoned  decision  in  which  the  FTT  considered  the
    restricted rights of appeal in visit visa cases the FTT found that  the
    Claimant arrived in the UK on 30 September 2014 and got  married  on  6
    October 2014.  The factual background was accepted by the FTT  and  set
    out in [ 53].

4.   The FTT found the  Claimant's  account  to  be  credible  in  that  the
    decision to marry was  a  last  minute  decision.   The  FTT  found  no
    intention to deceive at the time the entry clearance application  as  a
    visitor was made [ 54 & 57].  Further the FTT found that  the  Claimant
    had not overstayed and had left voluntarily at her own expense and that
    there was no deception for the purpose of securing any advantage [57].

5.   The FTT therefore concluded that paragraph 320(7B) did not apply  [58].
     The FTT had regard to the fact that the requirements  under  paragraph
    41 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) were met.

6.   The FTT then went on to consider Article 8 and made an  assessement  of
    proportionality having regard to public interest factors under  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended).
    The FTT followed the Razgar stages and found that there was family life
    under Article 8.  The FTT  considered  that  the  sponsor  had  limited
    holidays and that there would be prolonged separation as  a  result  of
    the decision.  The FTT took into account that the  sponsor  could  make
    visits to China to see the Claimant.

7.   I have heard submissions this morning and I have  also  read  Mr  Lam's
    written submissions and the further material provided. I  am  satisfied
    that there is no material error of law in the FTT decision.

8.   This is a full and detailed determination. The FTT  considered  all  of
    the evidence and made findings that were properly open  to  it  on  the
    evidence. Regarding paragraph 320(7B) the FTT found  no  deception  and
    gave full consideration  to  the  pertinent  issue  of  the  Claimant's
    intentions at the time she made the application for a visit visa.

9.   In terms of Article 8, whilst accepting that  the  assessment  was  not
    perhaps as detailed as it could  have been,  in  terms  of  the  Razgar
    stages, I am satisfied that the findings and  decision   properly  come
    within the range open to the FTT albeit that the FTT has taken a fairly
    generous approach. There was no error of law  and  the  FTT  considered
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).

10.   I dismiss the appeal.  The decision and reasons shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5th December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed                                  Date 5th December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
