
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01261/2015
     VA/01263/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 September 2016                        |On 27 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr miro eren
                               mrs hatun eren
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Emine Eren, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge  Petherbridge,  who  following  a  hearing  on  27
    January 2016 allowed the appeals of Mr Miro Eren and  Mirs  Hatun  Eren
    ("the claimants").

 2. The claimants had appealed against a decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 27 January 2015 to refuse their  applications  for  entry
    clearance visas to visit their children  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The claimants  are  citizens  of  Turkey.   The  first
    claimant was born on 1 March 1941 and his wife, the second claimant was
    born on 13 February 1943.

 3. On 17  January  2015  the  claimants  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance to visit their  children  and  grandchildren  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer  considered  that  the  claimants  had  not
    provided any documentation in respect of their other children who  were
    said to be present  in  the  United  Kingdom  that  demonstrated  their
    immigration status. The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that
    the claimants had sufficient income  to  meet  their  living  needs  in
    Turkey and also considered that there was  insufficient  evidence  that
    the claimants had children  living  in  Turkey.  Therefore,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer considered that the claimants  had  not  demonstrated
    sufficient ties to Turkey which might prompt them to leave  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of their visit.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimants appealed against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    only ground on which the claimants could appeal was on the  basis  that
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was incompatible  with  the
    appellants' Convention rights.  The judge set out that if the claimants
    could show that refusing them  entry  clearance  would  interfere  with
    their private and family lives the issue  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    claimants can meet the substance of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) would be relevant to the proportionality of  the  decision  to
    refuse them entry clearance when considering the European Convention on
    Human Rights ('ECHR').

 6. The judge found that the claimants had savings and  investments  income
    in excess of their monthly expenditure.  The judge also found that  the
    claimants have six children who appear to be living in Turkey according
    to the Nufus Register.  The judge considered that the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was a disproportionate  interference  with  the
    claimants' Article 8 right to family life.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of State on behalf of the Entry clearance officer applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 20 July 2016 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chambers granted permission to appeal.

Summary of Submissions

 8. The grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in law before failing to consider whether or  not  the
    claimants and the sponsor had a family life.  Reliance is placed on the
    case of MF (Article 8 - family life  -  dependency  -  proportionality)
    Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064 and the case of Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31.  It is submitted that these cases demonstrate that in order for
    there to be a finding that there is family life within the  meaning  of
    Article 8 between adult children and non-dependent parents  there  must
    be further elements involving more than normal emotional family ties.

 9.  Reliance is also placed on the cases of ZB (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 834 and Gissing and Others [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC).    It  is
    asserted that there must be  some  form  of  dependency  between  adult
    children and parents.  The Secretary of  State  asserts  that  none  of
    these criteria appear to be met in this case. There is  no  finding  of
    additional dependency such as to amount to family life.

10. It is also asserted that no reasons are  given  as  to  how  the  judge
    reached his conclusion that  the  entry  clearance  officer's  decision
    interferes  with  their  private  and  family  lives   and   that   the
    interference  is  of  sufficient  gravity  potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.  It is also asserted that the judge has  failed
    to consider that the sponsor is able to visit the  claimants  and  that
    any finding of interference is inadequately reasoned and not explained.



11. Mr Tufan relied on the cases of Adjei (visit visas- Article 8 )  [2015]
    UKUT 261 and submitted that although the Tribunal may need to  look  at
    the extent to which the claimants is said to have failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules the right  of  appeal  is  solely
    against Article 8.  Mr Tufan referred to paragraph 28 of  the  decision
    and submitted that the judge appears to have assumed that excluding the
    claimants from an opportunity to see their children  and  grandchildren
    in the United Kingdom interferes with a right  to  respect  for  family
    life without answering firstly the question as to whether or not  there
    is family life and whether or not Article 8 is even engaged at all.

12. The sponsor (through her friend)  submitted  that  the  claimants  have
    enough money to meet their living needs and that they want to  come  to
    the UK to see what her life in the UK is like.  She submitted that  the
    claimants were not coming here to live but they just wanted to come for
    one month.  When asked if there were any  points  that  she  wished  to
    raise  with  regard  to  anything  specific  or   special   about   the
    relationship between the sponsor and her parents, the sponsor submitted
    that it was just her right and her parents' right to want to  come  and
    see her life here. She submitted that she would  be  happy  to  give  a
    written undertaking that her parents would return to Turkey at the  end
    of their visit.

Discussions

13. There is no evidence in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that  the
    judge has considered the relationship between the claimants  and  their
    daughter, the sponsor.

14. The judge appears to have assumed that family life within  the  meaning
    and purpose of Article 8 exists between them.  The judge  sets  out  at
    paragraph 26:

         "26. The grounds of appeal against the refusal of a visit visa have
         to be considered as to whether or not  the  refusal  amounts  to  a
         breach of the appellants' human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

         27. I have to follow the approach outlined by the House of Lords in
         R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 26.  ....

         28. Clearly the exclusion of the appellants from an opportunity  to
         see  their  children  and  grandchildren  in  the  United   Kingdom
         interfered with their right to respect for  family  life.    It  is
         settled law that in an Article 8 balancing exercise, the rights  of
         all those closely affected, not only those of the claimants, having
         to be considered.

         29. It is my view that the decision  in  Shamin  Box  [2002]  UKIAT
         02212 is to be followed and that the obligation imposed by  Article
         8 is to promote the family life of those affected by the  decision.



         30. I am satisfied that on the facts of this case, the decision  to
         refuse the appellants entry clearance interferes with their private
         and family lives and that the interference is of sufficient gravity
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

         31. I place considerable importance on my decision  in  determining
         proportionality in taking into account the respective ages  of  the
         appellants, neither of whom are said to have any health problems.

         32. I find that none  of  the  reasons  provided  by  the  ECO,  as
         reviewed by the ECM, for refusing the appellants'  application  can
         be sustained on the evidence before  me.   The  evidence  does  not
         support a proposition as made by the ECO that the  appellants  were
         spending more per month than they were  receiving.  The  appellants
         have been able to show that they have four children in  the  United
         Kingdom with British passports and the  Nufus  confirms  that  they
         have a further six children making a total of ten in all, which was
         what the appellants said in their 2008 application.

         33. Based on those  findings,  I  find  that  the  refusal  of  the
         appellants'  application  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
         However, the ECO cannot satisfy paragraph (iii) of the Razgar rules
         in that the interference to the established private and family life
         of the appellants by refusing their application for  a  visit  visa
         was not in accordance with the law.

         34. If I were to be wrong with this finding, and that the  ECO  had
         been correct to say that the appellants'  monthly  income  did  not
         meet their monthly expenses, so that the decision was, in fact,  in
         accordance with the Rules I would still have to go on and  consider
         whether by refusing the appellants their entry clearance visa,  was
         that interference proportionate to the legitimate public end sought
         to be achieved, (iv) of the Razgar test identified by Lord  Bingham
         of Cornhill.

         35. If that were to be the case, I am satisfied that in  any  event
         the decision of the  ECO  interferes  disproportionately  with  the
         private lives of the appellants.

         36. I am satisfied as to the honesty of  the  appellants  in  their
         application.  They  have  not  in  any  way  contributed  to  their
         application being refused by presenting inaccurate  information  or
         by  omitting  something  material  or  committing  some  comparable
         misdemeanour.  Accordingly, even had the ECO 's decision  been   in
         accordance with the requirement of the Immigration Rules,  I  would
         have considered in the circumstances  that  the  refusal  of  their
         application, bearing in mind that the ECO  had  accepted  that  the
         appellants had substrata parcels of land and had not challenged the
         appellants' evidence as  to  the  funds  that  the  appellants  had
         available to them, as shown in the bank statements  that  had  been
         provided with their appeal, that the ECO's decision was a breach of
         the appellants' rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR."  (emphasis
         added)

15. Nowhere in the decision has the judge considered  whether  or  not  the
    relationship between the claimants and their adult daughter  (or  other
    children in the UK) constitutes  family  life  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 8.  It is clear from the case law that in order for there to be
    an engagement of Article 8 in a relationship between parents and  adult
    children, there must be something in addition to the  normal  emotional
    family ties.  Paragraph 25 of Kugathas sets out:

         "Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgement  a
         family life is not established between an adult and  his  surviving
         parent or other siblings unless something more exists  than  normal
         emotional ties."

16. Further in Kugathas at paragraph 20 the court set out:

         "...  Neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
         ordinarily go with them  are,  by  themselves  or  together  in  my
         judgement enough to constitute family life. Most of us  have  close
         relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or  who
         visit us, from time to time; but none of  us  would  say  on  those
         grounds alone that we share a family life with them  in  any  sense
         capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8."

17. In this case the judge has not  identified  anything  that  amounts  to
    dependency on the part of either the claimants or the  sponsor.  Whilst
    it is natural that the claimants would wish to visit their daughter  in
    the United Kingdom and their other children and grandchildren in the UK
    the relationship  between  them  does  not  extend  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties to be found between family members. Unfortunately, those
    relationships do not fall within the  ambit  of  the  rights  that  are
    protected  by  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  I  consider  that  this   is
    particularly so where there is  only  to  be  a  short  term  visit.  I
    therefore find that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  continued  a
    material error of law.  I set aside that decision.

Remaking the Decision

18. On the basis of the evidence before me and on the submissions  made  by
    the sponsor when asked during the hearing if she was able  to  set  out
    any particular aspects of the relationship with her  parents  there  is
    nothing to suggest that the claimants have  any  particular  dependency
    upon the sponsor or their other children  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    neither does the sponsor or  the  claimants'  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom  have  any  particular  dependency  upon  the  claimants.   The
    relationship therefore does not fall within the meaning and purpose  of
    Article 8 as identified in Kugathas.

19. The grounds of appeal against the decision to  refuse  entry  clearance
    are limited to the  grounds  identified  in  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  only  grounds  upon
    which the claimants can bring an appeal is on the basis that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision is incompatible with  their  rights  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.    On  the  basis
    that I do not consider that the claimants have been able to demonstrate
    that their relationship gives rise to family life  within  the  meaning
    and purpose of Article 8 of the ECHR their appeal must fail.

Notice of Decision

20. The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material error of law.  I
    set aside that decision.    I  remake  the  decision.   The  claimants'
    appeals against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant an entry  clearance  visa  is  dismissed.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision stands.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 26 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



