
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01803/2014
                                                               VA/01804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th July 2015                      |                 On 12th August 2015  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                 Gabriel Bamidele Ogundele (first Appellant)
                  Alice Adebisi Ogundele (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - lagos
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Slatter, Counsel for Graceland Solicitors,
Lewisham
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are husband and wife and are nationals of Nigeria.   The
    First Appellant's date of birth is 11th September 1939 and  the  Second
    Appellant's date of birth is 22nd May 1942.  They appealed against  the
    decisions of the Respondent dated 20th March  2014  refusing  to  grant
    them entry clearance as general visitors  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    limiting their appeals to grounds listed in  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  They wish to visit their
    daughters in the United Kingdom.  Their appeals were heard by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Callow on 12th January 2015.  The appeals  were
    dismissed in a determination  promulgated  on  24th  March  2015  under
    Article 8.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid on 1st June 2015.  The
    grounds rely on Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC)  and  argue  that  the
    judge made material errors of law by conflating private and family life
    and thus materially affecting  his  decision.   Reference  is  made  to
    paragraphs 19, 20, 28 and 31 of the determination.  The  grounds  state
    that the judge failed to have regard to Mostafa which  was  promulgated
    after the hearing in these appeals but before the judge's determination
    was promulgated.

 3. This is an error of law hearing.

The Hearing

 4. This appeal is based on the Appellants' human rights  only.   The  said
    case of Mostafa is not a country guidance case but can be given weight.
     It is an Upper  Tribunal  decision  which  was  heard  by  Mr  Justice
    McCloskey, President, and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

 5. The Appellants' representative referred to the three Grounds of Appeal.
     Permission was granted, although the application was out of time.  The
    permission is based on the case of Mostafa.

 6. Counsel submitted that the judge misdirected himself on the  law.   The
    Tribunal has no power to consider Grounds of Appeal alleging  that  the
    decisions were not in accordance with the Rules or the law.   What  the
    Tribunal has to do is consider whether the decisions  are  incompatible
    with the right to respect for a private and family life under Article 8
    of the Convention.

 7. Counsel referred me to paragraph 27 of the determination.  He submitted
    that the judge found there to be no family life, according to the  test
    laid down in Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.   Counsel  submitted  that
    private life should  have  been  considered.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellants have the right to establish their  relationship  with  their
    two British daughters and their grandchildren in the UK.  He  submitted
    that private life may exist where family life does not.   He  submitted
    that the First-tier Judge conflated private  and  family  life  in  his
    analysis and this is an error of law.

 8. Counsel submitted that the Appellants visit for a few weeks every  year
    and have always returned to Nigeria at the end  of  their  visits.   He
    submitted that there is a close relationship and the Appellants  should
    be able to enjoy family and/or private life  with  their  children  and
    grandchildren.

 9. He submitted that the Appellants are both over 70 years  old  and  have
    regularly visited the United Kingdom since 1960.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 6 of the determination.  He submitted that the  children  are
    gainfully employed and I  was  referred  to  their  daughters'  witness
    statements which state that it is more difficult for them to visit  the
    Appellants in Nigeria  because  of  their  work  and  their  children's
    schooling.   He  submitted  that  each  case  is  fact-sensitive.    He
    submitted that paragraph 27 of the determination does not do justice to
    the circumstances of this case.  It is not enough for the judge  simply
    to state that the existence of a private and family life has  not  been
    established.  He submitted that there are private life ties which  have
    to be addressed with the specific facts of the case and because of  the
    way matters have been dealt with in paragraph 27  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal has been affected.

10. Counsel submitted that because of this,  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

11. I was referred to paragraph 28 of the determination  and  the  case  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The case of Mostafa was referred to.  This is a
    family life case.  A husband wishing to visit his wife in  the  UK.   I
    was referred to paragraph 16 of that case.  Counsel submitted that  the
    Appellants' desire to be together with their daughter and grandchildren
    in their home area for a short period is very human and understandable.
     He quoted from paragraph 16 that "preventing the visit would not be  a
    technical or  inconsequential  interference  and  should  be  permitted
    subject to the proportionate requirements of immigration control."   He
    submitted that his clients' case meets that threshold.  There are young
    grandchildren  in  this  case  and  this  reduces  the  threshold.   He
    submitted that the terms of Article 8(1) require to be adhered  to  and
    ties should be allowed to develop normally in families.   He  submitted
    that there would be an interference  with  the  Appellants'  Article  8
    rights and with their daughters' and grandchildren's Article  8  rights
    if they are prevented a visit to the United Kingdom.  He submitted that
    the First-tier Judge used too high a threshold.

12.  He  submitted  that  that  particular  issue  has  not  been  properly
    considered by the judge and is a relevant consideration.

13. He submitted that although the terms of the Rules cannot be considered,
    the Rules have to be taken into account in the balancing exercise  when
    proportionality is assessed relating to Article 8.  I was  referred  to
    paragraph 9 of Mostafa which states that in that case the claimant  had
    shown that refusing him entry clearance interfered  with  his  and  his
    wife's private and family life  so  it  was  necessary  to  assess  the
    evidence to see if the claimant meets the substance of the Rules.  This
    paragraph states that this is because the ability to satisfy the  Rules
    illuminates  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance.

14. I was then referred to the case of Adjei [2015] UKUT  0261  (IAC).   He
    submitted that at paragraph 13 of that case the point made  in  Mostafa
    is reiterated.  This states that where Article 8 may be engaged  it  is
    necessary to see whether the substance of the Rules has been  met.   He
    submitted that refusal under the Rules requires to be  considered  when
    proportionality is assessed and  that  the  First-tier  Judge  did  not
    address this.

15. The Presenting Officer made his submissions and referred to his Rule 24
    response.

16.  He  submitted  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the
    determination as this is a private life claim.   The  First-tier  Judge
    found that there was no family life between the  Appellants  and  their
    adult children and grandchildren.  I was asked to accept that  this  is
    purely a private life claim.  He submitted that even if Article  8  and
    private life are considered on their own, a person  who  satisfies  the
    Tribunal that he meets the requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395  does
    not succeed on that account.  He still  has  to  demonstrate  that  the
    refusal represents an unlawful  infringement  of  rights  protected  by
    Article 8 of ECHR.  He submitted that for a person who does not satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 41 to succeed in an appeal,  there  would
    have to be cogent and  compelling  reasons  demanding  that  he  should
    succeed.

17. He submitted that all the jurisprudence relating to Article 8  in  this
    situation consists of family life cases.  This is  not  a  family  life
    case but a private life case only.  He referred to the cases of  Adjei,
    Mostafa and Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212, all of which are family life
    cases.  He submitted that for Counsel's argument to  succeed  immediate
    family members have to be involved to make a refusal  disproportionate.
    He submitted that in this case young children are not directly involved
    and neither are family life issues.

18. He submitted that there are problems with private life cases  as  there
    is no jurisprudence.  Even the European cases on this issue  relate  to
    family life.

19. He submitted that because this is a private life  case  compelling  and
    exceptional circumstances have to be engaged.

20. I was referred to the case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387  and  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that in this case there was a wide  margin
    of appreciation given to the state.  He submitted that this  margin  of
    appreciation is even greater when private life cases are considered.

21. He submitted that there is no error in the  judge's  determination  and
    that the determination should stand.

22. Counsel submitted that the family life cases referred to can be  relied
    on when this case is assessed.  He submitted that these Appellants have
    grown up children but this does not mean they are not entitled to  have
    relationships with them.  He submitted that each case has to be decided
    on its own  facts  and  although  this  is  a  private  life  case  the
    Appellants and their families' private lives all need  protection.   He
    submitted that the Appellants are visiting close relatives and  in  the
    case of Adjei, although private life is  not  considered  at  all,  the
    facts of the case have been considered and at paragraph 15 it is stated
    that there is no good reason why the UK based  relatives  cannot  visit
    the claimant in Ghana if they wish to do so.   Counsel  submitted  that
    there are significant  difficulties  for  the  Sponsors  in  this  case
    travelling to Nigeria with their children.  The family require to  live
    in the United Kingdom and I was again referred to  the  Kugathas  test.
    He submitted that the Presenting Officer is wrong to say that  that  is
    not material.

23. I was asked to set aside the First-tier Judge's decision.

Decision & Reasons

24. It is significant that there is no jurisprudence  relating  to  private
    life.  All the jurisprudence relates to  family  life  and  because  of
    this, for the Appellants' appeal to succeed there have to be cogent and
    compelling reasons demanding this.  I find that this is a private  life
    case.  There are no compelling reasons to enable the claim to succeed.

25. I find that the case of Mostafa is not material as at paragraph  27  of
    the determination in the case before me, after the judge had considered
    all the facts and circumstances of the case, he found that family  life
    had not been established.  He goes on to state that there is no general
    obligation to promote contact between independent adults, even if  they
    are related.  It has not been shown that  there  are  ties  of  support
    either emotional or economic in existence, which go beyond the ordinary
    and natural ties of  affection  that  would  accompany  a  relationship
    between parents and adult children living in different  countries.   In
    these circumstances he found that Article 8 was not engaged.

26. In the next paragraph the judge states that it has not been established
    that  the  interference,  if  this  appeal  is  dismissed,  will   have
    consequences of gravity engaging Article 8.  Article 8 does not  impose
    on a state a general  obligation  to  respect  a  visitor's  choice  of
    country in order to undertake a family visit.

27. The judge has made these findings based on what  was  before  him.   He
    finds that Article 8 is not engaged and the case of Adjei  states  that
    it is unlikely that Article 8 will be engaged in all except a few  very
    narrow cases.

28. This claim does  not  represent  an  unlawful  infringement  of  rights
    protected by Article 8 of ECHR.  Counsel has submitted that  there  are
    cogent and compelling reasons in this case for allowing the appeal, but
    although he states it is difficult for the Sponsors and their  families
    to go to visit the appellants in Nigeria, there is nothing before me to
    show that that is the case.  I accept that it would be  more  expensive
    and that the children have jobs and the grandchildren  are  at  school,
    but the Appellants are only seeking to visit  for  two  weeks  and  the
    judge has found that  a  two  week  visit  would  be  possible  to  the
    Appellants by their children and grandchildren in the United Kingdom.

29. The family life cases which have been presented and referred to  relate
    to closer family members, e.g. husband and wife  or  other  close  life
    partners or a parent and a minor child.

30. In this case the judge found that based on the refusal letter the terms
    of the Immigration Rules could not be satisfied.  This is only relevant
    in the proportionality assessment of Article 8 based on  the  case  law
    quoted by both parties'  representatives  but  it  can  be  taken  into
    account in a proportionality assessment.  This  does  not  support  the
    Appellants' claim.

31. I find that the fact that the judge did not take Mostafa  into  account
    is not material.  The case of Mostafa deals with a very narrow range of
    claimants and the Appellants in this case  are  not  included  in  that
    range.

32. With regard to the findings in the determination on  paragraph  320(7A)
    of the Rules, if the Appellants are not  satisfied  relating  to  this,
    then a judicial review is the next step.

33. I find that the existence of family life has not  been  established  in
    this case.  This is a private life case.  I find that  to  dismiss  the
    appeal will not result in consequences of such  gravity  as  to  engage
    Article 8.  I find that the judge took into account the  facts  of  the
    case and reached his decision accordingly.

Decision

34. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination
    promulgated on 24th March 2015.

35. The determination of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Callow  must
    stand.

36. No anonymity directions are made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray













