
[pic]
Upper Tribunal   Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  VA/01380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House   Determination Promulgated
On 31 October 2014     On 3 November 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                               NaCeesay Janha
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                    Accra
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Conteh, nominated sponsor.
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Birrell promulgated on 20  August  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 5 March 2014 to  refuse
      to grant entry clearance to visit the UK to see her husband  Mr  Swaib
      Conteh ('the sponsor').



Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Gambia born on 3 June 1990. She made an
      application for entry clearance as a family visitor using  an  on-line
      application form completed on 20 February 2014, indicating she  wished
      to visit the sponsor and intended to stay in the UK for 6 months.  The
      application was refused on 5 March 2014  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      Notice of Immigration Decision with particular reference to  paragraph
      41(i), (ii), (vi), and (vii) of the Immigration Rules.


   3. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  On  her  Notice  of  Appeal  the
      Appellant indicated that  she  wished  the  appeal  to  be  considered
      without an oral  hearing  'on  the  papers'.  Her  appeal  was  listed
      accordingly, and was dismissed for reasons set out in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's determination.


   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
      was granted on 26 September 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Scott-
      Baker.


   5. A Rule 24 reply has been filed on behalf of  the  Respondent  dated  3
      October 2014.


Consideration

   6. The Notice of  Immigration  Decision  alerted  the  Appellant  to  the
      limited nature of the grounds of appeal available to her in the  event
      that  she  wished  to  exercise  her  right  of  appeal  against   the
      Respondent's decision: "Your right of appeal is limited to the grounds
      referred to in section 84(1)(c) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002" - followed  by  a  web  address  where  the  relevant
      legislation could be found. The limitation is that the Appellant could
      only appeal on the ground that the decision was unlawful under section
      6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the
      Appellant's rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.


   7. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recognised  this  limitation  in  her
      determination: see paragraph 3.


   8. The Appellant's grounds set out in her Notice of Appeal focus only  on
      the substance of the refusal under the Immigration Rules  and  do  not
      address human  rights  issues.  Similarly,  the  supporting  documents
      referred to in the Notice of Appeal only go to the  issues  under  the
      Rules.


   9. There is a note on the Tribunal file indicating that the  validity  of
      the appeal was considered  on  30  April  2014  by  Judge  Monro,  who
      commented "Visit to husband working in UK. Arguable HR grounds. Appeal
      to proceed". Judge Birrell refers to  this  at  paragraph  11  of  her
      determination: "This is a case that carries a limited right of appeal.
      Although not  specifically  argued  by  the  Appellant  the  case  was
      permitted to proceed on the basis that there was arguably a breach  of
      Article 8 as the Appellant was seeking to visit her husband".


  10. The failure of the Appellant's Notice of Appeal  to  address  relevant
      matters was identified in the Respondent's Entry  Clearance  Manager's
      review of 28 May 2014: "I note that the application does not attract a
      full right of appeal therefore any consideration for an appeal  should
      be restricted to Human Rights only. I also  highlight  the  fact  that
      they have not made this appeal under Human Rights grounds,  but  raise
      concerns which amount to a disagreement over the ECO's  assessment  of
      the sponsor's ability to meet the expenses of the appellant's proposed
      visit as well as the evidence provided by the appellant regarding  her
      personal financial circumstances in Gambia".


  11. Judge Birrell considered the Appellant's unformulated Article  8  case
      with reference to the guidance in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, and concluded
      that the Appellant's case failed at the  second  of  the  five  Razgar
      questions: see determination at paragraph 13.


  12. The Appellant has pleaded two matters in her grounds in support of the
      application for permission to appeal. First,  it  is  noted  that  the
      Judge referred to the Appellant as being a  Ghanaian  national  rather
      than a Gambian national, and it is submitted  that  this  demonstrates
      the Judge had not paid sufficient attention  to  the  details  of  the
      case. Second, it is said that the Judge failed to refer to  an  appeal
      bundle submitted on behalf of the Appellant.  In  this  latter  regard
      Judge Scott-Baker noted that the Tribunal had received a bundle  on  9
      June 2014, and that "Arguably there is an error of  law  in  that  the
      Judge appears to have overlooked this evidence".


  13. No specific criticism of the Judge's approach with reference to Razgar
      was made in the application for permission  to  appeal,  and  in  this
      regard. I find that  judge  Birrell's  approach  and  conclusion  were
      entirely sustainable on the basis of the evidence before her.


  14. However, I have noted that Judge Birrell  repeatedly  and  erroneously
      referred to the Appellant as being a citizen of  Ghana  (determination
      at paragraphs 1, 4, 10, 13). I have reminded myself of what is said in
      ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844 in the context of factual errors when
      detailing the  nature  of  an  appellant's  case  in  a  determination
      potentially demonstrating an absence of a fair hearing, and thereby an
      error of law. However, I also recognise that  there  is  scope  for  a
      determination to  contain  slips  and  errors  without  it  inevitably
      constituting a material error of law.


  15. In the circumstances of this particular case it is  not  evident  that
      the Judge has otherwise misunderstood any of the relevant facts of the
      appeal. In my judgement the mistake as to nationality is most likely a
      mere slip, bearing in mind that the  Respondent  was  based  in  Ghana
      (Accra). It has not been alleged that the  attribution  of  the  wrong
      nationality to the  Appellant  is  indicative  of  any  discriminatory
      approach by the Judge. In all the circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied
      that this circumstance is demonstrative of  a  lack  of  attention  or
      consideration such as to deprive the Appellant of a fair  hearing:  in
      my judgement the mistake as  to  nationality  was  immaterial  to  the
      Judge's consideration of human rights grounds.


  16. In respect of the Appellant's appeal bundle, I acknowledge that it  is
      indeed the case that the Judge appears to have determined  the  appeal
      without consideration of this bundle. Although the bundle  is  now  on
      the Tribunal file it is not apparent when it was linked to  the  file,
      and accordingly I am inclined to infer that it had not been so  linked
      prior to the file being passed to the Judge. Nonetheless, even  though
      it appears likely that  the  circumstance  of  the  bundle  not  being
      considered by the Judge arose for administrative reasons, it is  still
      capable of amounting to an error of law notwithstanding that  it  does
      not arise by reason of judicial error. It  was  a  breach  of  natural
      justice to determine the appeal in the absence of materials upon which
      the Appellant wished to rely.


  17. The question really becomes one of materiality.


  18. I have carefully considered the contents of the un-paginated  and  un-
      indexed bundle that is on file and stamped as having been received  by
      the Arnhem Support Centre on 9 June 2014. It is clear to me  that  the
      contents of the bundle have been prepared in an attempt to address the
      substance of the decision under the Rules,  and  do  not  in  any  way
      address any potential human rights grounds. Moreover, there is nothing
      by way of a covering letter or a statement from either  the  Appellant
      or the sponsor  as  to  the  impact  upon  them  of  the  Respondent's
      decision. Accordingly, in my judgement  had  the  bundle  been  before
      Judge Birrell, it could not have made any difference to the outcome of
      the case considered by the Judge under Article 8.


  19. Mr Conteh has attempted to formulate  an  Article  8  case  before  me
      today.


  20. One matter that he was able to clarify, which did not  emerge  clearly
      from any of the documents  already  on  file,  was  that  he  and  the
      Appellant had never actually met. In this  context  I  note  that  the
      invitation letter of 23 December 2013 is couched in  ambiguous  terms:
      "[The Appellant] and I got married in a religious ceremony on 6/08/13,
      but have not had the chance to meet in person since then.  Before  our
      marriage, we had been in  a  relationship  conducted  mainly  via  the
      internet after having been introduced to each by mutual friends in the
      Gambia. ... I am earnestly appealing to you to give her any assistance
      needed to secure a visa so that we can have our first chance of living
      together as a married couple". It seems to me  that  this  passage  at
      least implies that the Appellant and the sponsor have met. Be that  as
      it may, the sponsor now clarifies that he has not met  the  Appellant,
      and that the  marriage  registered  on  22  August  2013  following  a
      religious ceremony on 6 August 2013 was a marriage by  proxy.  Indeed,
      the sponsor stated that one of  the  obstacles  to  applying  for  his
      spouse to join him in the UK for settlement was that they had not met.


  21. Accordingly, it may be seen that the ability to  meet  is  significant
      both in terms of developing a mutual family life, and in  providing  a
      factual premise in order to be able  to  establish  a  permanent  home
      together in the UK. No doubt mindful  of  the  observations  of  Judge
      Birrell at paragraph 13 of her determination, the sponsor also  stated
      that because he has been active in Gambian politics from about 2011  -
      whilst studying in the UK - he fears that it may not be safe  for  him
      to return to Gambia to visit the  Appellant.  (The  sponsor  confirmed
      that he had obtained his indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of
      the length of time he had been in the UK as a student and not pursuant
      to an asylum application.)


  22. The Article 8 case as now articulated was not raised in the grounds of
      appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  was   not   otherwise
      identified in any of the materials sent to the Tribunal. Nor was  such
      a case formulated or supported by materials  in  the  application  for
      permission to appeal. Yet further, no such case was advanced by way of
      statements, or materials pursuant to  the  Directions  issued  by  the
      Upper Tribunal accompanying the Notice of Hearing issued on 3  October
      2014. Moreover, the sponsor did not bring with him today any materials
      that might support his contentions - for example, in  respect  of  his
      political activism and any possible risk in visiting the  Gambia.  (In
      any event, in this latter regard I can see no reason, and the  sponsor
      did not advance any reason, why the Appellant and  the  sponsor  might
      not meet in some third country to which they both could travel.)


  23. The formulation of an Article 8 claim at this late stage does  not  in
      any way impugn the approach taken by Judge Birrell. I have taken  into
      account that both the Appellant and the  sponsor  are  lay-people  and
      cannot be assumed to know all of the details of the law.  Nonetheless,
      the scope of the appeal has been made apparent from the  date  of  the
      Respondent's decision and throughout the appeal process. The  case  as
      put to Judge Birrell - even with the benefit of the appeal bundle that
      did not reach her - could not have succeeded. In my  judgement  it  is
      too late for the Appellant and the sponsor to seek to advance in these
      proceedings the Article 8 argument now formulated.


  24. I note that this does not condemn Appellant and the sponsor to  living
      apart. It is open to the Appellant to reapply for a visit visa  making
      good all of the matters that were considered deficient under the Rules
      - and perhaps more fully explaining her circumstances and the  reasons
      underlying the proposed visit. As  regards  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules, there has been no  adverse  finding  by  the  Tribunal  on  the
      additional materials presented in support of the appeal. Moreover,  it
      is open to the Appellant and the sponsor to meet in a  third  country,
      with a view to making an application for the  Appellant  to  join  the
      sponsor as a spouse in the UK  thereafter.  The  merits  of  any  such
      applications will fall to be determined on all of the circumstances at
      the time - and nothing herein, should be taken as an indication either
      of merit or lack of merit in such potential applications. I  refer  to
      them only to indicate that the decision to dismiss the  appeal  herein
      is not finally determinative of the Appellant's and sponsor's hopes to
      be able to establish a family life together.


  25. In all such circumstances whilst I accept that there was an  error  of
      law in that the Judge proceeded without the Appellant's  bundle,  such
      an error was not material. Further in circumstances where no Article 8
      argument had been formulated or advanced,  the  Judge  is  not  to  be
      impugned for determining the appeal in the way that she  did.  In  the
      circumstances I decline to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, and in consequence I do not permit the Appellant  to  pursue
      further in these  proceedings  the  Article  8  submissions  only  now
      formulated by the sponsor.

Notice of Decision

  26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law. However, in all of  the  circumstances  I  do  not  exercise  the
      discretion to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      pursuant to section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
      Act 2007. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


  27. The appeal is dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     31 October 2014

