
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/01178/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 26 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                  Master rb
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation but Mr SA appeared
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in  2011.   His  mother  JS  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a  visitor.   That  application  was
    refused but on appeal was allowed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  under
    appeal number  VA/01074/2013.   A  separate  application  was  made  in
    relation to RB which was also refused but allowed upon  appeal  in  the
    same determination as that of his mother.

 2. The respondent sought permission to appeal the allowed  appeal  of  RB.
    The grounds seeking permission are that with effect from  9  July  2012
    (upon the coming into force of the  Family  Visitor  Regulations  2012)
    although the appellant's mother was applying to visit her sister RB was
    applying to visit his aunt and the relationship of aunt and nephew  was
    no longer one falling within the definition of  "family  member".   Any
    refusal of a  family  visit  entry  clearance  application  by  someone
    falling within such a relationship no longer attracts a right of appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  Permission to appeal the decision of  the
    judge was granted.  At the hearing I allowed Mr SA, the  brother-in-law
    of Mrs JS, to address me.

 3. It is clear  upon  a  reading  of  the  determination  that  the  judge
    proceeded on the basis that  RB  had  a  full  right  of  appeal.   The
    Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 at 2(1)  and  (2)
    sets out those who may appeal  against  an  adverse  decision  refusing
    entry clearance. This does not include the  relationship  of  aunt  and
    nephew.  Mr SA said that this would mean that although  his  sister-in-
    law would be able to visit in theory, in practice she would not be able
    to do so because she could not leave her infant son  behind.   However,
    as I explained to him that is  the  unfortunate  consequence  of  those
    Regulations being brought into force. There  is  only  a  very  limited
    right of appeal against an adverse decision in such circumstances.

Decision

 4. The judge erred in law in allowing the appeal of RB when in fact he had
    no right of appeal except  upon  the  limited  ground  referred  to  in
    Section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    That limited ground is that the decision is unlawful under Section 6 of
    the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority  not  to  act  contrary  to
    Human Rights Convention) as being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
    Convention rights.  No appeal under  that  ground  has  been  made.  In
    consequence, RB does not have and did  not  have  any  valid  right  of
    appeal. I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and substitute for that decision  one  that  there  is  no  valid
    appeal.

 5. In case there should be any doubt about the matter the  allowed  appeal
    of RB's mother JS  still  stands  and  is  entirely  unaffected  by  my
    decision.

Anonymity

 6. I decided to make an anonymity direction in respect of  RB  because  of
    his age.  Even now he is only approximately 21 months old.


Signed:                             Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


