
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/01364/2015
                                                               VA/01365/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2017                 |On 2nd February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          VISA OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mrs saya begum
                              miss rubana begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hossain


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Lucas made following a hearing at Taylor House on 4th August 2016.

 2. The claimants are citizens of India.  They initially applied,  together
    with the first claimant's son (the second claimant's brother), to  come
    to the UK as visitors on  29th  April  2013.   They  were  refused  but
    successfully appealed to the Tribunal on 28th July 2014.   The  appeals
    of the first and second claimants were allowed.  The judge  ruled  that
    their brother had no right of appeal against the  decision  because  he
    was not a child at the  date  of  application  and  accordingly  not  a
    dependent upon his mother's application.

 3. The claimants then were instructed to submit their  passports  for  the
    visas to be issued.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused to issue  the  visa  and  wrote  as
    follows:

         "You submitted your passport, and that of  your  daughter,  however
         you also submitted an amended call in notice of your  son  Mohammed
         Abul Miha which appeared to have been sent by this office.  It  was
         not,  therefore,  I  have  reconsidered  your   application   under
         paragraph 41 ... and refused it in accordance  with  paragraph  46A
         and 320(7A)."

 5. The refusal goes on state as follows:

         "Your passport was received, however, you also submitted your son's
         passport.  This is itself not an offence,  however  you  have  also
         submitted an amended call in letter which shows  your  son's  Dhaka
         VAF reference but also refers to your Delhi  reference  created  to
         enable the issue of your visa remotely  from  Delhi  Visa  Section.
         This led me to believe that the  letter  had  been  amended.   Your
         son's name appears at the top of the email,  however  this  is  not
         linked to the body of the email itself  (i.e.  it  has  been  added
         subsequently).  There are no Delhi records of any  call  in  having
         been sent containing any reference number relating to your son.   I
         am therefore satisfied to a high degree  of  probability  that  you
         have submitted a non-genuine document in an  attempt  to  obtain  a
         visa to which your sibling (son) is not entitled."

 6. The claimants appealed against  the  second  refusal.  At  the  hearing
    before the judge it was argued that the situation of the claimant's son
    had no impact at all upon the present claim which had been  allowed  at
    appeal before the Tribunal.  There could not be any assertion that  the
    allegation of false representations had been made in relation  to  this
    appeal - the situation of the claimant's son was irrelevant.  It should
    have been a matter of separate consideration if and when he applied for
    a visit visa.

 7. The judge accepted that argument and wrote as follows:

         "This is a most unusual decision.  The two appellants have made  an
         unsuccessful application for a visit visa as long ago as 29th April
         2013.  This was successfully appealed before this Tribunal on  28th
         July 2014 and this appeal was allowed.  The Visa  Office  proceeded
         to reconsider their claims and refused to issue a visa on the basis
         of alleged false representations  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant's son.  The latter is not a party to this appeal.

         The Tribunal has fully considered all of  the  above  circumstances
         and have concluded that the Visa Officer has or had no legal  power
         to overturn the decision of this Tribunal in relation to these  two
         appellants and their  individual  claims.   The  situation  of  the
         appellant's son and any alleged false representations said to  have
         been made in relation to him is a separate and distinct matter from
         this appeal.   Any  further  appeal  or  claim  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant's son can be considered on its own individual merit.   It
         cannot affect this claim.  There is therefore no legal  or  factual
         basis for the Visa Officer to have  reconsidered  the  decision  of
         this appeal and claim as it was then and as now lodged."

 8. The judge allowed the appeal and directed the Visa Officer to  issue  a
    visa to the two claimants.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that the judge had erred in law.  The judge was wrong to say  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had no legal power to overturn the decision  of
    the Tribunal, having failed to  have  regard  to  MM  (allowed  appeal:
    further refusal) Pakistan [2008] UKAIT 00040 which held that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in that case was entitled  to  issue  a  new  refusal
    under paragraph 320.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer continued to rely on paragraph 320.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrews on 7th December 2016.

Submissions

12. Mr Tufan relied on his grounds.

13. Mr Hossain submitted that it was the claimants' position that she  knew
    nothing about the call in letter relating to her son but in  any  event
    it was not relevant to the question  of  whether  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was entitled to re-refuse the mother and  daughter.   Paragraph
    320 had no application here.

Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

14. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  undoubtedly  entitled  to  consider
    whether entry clearance  ought  to  be  issued,  following  an  allowed
    appeal. In MM  the  Tribunal  held  that  in  general  Entry  Clearance
    Officers were  not  entitled  to  ignore  the  effects  of  a  judicial
    decision. However in that case, as  in  this,  there  was  prima  facie
    evidence of deception.  The Tribunal  held  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was entitled to refuse under paragraph 320, even if bound by  a
    judicial decision to accept that the substantive  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules had been met.

15. The judge was therefore wrong when he said that the Visa Officer had no
    legal power to overturn the decision of the Tribunal.

16. Second, paragraph 320(7A) states:

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge)  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application."

17. Mr Hossain sought to maintain his previous arguments made to the First-
    tier tribunal. However it  cannot  properly  be  said  that  the  son's
    application was separate from the claimants.  The  family  all  applied
    for visit visas together, and the call in  letter  was  linked  to  the
    other applications on its face, through the  citing  of  the  reference
    numbers. It is quite clear that the purpose of submitting the  document
    was to obtain a visit visa for the son to travel with the other  family
    members. If found to be fraudulent, it would clearly  fall  within  the
    remit of paragraph 320(7A).

18. For the above reasons, the judge erred in law and his decision  is  set
    aside.

Findings and Conclusions

19. The question then remains  whether  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    justified in re-refusing application under paragraph 320(7A).

20.  In  the  papers  before  the  original  judge  there  was  a  document
    verification report on the call in letter verifying it as  false.   The
    document itself was not included in the original papers  but  Mr  Tufan
    produced it.

21. Mr Hossain had never seen  this  document  before  and  was  not  in  a
    position to make submissions on it.  Accordingly I  allowed  a  further
    seven days for him to take instructions on the  document  and  informed
    him that the appeal would be determined after 27th January 2017.

22. Following  the  hearing  I  received  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
    representatives  stating  that  the  appellants   wish   to   make   it
    unequivocally clear that they did not submit the document to the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  They write:

         "The respondent's verification report alleges  that  the  applicant
         who is identified on the other side of the page as Abul Miha -  not
         the present appellants - submitted an  amended  call  letter  which
         showed his Dhaka reference number (Dhaka 639338) (please  see  copy
         of  original  notice  of  refusal  for  this  individual   attached
         (Document C) which shows the same number) but also referred to  his
         mother's Delhi reference number.  The Tribunal will note  that  the
         impugned email (Document A) does not  include  any  reference  than
         that of Abul Miha.  Therefore the allegation  in  the  verification
         report is not supported by the Secretary of State's evidence."

23. According to the refusal, and evidence in the  document,  the  call  in
    letter shows the reference number of the brother,  Abul  Miha  together
    with the reference number of his mother Saya Begum.  Since  her  number
    appears on the document it clearly relates to her  application.  It  is
    plainly an attempt to obtain a visa for Abul Miha.

24. However, according to the Entry Clearance Officer there  are  no  Delhi
    records held for Abul Miha and no record of any  call  in  having  been
    sent containing any reference numbers relating to him.

25. The claimant's case, as set out in the Grounds of Appeal is that she is
    unclear as to the email being referred to  came  about  and  unable  to
    comment on it.  She asserts that she has not knowingly engaged  in  any
    deception.

26. The respondent has produced a document which they say did  not  emanate
    from their  office  as  there  were  no  Delhi  records  held  for  the
    appellant. There is no explanation from the appellants as to  how  this
    email could have been sent.  I find that the respondent has  discharged
    the burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  show  that,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, it emanated from Abul Miha's family  in  an  attempt  to
    obtain a visa for him to which he was not entitled.

27. The second argument in the written submission repeats that made by  the
    appellant to the First-tier tribunal, i.e.  the respondent has no issue
    with the call in letter sent to the claimant inviting her to  bring  in
    her passport for the visa to be issued.  The document from Abul Miha is
    therefore  not  one  produced  by  the  present  appellants  to  obtain
    documents from  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  only  documents  they
    presented to obtain visas for themselves are genuinely issued  call  in
    letters.

28. However the call in letter for Abul Miha was plainly in relation to the
    application of the appellants.  He was attempting to obtain a  visa  to
    visit the UK with them. Abul Miha has not made a  separate  application
    for another visit visa. The handwritten numbers on the top face of  the
    email are those of the appellants,  and  clearly  in  relation  to  the
    present appellants' applications.  There is  no  basis  upon  which  to
    conclude that they are in relation to  anything  other  than  else  the
    applications of his mother and sibling.  It is quite wrong to say  that
    the only documents they presented to obtain visas for  themselves  were
    genuinely issued call letters.  They also produced a false call  letter
    for their child/sibling.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  It  is  remade
as follows.  The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 2 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
