
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/02577/2015
     VA/02579/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 July 2017                         |On 10 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, RIYADH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DR SANJEEDA KHATOON
                           DR MOHAMMAD EJAZ AHMED
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Hashim of Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Chambers (Ilford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lingam promulgated on 24 November 2016 in which she  allowed  the
    appeals of Dr Sanjeeda Khatoon  and  Dr  Mohammad  Ejaz  Ahmed  against
    refusals of entry clearance as family visitors dated 2 February 2015.


2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer  is  the  appellant  and
    Drs Khatoon and Ahmed are the respondents, for the sake of  consistency
    with the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  I  shall  refer  to  Drs
    Khatoon and Ahmed as the Appellants and the Entry Clearance Officer  as
    the Respondent.


3.   The Appellants are wife and husband with respective dates of  birth  of
    30 January 1951 and 6 June 1946.  They are both nationals of India  who
    reside in the Kingdom of Saudi  Arabia.   The  Appellants  applied  for
    entry clearance as family visitors proposing a two week holiday in  the
    United Kingdom.  They were sponsored in their application by their son,
    Dr Arif  Ahmed,  a  British  citizen,  born  on  16  April  1975  ('the
    sponsor').  The Respondent refused the applications for reasons set out
    in respective Notices of Immigration Decision  dated  2  February  2015
    with  particular  reference  to  paragraphs  41(i)  and  (ii)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  Concerns were expressed in the decisions in respect
    of the financial circumstances of the Appellants and also in particular
    with regard to their status in Saudi Arabia.   In  this  latter  regard
    doubt was expressed as to their compliance  with  the  labour  laws  of
    Saudi Arabia and in the circumstances the Entry Clearance  Officer  was
    not satisfied that  they  would  be  readmitted  to  Saudi  Arabia  and
    consequently, in turn, determined that he was not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellants genuinely intended only a visit to the  United  Kingdom  and
    would not seek to remain.


4.   The Appellants appealed to the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber.   Their
    appeal rights were limited to the grounds in section 84(1)(b)  and  (c)
    of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  virtue  of
    amendments introduced by section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013.
    In essence they could only bring their appeal on human rights  grounds.
    The appeal was heard on 4 November 2016 by Judge  Lingam  who  on  that
    occasion heard evidence from the sponsor.  The appeals were allowed for
    the reasons set out in the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


5.   The Respondent  has  sought  and  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of Judge Lingam.  Permission to appeal was granted
    on 11 May 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies who in material
    respects observed as follows:

         "The Judge's decision is flawed because although he  finds  'it  is
         without doubt that the appellants enjoy an established family  life
         with their son and his family in the UK' he has not indicated  what
         evidence leads him to make that finding.  There appears  to  be  no
         evidence of dependency which would enable  the  Judge  to  conclude
         that a family life existed and thus Article 8 was engaged."


6.   Although that grant of leave is expressed in absolute  terms  -  "[the]
    decision is flawed" - of course what Judge Davies really meant was that
    it was arguable that that was the case. The decision as to  whether  or
    not the First-tier Tribunal Judge had fallen into error  of  law  is  a
    decision for this Tribunal at substantive hearing and not a decision to
    be made at the permission stage.   Be  that  as  it  may,  for  present
    purposes, this makes no material difference to the issues before me.


7.   It is very clear from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    Judge was impressed with the sponsor as a witness, and  also  impressed
    with the supporting evidence provided in  respect  of  the  Appellants'
    circumstances, their professional standing and also  their  immigration
    status in Saudi Arabia: see in particular paragraphs 18  and  43-45  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  It is similarly  clear  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  the  Appellants  had
    adequately addressed  the  concerns  expressed  by  the  Respondent  in
    respect  of  paragraphs  41(i)  and  (ii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, as the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recognised,  this  was  an
    appeal limited to human rights grounds which in practical terms on  the
    facts of this case meant limited to Article 8 grounds, and was  not  an
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly, an  ability  to  meet
    the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules   was   not   inevitably
    determinative of the outcome in the appeal.  It was a matter that might
    sound in the proportionality assessment, that is to say the  evaluation
    pursuant to the fifth of the Razgar questions, but it was not in itself
    determinative of the existence of family life which  was  the  starting
    point for any appeal brought under the limited grounds.


8.   The Judge directed herself in considering Article  8  to  the  case  of
    Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212, and  also  in  particular  the  case  of
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112.  Reference  was
    also made to the case of Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
    0261  (IAC).   The  Judge   also   identified   the   public   interest
    considerations pursuant to section 117A of the 2002 Act, although these
    matters again primarily relate to the issue of  proportionality  rather
    than the question of the existence or otherwise of family life.


9.   The key finding in respect of family life is set out  at  paragraph  30
    of the Judge's decision.  It is in these terms:

         "There  is  no  dispute  regarding   the   appellants'   claim   of
         relationship with the sponsor.  Indeed, the  appellants  have  made
         several trips to visit their son and his family living in  the  UK.
         There is therefore a long established family life in the  UK.   The
         appellants are frequent visitors at  all  their  children's  homes.
         The sponsor stated that he wishes for his children  (sons  born  in
         2009 and 2012), who see their grandparents each year,  to  continue
         enjoying  their  relationship  with  their  grandparents.    I   am
         satisfied that as the appellants have  been  seeing  the  sponsor's
         children since birth that there would be a strong bond between  the
         appellants and their grandchildren in the UK."


     I pause to note that the reference there to  "frequent  visits  at  all
    their children's homes" is a reference to the fact that the  Appellants
    as well as having the sponsor in the UK have adult  children  variously
    in India, Saudi Arabia and the United States of America.


10.  The Judge does not advance any further  analysis  or  consideration  of
    the facts of family life and does not identify any further reasons  for
    her conclusion as to the existence  of  family  life.   The  conclusion
    reached at paragraph 30 is, however, taken forward at paragraph 38 when
    the Judge turns  to  a  consideration  of  the  Razgar  questions.   At
    paragraph 38 the finding at paragraph 30 is in essence restated  -  "It
    is without doubt that the appellants enjoy an established  family  life
    with their son and family living in the UK" -  with  the  Judge  adding
    that she was satisfied that  the  decision  would  interfere  with  the
    exercise of the Appellants' family life with their son and his  family.
    Thereafter the Judge's Decision considers the issue of proportionality.


11.  It is to be noted in this context that in addressing  the  concerns  in
    respect of the Notices of Immigration Decision and paragraph 41 of  the
    Immigration Rules the Judge records submissions advanced on  behalf  of
    the Appellants to the effect that they would not be in  a  position  to
    vary their leave once in the UK because they  were  not  dependants  of
    their son.  We see this at the concluding  sentence  of  paragraph  43:
    "Even  if  so,  as  submitted  by  [their  representative],   such   an
    application if one were submitted would fail for lack of dependency  on
    their son".  This is echoed again at paragraph 45 in these  terms:  "As
    indicated above, I take on board that any concern the appellants  might
    remain with the  son  can  be  dispelled  by  the  admission  that  the
    appellants are both financially  and  emotionally  independent  of  the
    sponsor".


12.  The Respondent challenges the Judge's conclusion in respect of  'family
    life' and argues in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  conclusion  is
    unsustainable by reference to the applicable principles to  be  gleaned
    from case law and  bearing  in  mind  the  facts  of  these  particular
    Appellants.  In this regard particular reliance is placed in the  first
    instance on the case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  This is  a  well-
    known case in this jurisdiction but nonetheless it is  worth  restating
    the contents of paragraph 19 and in part paragraph 25.  Paragraph 19 is
    in these terms:

         "Returning to the present case, neither blood ties nor the  concern
         and affection that  ordinarily  go  with  them  are  by  themselves
         altogether in my judgment enough to constitute family  life.   Most
         of us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond  and  whom
         we visit, or who visit us, from time to time; but none of us  would
         say on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them in
         any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning  and  purpose  of
         Article 8." (per Lord Justice Sedley).


     At paragraph 25 the following is stated, in part:

         "Because there is no presumption of family life, in my  judgment  a
         family life is not established  between  an  adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties: see S v United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196
         and Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom [1985] 7EHRR
         471.  Such ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on  his
         family or vice versa.  It  is  not,  however,  essential  that  the
         members of the family should be in the same country."


13.  The guidance set out therein is essentially echoed in  a  further  case
    that the Respondent places reliance upon, MS (Article 8 - family life -
    dependency - proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064.   Paragraph  8
    of that decision states in part:

         "It is accepted law that in circumstances where family life is put
        forward as existing between an adult child and his  parents  or  an
        adult sibling and his other siblings  there  needs  to  be  further
        elements of dependency involving more than normal  emotional  ties.
        This was reaffirmed by the Tribunal recently  in  the  decision  in
        Salad [2002] UKIAT 06698 relying on the earlier  case  of  Advic  v
        United Kingdom, a Strasbourg case decided in September 1995."




14.  The Respondent makes further reference in the Grounds to the  cases  of
    ZB (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and Ghising and  Others  [2013]  UKUT
    00567 (IAC), but it seems to me that in substance those  cases  add  or
    detract nothing further from the principles I have  indicated  above  -
    although perhaps provide  something  by  way  of  illustration  of  the
    application of those principles to the facts of particular cases.


15.  Bearing these matters in mind it is appropriate that I  also  refer  to
    the case of Mostafa to which the Judge directed herself: see First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision at paragraph 35.  Paragraph 24 of Mostafa  is
    in part in the following terms:

         "It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope.  We are, however, prepared to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope  of  Article  8(1).  In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together."




16.  I emphasise that the Tribunal in Mostafa emphasised  that  it  was  not
    attempting to be  in  any  way  prescriptive.   However,  the  Tribunal
    identified that it will only  be  in  'unusual  circumstances'  that  a
    relationship outside the type of relationship identified in the passage
    quoted above would engage Article 8.  This inevitably throws  one  back
    on the jurisprudence as to the existence or otherwise  of  family  life
    between, for example an adult child and his/her parent/s.   Accordingly
    it seems to me that there is  nothing  in  the  case  of  Mostafa  that
    detracts from the previous jurisprudence, and indeed the  reference  to
    it  only  being  in  unusual  circumstances  -  indeed  "very   unusual
    circumstances" - that Article 8 might be engaged  inevitably  indicates
    that a decision-maker must be clear  in  their  reasoning  as  to  what
    particularly was unusual to justify a finding of 'family life'.


17.  In my judgment the making of visits over recent  years,  and  seemingly
    annual visits through the lifetime of  the  very  young  grandchildren,
    does not inevitably establish family life. It is not manifestly a  very
    unusual circumstance.  In my judgment the Judge fails to  explain  how,
    on the facts of this particular case, it does indeed constitute 'family
    life' - or indeed more particularly as she puts  it  at  paragraph  30,
    "family life in the UK".  The Judge fails to engage  with  the  passage
    cited at paragraph 36 in her decision from Mostafa,  and  in  substance
    does  not  explain  what  distinguishes  the   circumstances   of   the
    Appellants' case that justifies a finding that  runs  contrary  to  the
    guidance in the jurisprudence explored above.   More  particularly  the
    Judge singularly fails to reconcile her conclusion as  to  family  life
    with her findings that there was no financial or  emotional  dependency
    as between the Appellants and the sponsor.  Indeed it seems to me  that
    the notion of a Kugathas dependency is confounded by  the  Judge's  own
    findings at paragraphs 43 and 45 as quoted above.


18.  It is  clear  from  paragraph  43  of  the  Decision  that,  like  many
    families, the children of the Appellants upon reaching  adulthood  have
    gone their own ways, and the parents have in  turn  pursued  their  own
    careers quite independently.  The adult children and  their  respective
    spouses and own children  are  spread  geographically  and  live  lives
    independent of the Appellants.  The Appellants in turn live their lives
    independently of their children.  Whilst in one sense  they  are  still
    indeed 'parents and children' and still a 'family' in the  broad  sense
    of that word, it is not the case that family life subsists  within  the
    meaning of Article 8. For that reason it seems  to  me  the  Judge  has
    erred both in law and fact in respect of her conclusions.


19.  Even if it were otherwise  and  the  first  Razgar  question  could  be
    answered in the favour of the Appellants, there is  no  exploration  of
    how ties could be maintained by visits by the sponsor and his family to
    Saudi Arable, or indeed to a third country such as  India  or  the  USA
    where there are other family members.


20.  In all of the circumstances I find that there was a material  error  of
    law on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which  necessitates
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be set aside.
21.  It also follows from what I have said  and  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above that I find that the Appellants cannot succeed  under  Article  8
    because family life does not exist as between them and the sponsor  and
    his family in the UK.   Accordingly,  I  remake  the  decision  in  the
    appeals, and dismiss the appeals.


22.  I should add that nothing I have said in the foregoing  undermines  the
    Judge's clear and  careful  findings  as  to  the  bona  fides  of  the
    Appellants with regard to their intentions in respect of the  visit  to
    the United Kingdom.  It may well be that an Entry Clearance Officer  in
    considering a new application will wish to  have  very  particular  and
    careful consideration to those favourable findings as to the  essential
    bona fides of the Appellants and indeed their sponsoring son in the UK.
     However that is a matter for another time and is not an issue directly
    before me today.


Notice of Decisions

23.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
    law and are set aside.


24.  I remake the decisions in the appeals. The appeals are dismissed.


25.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee awards.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis  (in  his  capacity  as  a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge)

