
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
VA/02745/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 17 November 2016                |            On 22 December 2016      |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     And

                           KRISHNAVELLI SIGAMONEY
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      Ms P Yong, of Counsel, instructed by Davies, Blunden
                    & Evans


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The claimant, a national of South Africa, born  on  15  October  1975,
      applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom as a family  visitor  to
      come and see her partner Mr Alan Caulfield (hereafter "the sponsor").

2.    The Respondent refused entry clearance to the claimant by  a  decision
      made on 26 March 2015, with reference to paragraph 41 (i) and (ii)  of
      the Immigration Rules. The Notice of Decision  informed  the  claimant
      that her right of appeal was limited  to  the  grounds  identified  in
      s.84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  She
      appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    The grounds of appeal made no reference  to  unlawful  discrimination,
      but they can and should be read as asserting  that  the  decision  was
      unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The  Entry  Clearance
      Manager reviewed the decision to refuse entry clearance on that  basis
      on 20 October 2015, but chose to uphold it.

4.    The claimant's appeal against the refusal was allowed  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 8 July 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis.

5.    On 21 October 2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted  the
      Respondent permission to appeal.

6.    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the Judge  erred  in
      law. In this regard it was the submission of Mr Walker that the  Judge
      erred in concluding that Article 8 was engaged and failed to  consider
      whether the relationship could  continue  in  South  Africa.  Ms  Yong
      essentially submitted that any error(s) were immaterial, and that, the
      Judge's findings were open to him on the evidence by reference to  the
      decisions in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
      and Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487.

7.        Mr Walker made no reply.

Decision on Error of law

8.    While the Judge's decision could have been more  comprehensive,  I  am
      satisfied that the findings made were open to him on the evidence.

9.    The claimant and sponsor are unmarried partners. They have been  in  a
      relationship since 2008 and they married in a  customary  ceremony  in
      March 2009. The claimant has since visited the sponsor in  the  UK  on
      twelve occasions, through which, she has  developed  her  relationship
      with the sponsor and in turn his children. Whilst the sponsor has also
      spent time living with the claimant in South Africa, it is through the
      claimant's visits to the United Kingdom, that  the  sponsor  has  been
      able to forge closer bonds with his  children.  The  Judge  heard  the
      sponsor attest to that background and considered the various documents
      relating to the claimant's links with South Africa.

10.   The Judge then considered  the  relevant  principles  and  authorities
      relating to Article 8. The Judge recognised that  the  first  question
      that must be answered was whether Article 8  was  engaged.  The  Judge
      accepted the sponsor's evidence, which was not in dispute,  about  the
      nature of his relationship with the claimant and thus  concluded  that
      the Respondent's decision interfered with their right to  respect  for
      family life. The Judge set out the applicable  sub-paragraphs  of  the
      relevant Immigration Rules, paragraph 41, and concluded that the Rules
      were met [32].

11.   At paragraph 38 the Judge found that the refusal  of  entry  clearance
      was not proportionate under Article 8. In his reasoning he noted  that
      the assessment of whether the decision under appeal was  proportionate
      may depend particularly upon whether  or  not  the  claimant  met  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules.

12.   The judge also considered the various factors  identified  in  section
      117B of the  2002  Act.  Having  regard  to  all  these  factors,  and
      approaching the evidence holistically, the Judge was of the view  that
      proportionality fell in favour of the claimant.

13.   The Entry Clearance Officer sought to appeal on  the  basis  that  the
      Judge made a material misdirection of law and gave inadequate reasons.
      Mr Walker argued briefly that the Judge was not entitled to find  that
      Article 8 was engaged and  that  the  proportionality  assessment  was
      inadequate.

14.   I have  into  account  the  authority  of  Mostafa  (supra)  and  Kaur
      (supra). I  am  satisfied  that  upon  a  proper  application  of  the
      principles enunciated therein that the  judge  reached  a  sustainable
      decision. Whilst the claimant and sponsor are  unmarried  partners  it
      was apparent from the evidence that they shared a  close  relationship
      akin to that of husband and wife. That relationship had  developed  in
      part through the claimant's visits to the UK which, in  turn,  allowed
      her to establish relationships with the sponsor's children. In Mostafa
      a Presidential panel of the Tribunal said this at [16]:

      "Mr Jarvis could not argue against the suggestion that  excluding  the
      claimant interfered with his and  his  wife's  right  to  respect  for
      family life. We regard  it  as  settled  law  that  in  an  Article  8
      balancing exercise the rights of all those closely affected, not  only
      those of the claimant, have to be considered.  It is our view that the
      decision in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 is to be followed  and  that
      the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family  life  of
      those affected by the decision.  Undoubtedly the  paradigm  Article  8
      entry clearance case concerns applicants seeking to join close  family
      members for the purposes of settlement. However it cannot be  excluded
      that where one party to a marriage is entitled to  be  in  the  United
      Kingdom a qualified obligation to facilitate spousal  unification  for
      the limited purpose of a short visit and sojourn may  arise  and  does
      arise  here.  Mrs  El-Sheikh  wanted  to  return  to  her  country  of
      nationality (the United Kingdom) for a time and her husband wanted  to
      be with her, not with a view to settlement but so that he could  share
      her life and relationships in the United Kingdom. The refusal decision
      had a material impact on their right to enjoy family life. He did  not
      want  to  settle  but  to  visit  her,  and  subject  to   permissible
      qualifications, he should be entitled to  do  that.  Whilst  it  would
      almost certainly be proportionate to refuse him entry clearance if  he
      did not comply with the rules  his,  and  his  wife's,  desire  to  be
      together in her home area, albeit for purposes of a  visit,  are  very
      human and understandable. Preventing that would not be a "technical or
      inconsequential interference" (see Sedley LJ  in  VW  (Uganda)  [2009]
      EWCA Civ 5) and should be  permitted,  subject  to  the  proportionate
      requirements of immigration control."

15.   In view of that guidance I am entirely satisfied that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find on the evidence that not only was there  family  life
      but that the refusal of entry clearance constitutes a breach with that
      family life.

16.         The Judge went on to consider whether the breach was lawful  and
      then considered whether the  refusal  was  proportionate  in  all  the
      circumstances. In considering proportionality the  Judge  specifically
      found  that  the  claimant  had  met  all  the  requirements  of   the
      Immigration  Rules.  The  judge  gave  sustainable  reasons  for   his
      conclusion that the claimant only intended to enter the United Kingdom
      as a  visitor,  having  regard  to  the  substantial  links  that  she
      maintained with South Africa.

17.   Having thus found that the Immigration Rules were met the  judge  went
      on to consider the relevant factors in section 117B of the  2002  Act.
      The Judge was clearly aware of the significance of the public interest
      at [35]-[38], and gave appropriate weight to those factors and, noting
      that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  were  met,  concluded
      that the decision to refuse entry clearance was disproportionate. This
      was a decision that was open to the Judge on the evidence  before  him
      and for the reasons  that  he  gave.  In  these  circumstances  I  can
      identify no material error of law and I dismiss  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer's appeal and uphold the initial  decision  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date 22/12/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
