
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02304/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 19th November 2015                 |                 On 4th January 2016    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                 MR ABID ALI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman issued on  8th  June  2015  allowing
    apparently under the Immigration Rules  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant
    against the decision of the Respondent  made  on  26th  March  2014  to
    refuse his application for entry clearance as a family visitor.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  on
    10th September 2014.  She said:

         "2.  The grounds argue  inter  alia:  the  judge  made  a  material
             misdirection in  law  by  failing  to  make  any  findings  in
             relation to the residual grounds  of  human  rights  and  race
             relations being the only competent grounds in a  family  visit
             appeal after 25th June 2013; the judge had erred in failing to
             carry out a proportionality  assessment  and  failed  to  have
             regard to the  statutory  public  interest  considerations  as
             required by Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002; the judge  had  erred  by  going  beyond  her
             jurisdiction and thus the decision should be set aside;  there
             was no evidence of the necessary element of dependency between
             adult relations so as to engage Article 8 in this appeal.

           3. It is arguable that the judge did not  make  adequate  or  any
             findings in respect of jurisdiction  and  failed  to  identify
             what Grounds of Appeal were competent."

 3. The Appellant had actually in this case appealed on  the  grounds  that
    the decision was contrary to his human rights.  It  did  not  help  the
    situation that the Entry Clearance Manager  was  rather  vague  in  his
    decision, simply saying that he was satisfied that  Article  8  is  not
    engaged but then referring to the failure of the Appellant to meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The fact is that there has been
    no right of appeal against Refusal under the  Immigration  Rules  since
    25th June 2013.  It appears from the determination that the  Judge  was
    unaware of that.  It is not mentioned at  all.   He  states  that  that
    application was refused under paragraph 41 of HC 395 (as amended).   He
    states that this is the relevant Immigration Rule.  He goes through the
    refusal letter and the  Appellant's  circumstances  and  finds  himself
    satisfied that the Appellant is genuinely seeking entry  as  a  visitor
    and that he intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of his visit
    - two requirements of the Rules.  He does not mention Article 8 at all.
     Clearly he had no jurisdiction to consider paragraph 41.  He failed to
    consider Article 8.  His decision therefore contains a  material  error
    of law and must be set aside. .

 4. The sponsor did attend the hearing and  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
    just wants to visit the UK and would return to Pakistan. The grounds of
    appeal relate solely to the refusal under the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Appellant claims to have family in Pakistan and close siblings  in  the
    UK but there is nothing to support a contention  that  there  exists  a
    family life that engages Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal  and  I  set  that  decision  aside  with  no  preserved
findings of fact.
The appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer is dismissed.


Signed   Date: 13th December 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
