
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02091/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer - dhaka
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            AHMED MAHMUD AL NOZIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Junior of Hamlet Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Afako)  allowing  the  respondent's
    appeal  against  a  decision  taken  on  17  March  2014  refusing  his
    application for entry clearance to visit the sponsor (his  brother)  in
    the United Kingdom under para 41 of the Immigration Rules  (HC  395  as
    amended).





Introduction

 2. It was accepted before the  judge,  correctly,  that  the  respondent's
    appeal was limited to Art 8 by virtue  of  s.88A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended with  effect  from  25  June
    2013 by s.52 of the Crime and Courts Acts 2013.

 3. Initially, the respondent had applied for entry  clearance  along  with
    his parents to visit the sponsor.  Although the ECO refused  all  three
    applications, on  review  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  reversed  the
    decisions in respect of the respondent's parents and  so  granted  them
    entry clearance.  Consequently, the judge was only concerned  with  the
    appeal of the respondent.

 4. In his determination, Judge Afako accepted that the  respondent  could,
    contrary to the ECO's decision, meet the requirements of para 41 of the
    Rules as a visitor.  However, he recognised that that was not a  proper
    basis for allowing the appeal given that  the  only  proper  ground  of
    appeal was on human rights, namely under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The judge went on to apply the five stage  approach  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  First, he accepted that the  respondent  enjoyed  family  and
    private life with his brother's family  and  that  the  ECO's  decision
    interfered with that family and private life.   Secondly,  he  accepted
    that the decision was in accordance with the law.  Thirdly, however, he
    found that the decision was disproportionate in all  the  circumstances
    taking into account that the respondent was a genuine  visitor  wishing
    to visit his brother and his nephew who suffered from  autism  and  was
    unable to travel to Bangladesh.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The ECO sought permission  to  appeal  on  essentially  three  grounds.
    First, the judge had been wrong in law to find that Art 8  was  engaged
    on the basis that there was "family life" between  the  respondent  and
    his brother and family in the UK.  Secondly, the judge had erred in law
    in that his proportionality assessment was inadequate and the judge had
    failed to take into account the public interest consideration  set  out
    in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    "NIA Act 2002").

 7. On 21 April 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N  J  Osborne)  granted
    the ECO permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 8. Mr Richards, who represented the ECO focused on  the  ground  that  the
    judge had been wrong in law  to  find  that  there  was  "family  life"
    between the respondent and his family in the UK given that his  brother
    was an adult and  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  of  any
    particular bond or close connection  between  the  respondent  and  his
    brother or his  nephew.   Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the  decision  in
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 that  more  than  "normal  emotional
    ties" were required to establish "family life".

 9. Mr Junior, who represented the respondent submitted that the judge  had
    given adequate reasons for his finding and that there was no  error  of
    law in concluding that "family life" existed.

10. In this appeal, I am not concerned  with  a  relationship  between  the
    respondent and a member of his family which gives rise to a presumption
    that family life exists as would be the case with a  parent  and  minor
    child or between spouses.  In this appeal, family life  must  factually
    be found to exist in all the circumstances of the case.

11. In Kugathas the Court of Appeal considered the issue  of  when  "family
    life" existed for the purposes of Art 8.  Sedley LJ in his judgment  at
    [14] approved the approach of the European Commission for Human  Rights
    in S v UK (1984) 40 DR 196 at p.198 where the Commission said this:

         "Generally, the protection of family  life  under  Art  8  involves
         cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their  dependent,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not necessarily acquire the protection of Art 8 of  the  Convention
         without evidence of further elements of dependency, involving  more
         than normal emotional ties."

12. At [17], Sedley LJ said:

         "17. Mr Gill QC [Counsel for the appellant] says that none of  this
             amounts to an absolute requirement  of  dependency.   That  is
             clearly right in the economic sense.   But  if  dependency  is
             read down as meaning 'support', in the personal sense, and  if
             one adds,  equine  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  'real'  or
             'committed' or 'effective' to  the  word  'support',  then  it
             represents in my view the irreducible minimum of  what  family
             life implies ...".

13. At [19], Sedley LJ added:

         "19. ... neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
             ordinarily go with them are, by themselves or together, in  my
             judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most  of  us  have
             close relations of whom we are  extremely  fond  and  whom  we
             visit, or who visit us, from time to  time;  but  none  of  us
             would say on these grounds alone that we share a  family  life
             with them in any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning
             and purpose of Art 8."

14. Arden LJ added this at [25]:

         "25. Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment
             a family life is not established between an  adult  child  and
             his surviving parent or other siblings unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties:  see  S  v  United  Kingdom
             (1984) 40 DR 196  and  Abdulaziz,  Cabales  and  Balkandali  v
             United Kingdom (Application  Nos  9214/80,  9473/81,  9474/81)
             (1985) 7 EHRR 471. Such ties might exist if the appellant were
             dependent on his family or vice versa.  It  is  not,  however,
             essential that the members of the family should be in the same
             country. The Secretary of State accepts that that  possibility
             may exist,  although  in  my  judgment  it  will  probably  be
             exceptional. Accordingly there is no absolute rule that  there
             must be family life in the UK, as the Tribunal held."

15. That approach has been endorsed in subsequent case law, for example, JB
    (India) & Others v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 234  and  Etti-Adegbola  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1319.  In  doing  so,  the  case  law  recognises  that
    "family life" between a child and parent does not necessarily terminate
    at the stroke of midnight when the child turns 18 years of age.

16. Most recently in Singh and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630, the  Court
    of Appeal approved Kugathas.  In his judgment Sir Stanley Burnton (with
    whom Richards and Christopher Clarke LJJ agreed) said at [24]:

         "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead to
         any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article 8  in
         cases involving adult children. In  the  case  of  adults,  in  the
         context of immigration  control,  there  is  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
         European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly in  Kugathas
         did not include any requirement of exceptionality. It  all  depends
         on the facts. The love and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his
         parents or siblings will not of  itself  justify  a  finding  of  a
         family life. There has to be something more. A young  adult  living
         with his parents or siblings will normally have a family life to be
         respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family life with  his
         parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life  at  midnight
         as he turns 18 years of age. On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult
         living independently of his parents may well not have a family life
         for the purspoes of Article 8."

17. On the facts, the Court of Appeal concluded that  the  judge  had  been
    correct to find that the respondent had no family life with his  family
    in this country as they were "independent and working" and, as  regards
    his younger siblings in India,  there  was  "no  evidence  of  anything
    beyond  the  normal  bonds  of  affection,  apart  possibly  from  some
    financial support of the family in India".  But as regards  the  latter
    Sir Stanley Burnton concluded:

         "that support cannot lead to a finding of a  family  life  in  this
         country, which was the only family life for  which  the  appellants
         contended."

18. In this appeal, Judge Afako made the following finding in  relation  to
    the respondent's family life with his brother's family at  para  10  of
    his determination:

         "There is no question that the decision prevents the appellant from
         enjoying a family and  private  life  with  his  brother's  family.
         Given the circumstances of  his  brother's  family  (as  I  discuss
         below) the relationship is of some importance and amounts to family
         life and an important aspect of private life."

19. Mr Junior accepted in  his  submissions  that  there  was  no  specific
    evidence before the judge in respect of the  respondent's  relationship
    with his brother or with his nephew.

20. The judge had a written statement from the respondent dated 29  January
    2015 (at pages 1-3 of the respondent's  bundle);  a  written  statement
    from the sponsor dated 29 January 2015  (at  pages  4  and  5  of  the
    respondent's bundle) and the sponsor gave oral evidence.

21. It is clear that the thrust of  this  evidence  was  to  establish  the
    genuineness of the respondent  as  a  family  visitor  based  upon  his
    financial circumstances and that of  the  sponsor.   The  evidence  did
    demonstrate that the respondent's nephew suffered  from  autism  and  a
    number of health problems which made it difficult if not impossible for
    him to visit Bangladesh.  However, nowhere in the those statements nor,
    having consulted the Record  of  Proceedings,  did  the  respondent  or
    sponsor give any evidence of anything other  than  "normal"  ties  that
    would exist between adult siblings or between an uncle and  nephew  who
    lived in different countries.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any  bond,
    dependency or tie which could conceivably amount to family life between
    the respondent and his family in the UK.

22. For these reasons, the judge erred in law in allowing the  respondent's
    appeal under Art 8 on the basis that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    breached his right to respect for family life in the UK.

23. That then  leaves  the  judge's  finding  that  the  respondent  enjoys
    "private life" with his brother's  family  in  the  UK.   It  is  well-
    recognised that Art 8 is not engaged unless an individual can establish
    "existing" family life.  That must equally be true of  "private  life".
    Article 8 is not concerned with a situation where an  individual  seeks
    to forge either family or private life which does  not  already  exist.
    Providing, however, either does exist  then  Art  8  also  protects  an
    individual's right to "respect" for in  the  sense  of  permitting  its
    development or flourishing.

24. In this appeal, it is difficult on the limited  evidence  submitted  to
    the judge (and no further evidence was submitted to  me)  to  see  what
    "private life" existed and which the  decision  of  the  ECO  prevented
    being developed or allowed to flourish.   The  only  candidate  is  the
    respondent's relationships with his family members in the UK.  However,
    the evidence of that was very limited, going,  in  effect,  no  further
    than the existence of  those  relationships,  in  particular  with  the
    sponsor and the  respondent's  nephew.   Indeed,  in  relation  to  the
    respondent's nephew, there was no evidence of  any  relationship  apart
    from the one arising by virtue of  kinship  raised  in  either  witness
    statement or in the sponsor's oral evidence.

25. Consequently, there was no evidential basis for the judge  to  conclude
    that the ECO's decision breached the respondent's "private life".

26. For those reasons, the judge erred in law in allowing the appeal  under
    Art 8 which was not engaged on the basis of  the  evidence  before  the
    judge and the appeal should have been dismissed.

27. In any event, even if private life did exist, I am satisfied  that  the
    judge's conclusion that the ECO's decision was disproportionate is,  in
    itself, flawed and the only proper finding is that the  ECO's  decision
    was proportionate.  I reach that view on  the  premise  that  the  only
    conceivable basis upon which Art 8 could be engaged is the respondent's
    private life.

28. First, the judge accepted, and so do I, that  the  respondent's  nephew
    suffered from autism and had "complex medical needs" such that  he  was
    unable to travel to Bangladesh.  Secondly, the judge accepted that  the
    respondent met the substance of the Immigration Rules, namely para  41.
    Thirdly, however, the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    respondent could reapply for entry clearance and it had not been  shown
    that such an application was likely to fail.  In fact, in the light  of
    the judge's findings on the Rules the respondent has  demonstrated,  at
    least at the date of the ECO's current decision, that he is  a  genuine
    visitor who meets  the  requirements  of  those  Rules.   Fourthly  the
    judge's decision was made on the basis of there being "family life" for
    the purposes of Art 8.  For the reasons I have given above that was  in
    error.  Although I accept that, to an extent, the  distinction  between
    "family" and "private" life may not affect the  outcome  of  an  appeal
    (see Singh and Singh at [25]), the weight to be given to "family life",
    given the need to  establish  and  exist  the  "close  ties"  following
    Kugathas, means that the weight to be given to family life is likely to
    be greater because the effect or impact upon  the  individual  if  that
    family life cannot be continued is likely to be greater.  That was,  no
    doubt, Judge Afako's approach  but  it  was  based  upon  an  erroneous
    finding that family life existed.

29. For these reasons, his finding  in  relation  to  proportionality  also
    cannot stand.

30. In relation to proportionality, if private life existed (contrary to my
    conclusion above), I would find as follows.

31. In carrying out the balancing exercise in respect  of  proportionality,
    the fact that the respondent met the  requirements  of  para  41  is  a
    weighty but not determinative  factor  in  determining  proportionality
    (see Mostafa (Art 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC)).

32. I "have regard to" the relevant factors in s.117B of the NIA 2002.

33. First, the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is  in  the
    public interest (s.117B(1)).

34. Secondly, it is in the public interest that those who seek to enter the
    UK speak English (s.117B(2)).  I  was  not  addressed  on  this  point.
    However, given the terms of the  respondent's  witness  statement,  and
    that it is not suggested he required an interpreter to  certify  it  as
    true, I accept for these purposes he can speak English.

35. Thirdly, I accept that the sponsor will pay for the respondent's  visit
    and so he will not be a burden on the taxpayer (s.117B(3)).

36. However, there is no family life established on  the  evidence  between
    them or any other member of the respondent's family  in  the  UK.   The
    evidence of existing "private life" is limited  to  that  arising  from
    kinship.  I bear in mind that the respondent's nephew cannot travel  to
    Bangladesh to see the respondent.  There is also the prospect that  the
    respondent may again apply for  entry  clearance  and,  no  doubt,  the
    findings of Judge Afako under para 41 will be readily apparent  to  the
    ECO though not binding him as to the respondent's future position under
    the Rules.  That, in my judgment, is an important factor in determining
    whether this decision was or was not proportionate.

37. In Mostafa, the Upper Tribunal at [24] stated that:

         "We are, however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Art 8(1).  In practical terms it is  likely  to
         be limited to cases where the relationship is that of  husband  and
         wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor  child  and
         even then it will not necessarily be extended to cases  where,  for
         example, the proposed visit is based on a  whim  or  will  not  add
         significantly to the time that the people involved spend together."

38. I agree.  At best the respondent can rely on his private life alone  in
    this appeal.

39. Taking all these factors into account, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    ECO's  decision  results  in  a  sufficiently  serious  breach  of  the
    respondent's protected rights under Art 8 so as to be disproportionate.



Decision

40. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
    respondent's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.
     That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

41. I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal under Art 8.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable because the appeal has been dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
