
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  VA/02901/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 25 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS REHANA KAUSAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No-one


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 28 February  1966.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  31  March  2015
    refusing to grant her entry clearance to the  UK  as  a  visitor  under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The right of appeal is  limited
    to the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(c) -  whether  the  refusal
    constitutes a breach of the appellant's human rights  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Williams on 25 January 2016.  The appeal was allowed on  human
    rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 4 February 2016.

 3. An application for permission to appeal  was  lodged.   Permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft on 19 July  2016.
    The permission states that the appellant wishes to come to  the  United
    Kingdom to participate in prayers for her deceased grandmother but  the
    respondent argues that a private life claim of this kind cannot be made
    out of country following SS (Malaysia) [2004] UKIAT 0091.  One  of  the
    grounds of onward appeal is that there is no right  to  visit  extended
    family members but the permission states that that of itself is  not  a
    good argument since the appeal is under Article 8 only,  not  paragraph
    41 of the Immigration Rules.  However, it goes on to state that if  the
    appellant cannot bring herself within the paragraph that  might  affect
    the proportionality exercise in accordance with existing Article 8 case
    law. The judge did not consider this.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file.  This states that  the  permission
    is void and null because the grounds of application were submitted late
    and Judge Woodcraft did not grant an  extension  of  time  but  granted
    permission to appeal.

 5. Reference is made in the response to  Antwi  and  Others  v  Norway  No
    26940/10 14 February 2012. The response states that that case should be
    distinguished from the present case as it concerned a visit to a living
    grandmother who was unable to travel or fly anywhere and she could  not
    enjoy family and private life in Pakistan.  The response states that in
    the present case the application for entry clearance was made while the
    appellant's grandmother was gravely ill  but  she  has  now  died.   It
    states that it stands to reason that the visitation and maintenance  of
    her grave and the act of grieving with others is an  intrinsic  feature
    of a civilised society throughout the world and falls into the category
    of exceptional circumstances for leave to be granted outside the Rules.
     The response states that Judge Williams clearly explained his findings
    under Article 8 which led to the appeal being allowed.

The Hearing

 6. There was no appearance at the hearing of this appeal on behalf of  the
    appellant. I was able to deal fairly with  the  hearing  based  on  the
    submissions of the Presenting Officer and the evidence on file.

 7. This is a case where the appellant is out of country so the time  limit
    for the grounds of application to be submitted is 28 days  which  means
    the respondent's grounds were not submitted late.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the  grounds  of
    application and submitted that Article 8 has not been dealt with  in  a
    proper manner by the judge.  I was  asked  to  find  that  there  is  a
    material error in the First-Tier Judge's decision and I  was  asked  to
    remake the decision and set the First-tier Judge's decision aside.

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected himself  in
    finding the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  to  refuse  the
    appellant entry clearance, constituted an  interference  of  a  gravity
    crossing the minimum threshold for engagement of  Article  8  of  ECHR.
    The grounds state that the judge erred  in  his  proposition  that  the
    refusal of a visitor's entry clearance to enter  the  UK  for  a  short
    period of time was an interference with Article 8 in a case where there
    is no family life.  There is no right to enter the United  Kingdom  for
    the purpose of visiting extended family members but in this  case  only
    Article 8 is being considered.  At paragraph 14 the judge found that he
    was not satisfied that the appellant has  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom but at paragraph 16 found that the appellant has a private life
    with her family in the United Kingdom.

10. The grounds state that the judge erred in his analysis of private life.
     The refusal of entry clearance in a visit case without anything  extra
    does not constitute  an  interference  with  the  private  life  of  an
    appellant and his extended family members.  Reference is  made  in  the
    grounds to the case of Abbasi and Another [2014] UKUT 00463  (IAC)  and
    it is pointed out that there are a number of decisions on burial  cases
    in which Article 8 is engaged, but  these  concern  the  family/private
    life of those already in the contracting state, which is not  the  case
    here.  The case of SS (Malaysia) [2004] UKIAT  00091  is  referred  to.
    This states that private life is not a basis on which an ECHR right  of
    entry can be based, since neither the ECHR nor  the  1999  Act  can  be
    construed as providing for all those whose private lives are restricted
    in a signatory or non-signatory country.

11. Although the judge has allowed the  appeal,  at  paragraph  21  of  his
    decision he states "I am satisfied that it would  be  proportionate  to
    refuse the appeal."  When the said case of SS (Malaysia) is followed  a
    private life claim of this kind cannot be made out of  country  so  the
    findings of the judge were not open to him.

12. Article 8 is not engaged based on  the  appellant's  private  life.   A
    refusal of entry clearance to the UK for a short period of time is  not
    an interference with Article 8 in a case where there is no family life.
     Private life as distinct from family life is not a basis on  which  an
    ECHR right of entry can be based.

DECISION

13. There is a material error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.   The  decision  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Williams
    promulgated on 4 February 2016 must be set aside.

14. The appellant's appeal for entry clearance as a visitor to  the  UK  is
    dismissed on all grounds.

15. No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed                                  Date 25 August 2016

I A M Murray
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
