
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/02259/2015
                                                               VA/02249/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd August 2016                           |On 26 August  2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               The secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                maqbool BEGUm
                                     and
                                 shakeela bi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No representation (Mohammed Malik attended as a
relative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer  Abu  Dhabi  (ECO)  against  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Hanlon)  allowing  the
    appeals of both respondents, against the ECO's refusal  of  15th  March
    2015, to grant them entry to the UK, as  visitors.   For  the  sake  of
    clarity, in this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary of  State/ECO
    as "the Respondent" and to the Respondents as  "the  Appellants."  This
    reflects their respective positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan. They are mother and  daughter-
    in-law born 1st January 1941 and 12th February 1979 respectively.

 3. Both Appellants made applications for entry clearance  as  visitors  to
    the UK for a period of six weeks. They intended to travel together. The
    purpose of their visit was to see family members.  Both were  sponsored
    by Ms Thanzeela Naz (the  Sponsor),  the  granddaughter  of  the  first
    Appellant and the niece of the second. The ECO decided to  refuse  both
    applications  under  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration   Rules.    In
    particular, he  noted  that  the  Appellants  were  seeking  to  travel
    together and that Shakeela Bi's husband was already in possession of  a
    valid visa allowing him to travel to the UK, at  any  time  during  the
    currency of that visa.

 4. It was considered therefore, that the Appellants had  not  demonstrated
    that there remained sufficient ties in Pakistan to show that they would
    leave the UK on expiry of their visas.  The applications were therefore
    refused.

First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellants appealed the ECO's refusal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Their appeals came before Judge O'Hanlon.  After taking  evidence  from
    the Sponsor, the judge issued two decisions. Both  decisions  contained
    identical paragraphs in respect of the relevant  parts  affecting  this
    decision.  Under a heading of Findings he said at [11] (Maqbool  Begum)
    and [7] (Shakeela Bi)

         "7.  In relation to the suggestion that there has been a breach  of
             the Human Rights Convention I do not find  that  this  is  the
             case.  The case of Sun Myung Moon v ECO Seoul [2005] UKIAT 112
             decided that the only arguable Human  Rights  Convention  that
             could be involved in an entry clearance appeal  is  Article  8
             and that is only in relation to  family  life.   There  is  no
             evidence before me to indicate  that  the  Appellant  has  any
             family life with the UK Sponsor and even  if  they  have,  the
             Appellant has not shown any  interference  with  that  because
             they can continue to enjoy that family life in the same way as
             they have done previously.  It is also the case that any right
             under Article 8 is a qualified right  proportionate  with  the
             need to maintain an effective immigration and border  control.
             Although the Sponsor has indicated that it would be easier for
             the Appellant to visit this country,  rather  than  family  to
             visit her, I do not find that this is a satisfactory reason to
             explain why the Appellants' relatives in  the  United  Kingdom
             would be unable to travel to Pakistan or a third country to be
             with her.  I therefore find that the decision was justified by
             the requirement  to  maintain  an  effective  immigration  and
             border control, that being in the public interest."

 6. Having decided that neither Appellant could meet  the  requirements  of
    Article 8 ECHR the judge then went on to consider  matters,  improperly
    it would appear, under the Immigration Rules. He  failed  to  recognise
    that the Rules had been changed by Section 52 of the Crime  and  Courts
    Act 2013, wherein the rights of appeal for family  visitors  under  the
    Rules were revoked for any decisions after 25th June 2013.  Effectively
    family visit visa appeals were  restricted  to  grounds  showing  human
    rights and/or race relation issues.

 7. Despite the judge's findings at [7]  and  [11]  of  his  decisions,  he
    allowed both appeals.

Onward Appeal

 8. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal.   Thus  the
    matter comes before me to determine whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains an error of law requiring it  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

 9. Before me, Mrs Pettersen attended on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   Mr
    Mohammed Malik, (the father of the Sponsor) attended speak on behalf of
    the Appellants.  The procedure was outlined to Mr Malik.  Mrs Pettersen
    made  submissions  keeping  to  the  lines  of  the   grounds   seeking
    permission.  She submitted that there was a clear error on the part  of
    the First-tier Tribunal judge who seemed to be totally unaware  of  the
    changes brought about in the Immigration Rules by the 2013 Act .  There
    was nothing in the decision, nor in the evidence which could have led a
    judge properly directed to allow these appeals.

10. She accepted that the judge had made clear findings that Article 8  was
    not engaged. There had never been any  suggestion  that  these  appeals
    were pleading Race Relation issues. She invited me  to  set  aside  the
    decisions and dismiss both appeals.

11. After the circumstances were explained to Mr Malik, I asked him to tell
    me what he would wish to say on behalf of the Appellants.  It  amounted
    to this.   He  could  not  understand  why  the  ECO  had  refused  the
    applications, because so far as the family was concerned, the financial
    papers were in order. His mother and  sister-in-law  simply  wished  to
    travel to see all their relatives in the UK.   He  explained  that  his
    mother had been to the UK before and  had  returned  to  Pakistan.   He
    explained that she had a large number of relatives in  the  UK  and  it
    would be far more costly for them to all go to Pakistan rather than  to
    have his mother visit here.  His sister-in-law was coming in  order  to
    accompany his mother who being an elderly lady needed another female to
    travel with her.

Error of Law

12. Following the submissions made by Ms Pettersen, I find I  am  satisfied
    that the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  contain  errors  of  law
    requiring them to be set  aside.   I  find  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    evidence on behalf of the Appellants is not sufficient to amount  to  a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR rights.  Judge O'Hanlon made clear findings on
    that aspect of the appeal at least.  The only platform upon  which  the
    Appellants could appeal is one of human rights/race  relations.   There
    has been no grounds  or  any  evidence  put  forward,  concerning  race
    relations.  These appeals  are  therefore  restricted  to  whether  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer amounts  to  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  I am satisfied  that  the  evidence
    shows that it does not.   Accordingly  I  set  aside  Judge  O'Hanlon's
    decisions and remake them dismissing both appeals.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal of the Secretary of State on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is allowed in both matters

14.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal are set aside.

15. The appeals  of  Maqbool  Begum  and  Shakeela  Bi  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's refusal to grant them entry clearance  as  visitors
    are hereby dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 26 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a fee award in  either  case  and  that
decision stands.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 26 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

