
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: VA/02645/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 30 April 2015                    |On 7 May 2015               |
|Prepared 30 April 2015              |                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    O. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER WARSAW
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Sponsors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of the Ukraine born  on  5  June  1980,
           applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom for two months  as
           a family visitor to her parents in law, declaring  an  intention
           to travel with  her  husband  and  son,  who  are  both  British
           citizens.
        2. The Respondent refused  entry  clearance  to  the  Appellant  by
           decision made on 17 March 2014  by  reference  to  paragraph  41
           (i)(ii)(vi)(vii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Notice   of
           Decision informed the Appellant that her  right  of  appeal  was
           limited to the grounds identified in s84(1)(c) of the 2002  Act.
           She appealed that decision,  although  she  requested  that  the
           appeal be determined upon the papers before the Tribunal without
           a hearing. The Respondent raised no objection to that.
        3.  The  grounds  of  appeal  made   no   reference   to   unlawful
           discrimination, but they can and should  be  read  as  asserting
           that the decision was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act
           1998. The ECM reviewed the decision to refuse entry clearance on
           that basis on 10 October 2014, but chose to uphold it.
        4. The appeal was heard and  allowed  on  16  December  2014  in  a
           decision promulgated on 9 January 2015 by  First  Tier  Tribunal
           Judge NMK Lawrence.
        5. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Robertson  dated  13
           February 2015 the First Tier  Tribunal  granted  the  Respondent
           permission to appeal on the basis  it  was  arguable  there  had
           been a failure by the Judge to dispose of the appeal pursuant to
           the restricted grounds permitted by s88A of  the  2002  Act  (as
           amended), because the Judge had made no  explicit  reference  to
           the Article 8  rights  of  any  person  in  the  course  of  his
           decision.
        6. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice. Thus the matter comes
           before me.


      The challenge to the decision
        7. I remind myself that  s85A  of  the  2002  Act  applied  to  the
           evidence admissible upon the appeal, and of  the  guidance  upon
           the proper approach to Article 8  cases  involving  applications
           for leave to enter that is to be found in Mostafa (Article 8  in
           entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112, and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
           387.
        8. At first sight the decision under appeal is  one  that  does  no
           more than allow the appeal on the basis of a  finding  that  the
           Appellant had demonstrated that she met the requirements of  the
           Immigration Rules at the date of decision. If that were all that
           the decision had done, then it is plain that  such  an  approach
           would have constituted an error of law.
        9. It was not in dispute that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
           subsisting marriage with a British citizen, and that as a result
           she was the mother of A, a boy born in the UK  on  28  September
           2007, who was six years old at the date of decision. It was also
           not in dispute that she had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
           relationship with A and her parents in law. In the circumstances
           it could not have been in dispute (and neither the ECO, nor  the
           ECM sought to place it in dispute) that  the  refusal  of  entry
           clearance was an interference in the ability  of  all  of  those
           individuals to pursue their "family life" together. If A was  to
           travel to the UK to visit his paternal grandparents, which as  a
           British citizen he could do as  of  right,  then  the  Appellant
           would be prevented from accompanying him as a mother  of  a  six
           year old would ordinarily do. It was in the  best  interests  of
           the child  to  form  and  strengthen  a  relationship  with  his
           paternal grandparents,  and  that  relationship  would  in  turn
           benefit from the formation and strengthening of  a  relationship
           between his mother and his paternal grandparents.  It  followed,
           as the Upper Tribunal set out in Mostafa [9] that Judge Lawrence
           was obliged  to  assess  the  evidence  to  decide  whether  the
           Appellant met the substance of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  she
           claimed she did, or whether she did not, as the  Respondent  had
           claimed.
       10. The Respondent raises no complaint either  in  the  grounds,  or
           before me, to the effect that it was not open to Judge  Lawrence
           to make the findings of fact that he did on  the  evidence  that
           was  before  him.  The  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant   had
           previously been granted a two year multi  entry  visa,  allowing
           multiple visits of up to six months in duration,  and  that  she
           had always complied with the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
           Rules, and her visa in the past. He was entitled to conclude, as
           he did, that this was  powerful  evidence  suggesting  that  her
           declared intentions for this  proposed  trip  were  genuine.  He
           noted (and indeed it was not in dispute before him) that she had
           both her own extended family, and a home, and a job,  to  return
           to in the Ukraine. In short he was perfectly entitled  to  reach
           the conclusions that he did in relation to the  issues  of  fact
           raised by  paragraph  41  (i)(ii)(vi)(vii)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules, of which the Respondent had not been persuaded.
       11. The Judge did not fall into  the  error  identified  in  Virk  &
           Others [2013] EWCA Civ 652, or Mostafa [11], and  thus  did  not
           purport to allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
           Judge  simply  stated  that  he  allowed  the  appeal,   without
           specifically and expressly identifying the basis upon  which  he
           was doing so. There was however only one legitimate ground  that
           was advanced, which was the Appellant's reliance upon the  human
           rights ground.
       12. Since the Article 8 rights of a number of different  individuals
           (all of whom were British citizens) were engaged by the  refusal
           decision, it fell to the Respondent to justify the  interference
           with those rights as one that was proportionate. The  Judge  was
           plainly not persuaded that there was any lack of candour on  the
           part of the Appellant in the course of her application, and  nor
           am I. There was no other possible  basis  left  upon  which  the
           Respondent could seek to do so in the light of the  findings  of
           fact that had been made in relation to paragraph 41.
       13. It followed therefore that the Judge was obliged  to  allow  the
           human rights appeal, and in my judgement that was what he sought
           to do when stating simply that he allowed the appeal.  He  could
           of course have made his reasoning more plain, but  ultimately  I
           am not persuaded that the Respondent has  established  that  the
           decision discloses any material error of   law  in  the  Judge's
           approach, that requires it to be set aside and remade.


   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  9
      January 2015 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds  that  requires
      that decision to be  set  aside  and  remade,  and  that  decision  is
      accordingly confirmed.

      I direct in accordance with the authority of Fenuyi [2002] UKIAT  6785
      that any endorsement that has been made upon the Appellant's  passport
      to the effect that she has been refused  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom should be further endorsed to the effect that such refusal was
      successfully appealed.




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  her.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 30 April 2015
