
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2015                              |On 9 April 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                rehena kousar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidyadiharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hulse, Counsel for Harris Ali & Co, Solicitors,
Middlesex


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  however
      for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as they  were  before
      the First Tier Tribunal.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  15  July  1955.   She
      appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  20  July  2014
      refusing to grant her entry clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
      family visitor.  Her appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal Symes and the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds in a
      determination promulgated on 10 December 2014.

   3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and permission  was
      granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Cruthers  on  3  February
      2015.  The grounds of application state that the Judge failed to  give
      adequate reasons for findings of a material matter.  Case  law  states
      that family life, within the meaning of Article 8  will  not  normally
      exist between adult siblings, parents and adult children  so  in  this
      case, Article 8 is not engaged.  They state  that  an  application  to
      come to the UK as a visitor is a temporary visit of  limited  duration
      and the requirements that need to be met to qualify under  the  Rules,
      are necessary for legitimate aims and are proportionate.  The  grounds
      state that the Respondent's refusal does  not  interfere  with  family
      life within the meaning of Article 8.  The case of MS Uganda [2004] UK
      IAT 0064 is referred to and the refusal of  entry  clearance  in  this
      case does not interfere with the existing family and private  life  of
      the parties as they are in different countries  and  the  sponsor  has
      previously travelled to Pakistan to visit, after the birth of each  of
      her children.  They  state  that  the  proportionality  assessment  is
      inadequate and does not explain why the refusal of a visa  which  only
      allows the parties to be together temporarily  is  a  disproportionate
      interference with those Article 8 rights.  These state that the  Judge
      is seeking to rely on Article 8 as a general dispensing power.

The Hearing

   4.  This  appeal  is  restricted  to  human  rights   grounds   or   race
      discrimination grounds:- in this case human rights grounds.

   5. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying on the grounds of
      application.  She submitted that the Judge clearly empathised with the
      Appellant and wanted to allow the  appeal  under  the  Rules  but  was
      unable to do so.  Because of this he considered the Appellant's  human
      rights at paragraph 20 of the determination and referred to  the  case
      of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He  referred  to  the  test  being  whether
      normal emotional ties between parents and an adult son or daughter are
      enough to constitute family life.  He stated that there is a need  for
      an element of dependency over and above the norm, between a parent and
      his  or  her  adult  child  but  that  everything   depends   on   the
      circumstances of each case.  He  found  that  the  Appellant  and  the
      sponsor enjoy family life.

   6. The Appellant's daughter is  the  sponsor  in  this  case.   She  left
      Pakistan in 1998 and the Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Judge
      did not explain why it would be disproportionate for this visit not to
      go ahead.  She submitted that the visit  only  leads  to  a  temporary
      situation and the Appellant can reapply for a  visa  and  address  the
      Entry Clearance Officer's concerns which are set out  in  the  refusal
      letter, in particular the  Appellant's  intention  and  likelihood  of
      returning to Pakistan within the terms of her visa.

   7. She submitted that the Judge considers the said case of MS and  states
      that all the terms of the Immigration Rules have  been  met,  but  the
      Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  this  is  a  genuine
      visit.  He was aware of the Appellant having visited many times before
      and of her returning within the  terms  of  her  visas  but,  on  this
      particular occasion, he was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  a
      genuine visitor and found that the terms of the  Rules  could  not  be
      satisfied.

   8. She submitted that the Entry Clearance Officer and the Entry Clearance
      Manager were not satisfied with the  whereabouts  of  the  Appellant's
      husband and were not satisfied with the bank statements and the  money
      available to the Appellant for the purpose of her visit.

   9. She submitted that Article 8 is not engaged and there is an  error  of
      law in the Judge's determination.

  10. I asked Counsel for the Appellant,  about  the  fall-out  between  the
      Appellant and  her  husband,  referred  to  in  paragraph  11  of  the
      determination.  I was told that this was in 2007 and at  paragraph  11
      the judge accepts that  they  have  been  reconciled.   The  appellant
      visited her daughter, the sponsor, in 2008  and  returned  within  the
      terms of her visa.

  11. Counsel for the Appellant made her submissions relying on the terms of
      the determination.

  12. She submitted that there is family life between the Appellant and  her
      daughter and her grandchildren.  She submitted that family life is not
      something rigid and the Judge was  aware  of  there  requiring  to  be
      something beyond normal emotional  ties  when  adult  family  members'
      relationships are considered, but the Judge found that on the facts of
      this case there is family life.

  13. She submitted that it is true that now that the application  has  been
      refused the only way the Appellant's application can succeed is  under
      Article 8 of ECHR.  She submitted that this should be  successful.   I
      was asked to consider the case of Huang in which Lord  Bingham  refers
      to family  members  depending  on  each  other  and  she  referred  to
      settlement applications where children under 18 can  apply  to  settle
      with their parents in the United  Kingdom.   She  submitted  that  the
      Appellant is  over  18  but  that  does  not  mean  that  she  has  no
      relationship  with  her  daughter  and  grandchildren  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  She referred to the case of  Bank  Mellat  v  Her  Majesty's
      Treasury (No 2) [2013] UK SC39 at paragraph 25 in which it  is  stated
      that the analysis of the factual case  advanced  has  to  be  properly
      considered.  This case refers to a freer balance being struck  between
      the rights of the individual and the interests of  the  community  and
      states that the severity of the consequences has to be assessed.   She
      submitted that the Home Office's intention is  not  for  there  to  be
      endless appeals and the Secretary  of  State's  objective  is  not  to
      prevent grandparents from seeing their grandchildren.   She  submitted
      that this case should not  have  been  dismissed  as  the  Appellant's
      circumstances are the same as they have been since 1998  and  she  has
      visited many times since then.

  14. Counsel submitted that this Appellant has her family life in  Pakistan
      but that does not mean that she does not have family life  with  other
      family members who do not live in Pakistan.  She submitted  that  this
      Appellant has a very good immigration history and there is no fairness
      in the refusal of the application by  the  Respondent,  especially  as
      there is no right of appeal under the Rules, when the  facts  are  the
      same as before.  She submitted that there is nothing which states that
      Article 8 can only  apply  to  children  under  18.    This  would  be
      unrealistic situation.

  15. She submitted that it cannot be right for the  Appellant  to  have  to
      make another application under the Rules and on the basis of  what  is
      said in the said case of  Bank  Mellat,  when  the  circumstances  are
      considered, Article 8 is engaged as there is  continuing  family  life
      between the Appellant, her daughter and her daughter's children.

  16. Counsel submitted that it cannot be  right  to  keep  the  Appellant's
      grandchildren away from her.

  17. I put to her that the reasons for refusal  are  that  this  is  not  a
      genuine visit and the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  with
      the bank account and statements produced, or the  whereabouts  of  the
      Appellant's husband.

  18. Counsel submitted that the Appellant's husband is in the  family  home
      in Pakistan and  the  appellant  lives  in  a  joint  household.   She
      submitted that discretion should have  been  applied  and  the  appeal
      should have been allowed under Article 8.  She submitted that there is
      an error of law in the determination.

  19. The Presenting Officer submitted that in the determination, the  Judge
      is using Article 8 as a dispensing power  because  the  terms  of  the
      Rules cannot be satisfied and that this must be an error of law.   She
      submitted that the reasons put forward by Counsel for Article 8  being
      engaged are untenable.

  20. The Presenting Officer submitted that Article 8 is  not  engaged.   If
      the application is refused there is no interference with the  existing
      family and private  life  of  the  Appellant  or  her  daughter.   She
      submitted that the appellant's daughter can  visit  the  Appellant  in
      Pakistan as she has done before.

Determination

  21. It is clear from the First Tier determination that the Judge  believed
      that the Appellant's application for entry clearance should have  been
      allowed.  He states that all the terms of the Rules have been met  but
      what he does not appear to have considered properly is the  fact  that
      the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied with certain aspects  of
      the application, being the financial situation of  the  Appellant  and
      the whereabouts of her husband.  The Entry Clearance Officer may  have
      had in his mind the fact that in 2007 the Appellant  and  her  husband
      had a fall-out.  He would also have  been  aware  of  the  Appellant's
      visit in 2008 and the fact that she returned within the terms  of  her
      visa and he would have been aware of her  previous  visits.   For  the
      Judge to state that the Appellant satisfies  every  dimension  of  the
      Immigration  Rules,  in  that  her   maintenance   and   accommodation
      arrangements are adequate and she has ample  incentive  to  return  to
      Pakistan in the future, as she has done so many  times  in  the  past,
      cannot be correct.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision, which  was
      supported by the Entry Clearance Manager's report, is clear.   He  was
      not satisfied with some of the elements of the application.

  22. Family visit appeals are restricted to residual grounds  contained  in
      Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of  the  2002  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act.  What the Judge has done in this case is find that in  his
      mind that the terms of the Rules have been satisfied.  Because of this
      he has allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds.   The  Appellant's
      family life is in Pakistan, not in the United  Kingdom.   This  is  an
      application for a visit to the UK on a  temporary  basis  for  limited
      duration.  The refusal does not interfere with family life within  the
      meaning of Article 8, relating to the appellant's family life and  her
      daughter's and grandchildren's family life.

  23. There was nothing before the Judge to indicate that in this case there
      are  further  elements  of  dependency  involving  more  than   normal
      emotional family ties between the Appellant  and  her  daughter.   The
      refusal does not interfere with the existing family and  private  life
      of the Appellant or her daughter.  The  sponsor  has  been  away  from
      Pakistan since 1998 and the sponsor can visit her mother  in  Pakistan
      and can take her children with her.

  24. The  Judge's  proportionality  assessment  is  flawed.   There  is  no
      disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights or
      with her daughter's Article 8 rights if this application  is  refused.
      As stated by the Presenting Officer, the Judge has relied on Article 8
      as a general dispensing power and this is an error of law.

  25. The Appellant can reapply and can address the  points  raised  in  the
      Entry Clearance Officer's refusal letter.

Decision

  26. I find that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal's determination and I am setting this aside.

  27. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

  28. The Appellant's representative asked me to  grant  leave  for  her  to
      appeal but I refused this.

  29. No anonymity direction has been made.



Signed        Date 1 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

