
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/02682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           visa officer, new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                sumit sharma
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by Charles
Simmons Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Thus  the  Visa  Officer  is  once  again  the
    Respondent and the Appellant is Mr Sharma.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miles (Judge Miles), promulgated on 19 February 2015, in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.  That
    appeal was against the Respondent's refusal of  entry  clearance  as  a
    family visitor, dated 29 April 2014.

 3. The Appellant is an Indian national, born on 18  July  1981.  His  visa
    application was based on a desire to visit his brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom (the sponsor). They had not seen each other for some years  and
    the sponsor found travel  to  India  difficult  because  of  his  self-
    employment. It was said that  the  sponsor  financially  supported  the
    Appellant, and had been doing so for many years.

 4. The Respondent's refusal was based  squarely  on  matters  arsing  from
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules (the Rules).  In  particular,  it
    was said that the Appellant did not genuinely intend a short visit  and
    that he would not return home at the duration  of  the  proposed  trip.
    Nothing was said about Article 8.

The hearing before Judge Miles

 5. The judge correctly recognised that the appeal before him  was  limited
    to human rights grounds only (discrimination  not  having  been  relied
    upon). He proceeded to consider the Respondent's reasons  for  refusing
    the application and made findings on the matters under paragraph 41  of
    the  Rules  which  were  favourable  to  the  Appellant.  Judge   Miles
    specifically states that if he had had jurisdiction to allow the appeal
    under the Rules, he would have done so (paragraph 14).

 6.  Turning  to  Article  8,  the  judge,  having  taken  account  of  the
    unchallenged fact of lengthy financial dependency of the Appellant upon
    the sponsor and daily telephone contact between them, proceeded to find
    that family life existed (paragraph 16). An interference with (or  lack
    of  respect  for)  that  family  life  was  also  found.  In  assessing
    proportionality, Judge Miles referred to  the  Appellant's  ability  to
    meet paragraph 41 of the Rules and the genuine problems  faced  by  the
    sponsor in terms of visiting  India  (paragraph  17).  Ultimately,  the
    judge was, on the facts of the case before  him,  "just"  persuaded  to
    conclude that the Respondent's decision was disproportionate (paragraph
    18). The appeal was duly allowed on Article 8 grounds only.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. Having cited several cases relating to Article  8,  including  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31, paragraph 6 of the grounds states:

         "It is submitted that the  findings  on  financial  dependency  and
         telephone contact do not establish that Article  8  is  engaged  in
         light of the fact that the Appellant and Sponsor have not seen each
         other for eight years."

 8. Paragraph 7 describes the proportionality assessment as "inadequate" on
    the basis that it did not explain why a decision denying only temporary
    contact could be disproportionate. Paragraph 8 assets  that  the  judge
    used Article as a "general dispensing power."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    7 May 2015.

The hearing before me

10. Mr Kotas relied on the grounds. He focused on the lack of  face-to-face
    contact between the Appellant and sponsor. He referred me to  paragraph
    27 of Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC)[1] and SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

11. Mr Plowright submitted that the findings and conclusions of Judge Miles
    were open to him. There  had  been  a  proper  direction  to  the  test
    required under Kugathas. In respect of the proportionality  issue,  the
    judge had been entitled to take the satisfaction of  the  paragraph  41
    requirements into account. I was referred to paragraphs 22  and  39  of
    Kaur.

12. In reply, Mr Kotas suggested that the Appellant could make a fresh visa
    application.

Decision on error of law

13. Having considered this matter with care, I conclude that there  are  no
    material errors of law in the decision of Judge Miles.

14. Dealing first with ground 1. It is readily apparent  to  me  that  this
    aspect of the challenge is in effect one of  perversity.  It  is  clear
    that the judge directed himself correctly to the Kugathas test  (albeit
    that the judgment itself is not cited). Further, the  judge's  findings
    of fact have not been challenged.  In  light  of  this  and  given  the
    wording in paragraph 6 of the grounds, the Respondent is asserting that
    the judge simply could not rationally have reached  the  conclusion  he
    did.

15. I reject this challenge. In a case  such  as  this  where  an  elevated
    threshold applies because of the nature of the challenge, the  question
    is whether Judge Miles' conclusion on family life  was  "open  to  him"
    (see  paragraphs  17  and  22-23  of   Dasgupta   (error   of   law   -
    proportionality  -  correct  approach)  [2016]  UKUT  00028  (IAC)  and
    paragraph 16 of Greenwood (No. 2) (para  398  considered)  [2015]  UKUT
    00629 (IAC)). Given  that  the  resolution  of  issues  concerning  the
    existence of family life are "intensely factual" (see paragraph  24  of
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC),  the
    party alleging perversity is likely to face particular difficulties.

16. In the present case the judge found that the financial  dependency  had
    been long-standing and that there was daily telephone  contact.  Whilst
    the judge's finding on family life as between the Appellant and sponsor
    might have been generous, I am unaware of any binding authority to  the
    effect that these factors are simply incapable, on any  rational  view,
    of showing ties beyond the norm such as to constitute family  life  for
    the purposes of Article 8(1). The Respondent has  provided  nothing  in
    support of her argument. On the contrary, a fair reading  of  paragraph
    39 of Kaur discloses a suggestion that financial  dependency  might  be
    sufficient to engage Article  8(1).  So  too  in  paragraph  41  of  ZB
    (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 834.

17. Judge Miles' conclusion must also be seen in the context of his finding
    that the requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii)  were  met.  This  is
    relevant to the sustainability of  the  judge's  acceptance  of  family
    life, albeit that he has not specifically stated as much (see paragraph
    13 of Kaur). A final matter to note is that  the  existence  of  family
    life was not expressly disputed in  either  the  Respondent's  original
    refusal notice or the Entry Clearance Manager's review. Nor, as far  as
    I can tell from the Record of Proceedings on file, did  the  Presenting
    Officer take this issue against the Appellant.

18. In respect of the substantial period  since  the  last  direct  contact
    between the Appellant and sponsor, the judge was clearly well aware  of
    this fact.

19. To the extent that ground 1 may encapsulate a challenge to the  judge's
    conclusion that the  refusal  constituted  an  interference  (or,  more
    accurately a lack of respect for) the family life, I  find  that  given
    what he says in paragraphs 16 and 17, it was open  to  Judge  Miles  to
    have answered the second Razgar question in the affirmative.

20. I turn now to ground 2. The  wording  here  is  somewhat  confused,  as
    whereas proportionality is mentioned at the outset, reference  is  made
    thereafter to the interference/lack of respect  issue,  which  in  fact
    comes first in the Razgar methodology. In any event, in terms  of  this
    issue, I refer back to the preceding paragraph.

21. As with ground 1, the Respondent's challenge to proportionality  is  in
    reality an assertion that Judge Miles' conclusion was not open to  him.
    Once again, I disagree.

22. The judge quite rightly acknowledges in paragraph 15 that  satisfaction
    of paragraph 41 of the Rules does not necessarily lead to success under
    Article 8. Having said that, we now know from Mostafa, Kaur  and  Adjei
    that the ability or otherwise to meet the requirements of the Rules  is
    certainly relevant when assessing both the existence of family life and
    proportionality. In the present case the ability to  satisfy  paragraph
    41 of the Rules is relevant in three ways.

23. First, the judge was fully entitled to take account of  the  fact  that
    the Appellant would be a genuine visitor, with an understandable desire
    to see his brother after a long period apart.  This  was  a  factor  to
    which the judge was entitled to weigh in the Appellant's favour.

24. Second,  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control is, as I read Kaur, effectively covered by  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 41 of the Rules (see  paragraphs  22-23  of  that  decision).
    Thus, the failure of Judge Miles to  expressly  refer  to  "the  public
    interest" does not undermine his overall conclusion.

25. Third, an applicant who fails to meet the  visitor  Rules  will  almost
    invariably fail in their Article 8 claim, as there  is  no  discernable
    gap between paragraph 41 and what Article 8 requires. That scenario did
    not  apply  to  the  Appellant.  Having   considered   the   concluding
    observations in paragraph 27 of Kaur and  SS  (Congo)  more  generally,
    what is being said is that the need to show "compelling  circumstances"
    in  the  form  of  a  particularly  strong  claim  arises   where   the
    requirements of the Rules are not met. In visit visa cases there is  of
    course no jurisdiction to allow an appeal under the  Rules,  but  there
    can be findings that the Rules  are  in  fact  met  by  the  individual
    concerned. Therefore, the Rules may be satisfied, but the appeal cannot
    be allowed on that basis (as a  result  of  the  statutory  limitations
    imposed by sections 88A and 84  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, as amended). It is somewhat difficult to  see  why  an
    appellant who can show that  Article  8(1)  is  engaged,  has  met  the
    relevant Rule, and does not bear the baggage of any misconduct, must in
    addition present further exceptional circumstances. I do not read  Kaur
    (to the extent that  it  relies  on  SS  (Congo))  as  saying  that  an
    appellant does bear such a burden in cases where the Rules are  met.  I
    respectfully refer to the concluding comments of the Upper Tribunal  at
    paragraph 24 of Mostafa, where it said that in the context of a case in
    which Article 8(1) is engaged:

         "If a person's circumstances do satisfy the Immigration  Rules  and
         they have not  acted  in  a  way  that  undermines  the  system  of
         immigration control, a refusal of  entry  clearance  is  liable  to
         infringe Article 8."

26. Returning to the present appeal, whether or not what I have said  above
    is correct, Judge Miles did not simply state that satisfaction  of  the
    Rules automatically led to success under  Article  8.  He  specifically
    takes into account the fact (unchallenged by the Respondent)  that  the
    sponsor was effectively precluded from visiting India  because  of  his
    self-employment. This, together with the satisfaction of  paragraph  41
    of the Rules, entitled the judge to arrive at the  rational  conclusion
    that the refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate.

27. As I have stated previously, it is clear that the  judge  had  in  mind
    throughout his assessment of this case that the Appellant had not  seen
    the sponsor for some years. This factor did not preclude the judge  (as
    a matter of rationality) from finding that  the  Respondent's  decision
    was disproportionate.

28. The judge's failure to refer to section 117B of the 2002 Act has  never
    been relied upon by the Respondent. In any  event,  it  is  immaterial,
    given in particular the co-extensive relationship between paragraph  41
    of the Rules and the public interest.

29. Finally, paragraph 8 of the grounds is misconceived. The judge was  not
    using Article 8 as a "general dispensing power": this is not a case  in
    which the Appellant failed  to  meet  the  Rules.  The  effect  of  the
    Respondent's contention is that an Article 8 claim can never succeed in
    a visit visa appeal, and that is plainly wrong.

30. As with the conclusion on  family  life,  Judge  Miles  may  have  been
    generous to the Appellant, but his conclusion was open to him.

31. The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.



Anonymity

32. I make no direction. None has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date: 4 February 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
This is because the Appellant's claim under Article  8  involved  additional
evidence and adjudication thereon by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date: 4 February 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

-----------------------
[1] The decisions in Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487
(IAC), Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and
Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) all post-date Judge
Miles' decision.

