

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/02689/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |On 20 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MERCEDITA LIWANAG TABAGO

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Norrie, Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Archer) which  allowed  the  appeal  of
      Mercedita  Tabago  against  the  ECO's  refusal  to  grant  her  entry
      clearance as a visitor under para 41 of the Immigration Rules (HC  395
      as amended).

   2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  who  was  born  on  1
      December 1968.  She lives in the Philippines  with  her  10  year  old
      daughter.  She met the sponsor in May 2012 in the Philippines and they
      began a relationship.  Having spent a month in the Philippines  before
      returning to the UK, the sponsor then returned to the  Philippines  in
      October 2012 where he remained  living  with  the  appellant  until  2
      February 2013 when again he returned to the UK.

   4. On 29 November 2012, the appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  to
      visit David Norrie, a British citizen.  On 19 December 2012,  the  ECO
      refused the appellant's application.  The ECO was not  satisfied  that
      the appellant was genuinely seeking entry for the limited purpose of a
      six month visit nor that she intended to leave the UK at  the  end  of
      her  proposed  visit  and,  as  a  consequence,  did  not   meet   the
      requirements of para 41(i) and (ii).  In the decision  letter,  it  is
      stated that:

           "Your right of appeal is limited to the grounds referred  to  in
           section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
           2002".

   5. That is a reference to race relations and human rights grounds.

   6. On 4 June 2013, the Entry Clearance Manager maintained the refusal  of
      entry clearance and, in relation to the appellant's right  of  appeal,
      said this:

           "The applicant has applied to visit her  boyfriend  in  the  UK.
           This relationship does not meet the criteria of a  family  visit
           and her application was refused with a limited right of appeal.

           The applicant has not appealed with regard to the  Human  Rights
           Act and I respectfully ask that the appeal be dismissed  without
           a hearing."

   7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  grounds  of
      appeal (which are numbered as I set them out) were as follows:

           "1.   She does not have any assets of her own and does not  work
                 and also that there was no evidence of where the money come
                 from in her account that we  opened  for  her  on  12th  06
                 December.

              1. Mercy does not work as I have been providing  her  and  her
                 daughter, the financial support they need as your colleague
                 should have  seen  from  the  receipts  of  western  union.
                 Regarding the money, I put into her account this was  money
                 I brought from the UK and some money mercy had saved.   The
                 main purpose of this account at first would  have  been  to
                 let her sister Terresa Tabago to use for stephanie's school
                 and any other expenses such as clothing  etc.  while  mercy
                 was in the UK with me and then Mercy  would  have  her  own
                 account to keep her money in rather than in the house.

              2. that there was no evidence to say what provision  had  made
                 by her for the care of her daughter.

              2. The fact that there was  no  evidence  provided  about  her
                 daughters Stephanie care was down to the fact there was  no
                 question about this in application form for this, so  think
                 it would be quote obvious  that  as  responsible  adult  we
                 would make provision for her, her sister who live's at  [an
                 address in San Ignacio Angles City] a[nd] would look  after
                 her Tel. [set out] so I  hope  that  this  clears  up  that
                 point.

              3. Finally the officer also stated that the believed that  she
                 had no intention of returning  from  the  UK.   I  hope  to
                 clarify some of those concerns.

           3.    As I stated in my letter before we are planning  to  marry
                 at the end of this year, and I have been living with  mercy
                 since 29 of October 2012 up until my return to  the  UK  on
                 the 2nd of February as we have  not  decided  on  where  we
                 would like to live I would like mercv to live  with  my  in
                 the UK for 6months  to  meet  my  family  and  friends  and
                 experience our weather and  culture  before  we  make  that
                 decision.  I hope this will clear up any doubt that this is
                 a genuine  relationship  and  Mercy  and  I  will  both  be
                 returning to Philippines at the end of six months visit."

   8. On 8 April 2013, while the appeal was pending  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, a document, which appears to be  signed  by  a  Duty  Judge,
      stated that:

           "Valid human rights as raised in grounds of appeal."

   9. The appeal subsequently came before Judge Archer on 15  October  2013.
      Having considered the evidence submitted by  the  appellant  including
      the oral evidence of the sponsor (whom he accepted to  be  a  credible
      witness), Judge Archer found that the appellant met  the  requirements
      of para 41 of the Immigration Rules.  At para 19 he concluded:

           "Overall, the appellant has addressed the concerns raised by the
           respondent and I am satisfied that his is a genuine visit.   The
           appellant and the sponsor clearly intend  to  split  their  time
           between the UK and the  Philippines  if  and  when  they  marry.
           Their relationship is still  at  a  relatively  early  stage  in
           certain respects.  The application was not properly refused  for
           the reasons given by the respondent.  All of the requirements of
           the Rules are met."

  10. Judge Archer also noted at para 19 that:

           "The issue of jurisdiction was  dealt  with  by  an  Immigration
           Judge on 8 April 2013 who  determined  that  human  rights  were
           raised in the grounds of appeal."

  11. The ECO sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
      that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
      grounds argue that the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor does  not  fall  within  the  relationships  set  out  in  the
      Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012  (SI  2012/1532)
      ("Family Visitor Regulations 2012").

  12. On 29 January 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge De  Haney)  granted
      the ECO permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

  13. Mr Hibbs, who represented the ECO submitted that  the  appellant  only
      had a limited right of appeal based upon human rights  grounds.   That
      was because, he submitted, the relationship between the appellant  and
      sponsor did not fall within the relationships set out in reg 2 of  the
      Family Visitor Regulations 2012, in particular that they had been:

           "in a relationship that is akin to marriage...for at  least  the
           two years before the day on which [the appellant's]  application
           for entry clearance was made".

  14. Mr Hibbs acknowledged that the Judge had found the relationship of the
      appellant and sponsor to be a genuine one but  on  29  November  2012,
      when the  appellant's  application  was  made,  it  had  not  been  in
      existence for two years.  Mr Hibbs submitted  that  Judge  Archer  was
      wrong to consider the application of the Immigration Rules  and  since
      the appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
      raise human rights grounds, in fact, there was no valid appeal  before
      him.

  15. In my judgement, Mr Hibbs' submissions are correct.

  16. By virtue of s.88A(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002:

           "A person may not appeal under s.82(1)  against  refusal  of  an
           application for entry clearance unless the application was  made
           for the purpose of -

           (a)   visiting a person of a class or description prescribed  by
                 regulations for the purposes of this section...."

  17. However, by virtue of sub-section (3):

           "Sub-section (1) -

           (a)   does not prevent the bringing of an appeal  on  either  or
                 both of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and  (c
                 )..."

  18. The effect of this provision is that an appeal against  a  refusal  of
      entry clearance as a visitor my only be brought if the requirement  of
      the Family  Visitor  Regulations  2012  are  met,  in  particular  the
      relationship  with  the  person  to  be  visited  falls  within  those
      relationships set out in the Regulations which came into  force  on  9
      July 2012.  (There  is  an  additional  required  concerned  with  the
      sponsor's immigration status in the UK: reg 2(1)(b) and reg  3.)  That
      limited is, however, subject to the caveat set out  in  s.88A(3)  that
      an appeal may be brought even if the relationship does not fall within
      the Family Visitor Regulations 2012 limited to race relations or human
      rights grounds.

  19. For present purposes the relevant  provision  in  the  Family  Visitor
      Regulations 2012 is in reg 2(1)(4) which requires  the  applicant  and
      sponsor to be:

           "(a)  in a relationship that is  akin  to  a  marriage...for  at
                 least  the  two  years  before  the  day  on   which   [the
                 applicant's] application for entry clearance was made; and

           (b)   such relationship is genuine and subsisting."

  20. Here, as Mr Hibbs submitted, although  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and sponsor was found by Judge Archer to be  a  genuine  and
      subsisting one,  it  had  not  at  the  date  of  application  been  a
      relationship  for  "at  least  the  two  years"  before   that   date.
      Therefore, the appellant did  not  have  a  general  right  of  appeal
      against the refusal of  entry  clearance;  her  right  of  appeal  was
      limited to reliance upon race relations or human rights grounds.

  21. It is clear from the appellant's grounds of appeal set out in  section
      D of Form IAFT-2 (the Notice of Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal)
      that the appellant did not rely expressly or by implication upon human
      rights grounds.  I have set out the grounds  in  detail  above.   They
      were accepted by Judge Archer but they all relate to the substance  of
      the appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules and  seek  to  rebut
      the ECO's reasoning that led to the refusal of entry clearance.  At no
      point in those grounds, is there any suggestion that the appellant  is
      relying upon her private and family life protected by Article 8 of the
      ECHR.  Whilst I accept that it would not necessarily be essential  for
      an individual to  refer  expressly  to  Article  8,  it  is  at  least
      necessary that they rely on the substance of Article 8 expressly or by
      implication.  It is not, in my judgement, sufficient merely to  assert
      that the individual has a genuine relationship with  the  person  whom
      they are seeking to visit.

  22. As I have already  pointed  out  above,  Judge  Archer  noted  in  his
      determination that a Duty Judge had considered that human  rights  had
      been raised in the grounds of appeal and therefore there was  a  valid
      appeal by virtue of s.88A(3)  of  the  2002  Act.   That  was,  in  my
      judgement, not correct.  The appellant had not raised human rights, in
      particular Article 8 of the ECHR, in her  grounds  of  appeal.   As  a
      consequence, she had no right of appeal under  the  2002  Act.   Judge
      Archer erred in law because there  was  no  valid  appeal  before  him
      either  in  general  or  solely  on  human  rights  grounds.    As   a
      consequence, I set aside his decision and substitute a  decision  that
      there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

  23. At the conclusion of the hearing,  I  explained  to  the  sponsor  the
      effect of my  decision  and  that,  despite  the  entirely  favourable
      findings by Judge Archer in relation to  the  Immigration  Rules,  his
      decision could not stand because of the legislative scheme  applicable
      to appeals in visitor cases.  That  said,  those  findings  were  made
      having considered all the evidence including the oral evidence of  the
      sponsor whom Judge Archer found to be a credible witness.  It will  be
      a matter for the ECO in any future application  by  the  appellant  to
      consider the evidence again.

Decision

  24. For these reasons, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved
      the making of an error of law.  I set that decision aside.

  25. I remake the decision which is that there was no valid  appeal  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.
                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date:
