
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02052/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th March 2018                            |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ms fekrat aloulabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr Hala Alsafadi, sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  to
    avoid confusion I shall refer to her as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Syria who was born  on  8th  June  1938.
    She made application for the grant of a visit  visa  on  27th  February
    2015, to the Entry Clearance Officer.  The application was  refused  on
    3rd March 2015.

3.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal solely on  the  basis
    of her rights under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms.   It  was  agreed
    between the parties that the respondent only had  a  limited  right  of
    appeal, given the change in the Immigration Rules which took  place  in
    2013.

4.   There was a first determination promulgated on 13th September 2016,  in
    which the respondent succeeded under paragraph 41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules then in force, which was successfully appealed  by  the  claimant
    without opposition on behalf of the respondent.  That determination was
    subsequently set aside  and  the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

5.   The matter was heard afresh  on  25th  September  2015,  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Metzer.   The  judge  had  witness  statements  from  Dr
    Alsafadi, from her husband and from  her  three  children.   The  judge
    noted that on behalf of the claimant, the Presenting  Officer  accepted
    that the respondent had established a family life and the judge went on
    to consider the "Razgar test" (see paragraph 17 of Razgar,  R  (on  the
    Application of) v. Sectretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]
    UKHL 27) and  whether  or  not  the  claimant's  decision  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference under Article 8(2).  The judge found that
    it would and purported to allow the appeal.

6.   The claimant challenged the decision  and  asserted  that  family  life
    would not normally exist between  adult  siblings,  parents  and  adult
    children.  The grounds  were  lengthy  and  suggested  that  given  the
    decisions  in  MS  (Article  8   -   family   life   -   dependency   -
    proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064, paragraph 25 of Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and
    Ghisling and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    UKUT 00567, none of the criteria necessary are in place and  the  judge
    had erred by purporting to allow the appeal under Article 8.

7.   At  the  hearing  before  me  the  sponsor  appeared  in  person.   The
    Presenting Officer indicated to me that she had  already  given  to  Dr
    Alsafadi a copy of the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  Entry  Clearance
    Officer Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 and told me that  she
    relied on paragraph 16.  She suggested that there was  no  interference
    with family life caused by the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  and
    the appeal should not, therefore, have been allowed under Article 8.

8.   I explained to Dr Alsafadi what this meant.  I  explained  the  purpose
    of the hearing and  that  before  I  could  interfere  with  a  judge's
    decision, I needed to be satisfied that the judge had made  a  material
    error of law.   I  explained  that  it  appeared  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law because before allowing the respondent's appeal
    he should have asked himself if the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer interfered with either the private or the family  life  of  the
    respondent. In this case the decision did not, in that  to  the  extent
    that the respondent was able to enjoy a family life  with  the  sponsor
    and her family before the decision, she was still able to exercise  the
    same rights after the decision.

9.   Dr Alsafadi told me that she  understood,  but  had  hoped  that  there
    might be an exception.  I explained that while I was sympathetic to the
    respondent's desire to come and see her family members, I was  required
    to apply the law and that Article 8(2) required that  there  to  be  an
    interference with Article 8 before protection could be afforded.  There
    has been no interference and, therefore, the judge was wrong  to  allow
    the appeal in the way he did.  She appeared to accept this.

10.  I have concluded that for the reasons set out  above  the  decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse entry clearance does  not  amount
    to a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights and  Judge  Metzer  was
    wrong to find that it did.  I set aside his determination  and  replace
    his decision with mine.  The respondent's appeal is dismissed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                                      Date:  12
April 2018
