
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 September 2016                           |On 14 September 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AZIZA [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Dyana, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereafter  the
    Respondent, as it was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford (the judge), promulgated  on
    1 March 2016, in which he allowed the appeal of Mrs [A] (hereafter  the
    Appellant once again), and dismissed  the  appeal  in  respect  of  her
    husband Mr [A].

 2. By applications made on 6 March 2015  the  Appellant  and  her  husband
    sought entry clearance to visit the Appellant's sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom (the Sponsor).  The reason stated for the visit  was  to  offer
    emotional support to the Sponsor during  her  first  pregnancy.   By  a
    decision dated 19 March 2015 the Entry Clearance Officer  refused  both
    applications on the basis that the relevant criteria of paragraph 41 of
    the Immigration Rules were not met.  Given the date  of  the  decision,
    the  only  ground  effectively  open  to  the  Appellant  in  terms  of
    challenging the refusal was that  it  violated  her  human  rights,  in
    particular, Article 8.




The judge's decision

 3. Before the judge the Appellant  was  represented  by  the  Sponsor.   A
    Presenting Officer appeared for the Respondent.   The  judge  expressed
    sympathy for the Sponsor who  he  found  had  experienced  a  difficult
    pregnancy without the support of female relatives in this country.   He
    appears to have found that the Sponsor's sister-in-law who does  reside
    in  the  United  Kingdom  suffers  from  Parkinson's  disease  and  was
    therefore unable to offer any support herself.  The judge notes that at
    the date of the hearing before him the Sponsor was  pregnant  with  her
    second child, with an expected due date of 21 September 2016.

 4. At paragraph 13 of his decision  the  judge  accepted  that  there  was
    family life as between the Sponsor and the Appellant.  It is said  that
    this was because there was an "unusual  level  of  dependency"  between
    them due to the second pregnancy. It is said that, "[t]he support  that
    the Sponsor needs cannot be provided by the NHS or  carers,  she  needs
    emotional and psychological support as well as practical support".

 5. At paragraph 14 the judge concludes that these ties did  not  exist  as
    between the Appellant's husband and the Sponsor and therefore  at  that
    stage the husband's appeal was dismissed.

 6. At paragraph 17 the judge concluded that the Appellant had strong  ties
    to Afghanistan, that the cost of her  trip  would  be  covered  by  the
    Sponsor, and that she intended to return to Afghanistan at  the  expiry
    of her proposed visit.

 7. In paragraphs 18 and 19  the  judge  concludes  that  the  Respondent's
    refusal of  the  applications  was  not  justified  and  constituted  a
    disproportionate interference with the family life.  On that basis  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The Respondent's grounds are threefold: firstly,  that  the  judge  had
    erred in having any regard to the second  pregnancy  when  this  was  a
    matter that had arisen a considerable period for time after the date of
    decision; secondly, that there was no consideration of the support that
    the husband could and should provide to the Sponsor  in  this  country;
    thirdly, it is said that the proportionality assessment  by  the  judge
    was inadequate.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bennett
    on 3 August 2016.




The hearing before me

10. The Sponsor attended the hearing alone.  I explained the nature of  the
    proceedings to her and was satisfied that she understood what was being
    said at all times.

11. For the Respondent Mr Kotas submitted that there was a  material  error
    of law in the judge's decision, namely his  reliance  upon  the  second
    pregnancy. In respect of any remaking of  the  decision  there  was  no
    reason why the Sponsor's husband should not have been able to help her,
    and that no compelling case had been shown as  to  why  the  Article  8
    claim should succeed.

12. The Sponsor in answer to  questions  from  both  myself  and  Mr  Kotas
    confirmed  that  her  husband  had  lived  with  her  in  his   country
    throughout.  He ran a dry cleaning business which was located  directly
    below the couple's flat. She confirmed that during the first  pregnancy
    she had been in  hospital  for  four  days  and  had  received  medical
    treatment prior to that.  Her sister-in-law did indeed have Parkinson's
    disease and was unable to help her. She confirmed that her first  child
    had been born prematurely on 31 May 2015.

13. Following her discharge from hospital a health visitor had come to  the
    house on five occasions. No one else had helped her  although  she  did
    confirm that the husband helped during the night.  She stated that  she
    had wanted help from a woman, in particular emotional help that  a  man
    could not provide.  She told me that she had come to the United Kingdom
    in December 2012 and had not seen her sister and the Appellant  between
    that year and 2015 but had visited Afghanistan herself in  February  of
    this year.




Decision on error of law

14. I find the judge did materially  err  in  law.   This  is  so  for  the
    following reasons.

15. First, it is quite clear that the judge  based  his  ultimate  decision
    upon the fact of the second pregnancy.  Given the dates stated  in  the
    evidence the Sponsor only became pregnant for the second time  in  late
    2015 or early 2016.  That of course postdates the Respondent's decision
    by many months.  The law as it relates to this particular appeal  means
    that the judge was precluded from considering the fact  of  the  second
    pregnancy.  The fact that he did take it into account was  in  my  view
    clearly a material error.  For that reason alone the  judge's  decision
    must be set aside.

16. Second, in addition to the first reason, the judge has failed  to  deal
    with the issue of whether the Sponsor's own husband  could  and  should
    have provided necessary  support.   It  is  one  thing  to  desire  the
    emotional support from a woman, indeed perhaps a  sister  for  example,
    but in reality the support of one's partner or spouse would, all  other
    things being equal, amount to a primary source of such support. If this
    was deemed to be absent or inadequate, particular  findings  should  be
    made on this point together with supporting reasons.  This has not been
    done. I find this to be a further material error of law.

17. Third, on the evidence before the judge it is very difficult indeed  to
    see how he could  have properly concluded that there was family life as
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant within the guidelines set down in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and subsequent decisions.  I find that  the
    reasons  expressed  in  paragraph  13  of  the  judge's  decision   are
    inadequate.

18. Fourth and finally, given the case law on Article 8 and  family  visits
    (see for example Kaur (visit appeals;  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487
    (IAC), Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112  (IAC)
    and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC),  the  judge
    has failed to identify why he regarded this case  to  be  a  compelling
    case with regard to the particular facts.  This is a  further  material
    error of law.

19. For all these reasons I set aside the judge's decision.




Remaking the decision

20. Given the  nature  of  this  appeal  and  the  relevant  date  for  the
    consideration of the facts  I  am  satisfied  that  I  have  sufficient
    evidence before me to remake this decision without adjourning.

21. I accept that the Sponsor  did  experience  a  difficult  pregnancy  in
    respect of  her  first  child,  and  that  she  suffered  from  medical
    conditions,  in  particular  several  allergies  as  confirmed   in   a
    supporting letter from her GP dated 31 March 2015.  I accept  that  the
    Sponsor would have wanted the Appellant to come  to  this  country  and
    offer emotional support. That is a perfectly understandable motive.   I
    accept that the Sponsor's sister-in-law in the United Kingdom is unwell
    and was at the material time unable to offer support herself.

22. Having said that, on the Sponsor's own  evidence  she  lives  with  her
    husband who was willing and able to offer support. He was  running  his
    own business and of course that would have taken up a certain amount of
    his time.  However, his business was  immediately  below  the  couple's
    flat.  He was near at hand to offer  support.   It  is,  with  respect,
    commonplace that couples face pregnancies together  and  often  without
    external support, at least  to  the  extent  that  they  would  perhaps
    otherwise desire.  In this case beyond  the  husband  being  there  the
    Sponsor was receiving appropriate NHS treatment.

23. I find that there was no compelling need for  particular  emotional  or
    practical assistance from the Appellant.  I find that as at the date of
    decision the Sponsor had not seen the Appellant for  some  three  years
    and that there were no ongoing particularly strong ties  of  dependency
    as between the two of them during this period for separation.  Both the
    Sponsor and the Appellant have at all material  times  of  course  been
    adults.

24. In light of the above I do not accept that there is family life for the
    purposes of Article 8.  The appeal must fail on this basis.

25. If I were  wrong  about  that  and  there  was  family  life,  I  would
    nonetheless conclude that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  did  not
    constitute a sufficiently serious lack of respect for the family  life.
    As I have said already, there was no particular need for the  Appellant
    herself to come to this country in order to  offer  assistance  to  the
    Sponsor.  This was not part of an ongoing pattern  of  support  between
    the two sisters.  There were no other compelling circumstances  either.
    The appeal must then fail at this stage.

26. If I were wrong about this too,  I  conclude  that  in  any  event  the
    Respondent's refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  not  disproportionate.
    Although the judge found that the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the
    Immigration Rules  were  satisfied  (and  these  findings  stand),  the
    particular circumstances of this case  simply  cannot  in  my  view  be
    classed as compelling, as is  effectively  required  by  the  case  law
    already mentioned and the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The appeal would fail at this final stage.

27. For all these reasons the Appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  on  human
    rights grounds.

28. In respect of  the  Appellant's  husband's  case,  as  I  have  already
    mentioned, the judge dismissed his case and there has been no challenge
    to that decision.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 12 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 12 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
