
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                       miss niromi perpetua ferdinando
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Shiranthie De Silva (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance as a visitor  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  14th  May  2015.
    The judge found that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    rules") were met but, in the light of the  limited  grounds  of  appeal
    available, went on to dismiss the appeal.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    sought by the appellant, through her sister and sponsor, Mrs Shiranthie
    De Silva ("Mrs De Silva") and permission was granted  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 10th August 2015.

2.   Mr Kotas, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  accepted  that  the
    decision contained an error of law.  In the light of recent  authority,
    the judge was obliged to determine the Article 8  case  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal,  that  assessment  being  separate  from  any  rules
    assessment.

3.   The decision is concise and has been prepared  by  a  very  experienced
    judge.  He recorded the evidence given by Mrs De  Silva  and  concluded
    that the requirements of the  rules  contained  in  paragraph  41,  and
    particularly those put directly in issue (contained  in  sub-paragraphs
    (i) and (ii)) were all met.  At paragraphs 6 to 9 the judge went on  to
    consider whether Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention was  engaged,
    setting  out  matters  of  relevant  principle.   Paragraphs  6  and  7
    summarised the  'Razgar  questions'  and  touched  on  public  interest
    considerations stipulated in statute.  It is clear that the judge  here
    had in mind section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.   The judge identifies a
    substantial  public  interest  in  upholding   the   effectiveness   of
    immigration control at paragraph 8 and then returns, in paragraph 9, to
    consider whether factual error on the part of  the  overseas  post,  no
    doubt  meaning  here  error  in  relation  to  the  assessment  of  the
    genuineness of the visit and the likelihood that  the  appellant  would
    return, reveals or amounts  to  an  unlawful  interference  with  human
    rights.  He observes that  an  appropriate  remedy  might  be  a  fresh
    application for entry clearance, likely to be quicker than waiting  for
    an appeal on human  rights  grounds  to  run  its  course.   The  judge
    concludes, at paragraph 10, that the appeal must be dismissed but makes
    a clear finding that the application for entry clearance  had  all  the
    hallmarks of genuineness.  With very great respect to the judge, I find
    that Mr Kotas is right to submit that the decision does not contain  an
    engagement with the human rights case advanced by the appellant, in the
    light of recent authority which includes Adjei [2015] UKUT  261  (IAC).
    The findings recorded at paragraphs 4 and 5 appear  not  to  have  been
    taken into account in an express weighing of the  competing  interests.
    There are very few findings  regarding  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her sponsor and it is not clear whether the  judge  found
    that  family  life  exists  between  them  or,   rather,   that   their
    relationship constitutes an important private life element for each  of
    them, Article 8 not being engaged (in the light of Mostafa [2015]  UKUT
    112 (IAC).

4.   In these circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set
    aside.   Both  parties  were  anxious  to  proceed  with  remaking  the
    decision.

Remaking the Decision

5.   I explained the procedure to be followed to Mrs  De  Silva.   Mr  Kotas
    suggested, helpfully and sensibly, that the judge's  finding  that  all
    the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the  rules  were  met  should  be
    preserved.  The scope of the remaking of the decision would be confined
    to the human rights ground of appeal.

6.   Mrs De Silva then gave evidence.  She  said  that  the  appellant,  her
    sister, wished to visit for four weeks to celebrate Mrs De Silva's 50th
    birthday,  her  son's  18th  birthday   and   a   significant   wedding
    anniversary.  The appellant has  a  learning  disability.   Sadly,  she
    believes at present that she cannot come to the United Kingdom for this
    reason.  She was looking forward to the visit and would only travel  in
    the spring and summer because the weather  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    otherwise too cold.  The appellant has not visited the  United  Kingdom
    before.

7.   The appellant lives with an older relative and Mrs  De  Silva's  cousin
    also provides support, such as filling out forms for her.  Mrs De Silva
    said that her sister is unable to read or write.  Mrs De Silva  visited
    Sri Lanka for her sister's 50th birthday recently, travelling there  on
    2nd November 2015.  The birthday was on 4th November and Mrs  De  Silva
    then returned to the United Kingdom on 18th November.

8.   In cross-examination, Mrs De Silva said  that  her  sister  receives  a
    pension which is sufficient to meet all her financial  needs.   Mrs  De
    Silva sends gifts from time to time but her  sister  does  not  require
    other financial support.  She has made  visits  to  see  the  appellant
    almost every other year.  However, Mrs De Silva  has  her  own  family,
    consisting of her husband and two boys and she works full-time, as  was
    the case when entry clearance  was  refused  in  May  2014.  She  would
    telephone her sister about once a week.

9.   Mr  Kotas  asked  whether  the  appellant  considered  making  a  fresh
    application for entry clearance.  Mrs De Silva  said  that  the  cousin
    would help but there was a cost to bear in mind, which would have to be
    met from her sister's pension.  If  that  were  the  only  option,  the
    appellant would make a fresh application.

10.  In submissions, Mr Kotas said that the Tribunal should  accept  Mrs  De
    Silva as an entirely credible witness.  The issue was whether Article 8
    of the  Human  Rights  Convention  was  engaged  by  refusal  of  entry
    clearance in May 2014.  As was clear from Adjei, the first question was
    whether human rights were engaged.  The evidence showed that there  was
    no dependency between the appellant and her sponsor sufficient to  show
    family between adult siblings.   There  was  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    closeness of the relationship, however.   An  appropriate  way  forward
    would be a fresh application for entry clearance, with the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in due course  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal being available to be placed before the Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

11.  Mrs De Silva made a brief response in  which  she  indicated  that  the
    appellant would take the best course and would still like to visit  the
    United Kingdom.

Findings and Conclusions

12.  In this appeal, the burden of proof lies with the  appellant  to  prove
    the facts and matters she relies upon and the standard of proof is that
    of a balance of probabilities.  As this is an entry  clearance  appeal,
    the date of assessment is the date of  the  adverse  decision,  in  May
    2014.

13.  I am grateful to Mr Kotas for the careful  way  in  which  he  put  the
    Secretary of State's case.  The findings of fact made by the judge were
    not subject to any challenge.  In remaking the decision,  the  evidence
    which emerged showed that those findings were  clearly  justified.   In
    particular,  the  concerns  raised  by  the  overseas  post   regarding
    paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the rules were fully met.  In other  words,
    no doubt remains regarding the genuineness of the proposed visit or the
    intention of the appellant to return to Sri Lanka at the end of it.

14.  Those are not, of course, the critical questions in  this  appeal.   As
    is clear from Mostafa and Adjei, the first question is whether  Article
    8 is engaged at all.  In the latter decision, the Upper  Tribunal  drew
    attention to part of the former, indicating that  in  practical  terms,
    the category of relationships in which refusal of  entry  clearance  is
    likely to show engagement is narrow.  Examples were  given  of  husband
    and wife or other close life partners or parent and minor child.

15.  There is no reason to doubt the closeness  of  the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor but the evidence shows that each  of  them  has  established  a
    successful, independent and separate family life, the appellant in  Sri
    Lanka and Mrs De Silva in the United Kingdom.   They  maintain  contact
    with each other, as one would  expect  between  sisters.   However,  Mr
    Kotas was correct in  his  submission  that  there  is  an  absence  of
    financial or  other  dependency  showing  family  life  for  Article  8
    purposes.  The appellant and Mrs De Silva are close adult siblings  and
    the relationship between  them  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  an  extremely
    important component in their private lives.   Contact  is  successfully
    maintained by means of weekly telephone calls and the regular visits to
    Sri Lanka undertaken by Mrs De Silva.  The extent of contact  tends  to
    show that the interference resulting from refusal of entry clearance is
    rather modest.  Overall, I conclude that Article 8 is not  engaged  and
    so the human rights ground of appeal is not made out.  Even if wrong on
    that, and if an assessment were required on the basis that Article 8 is
    engaged, I would  conclude  that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  a
    proportionate response.

16.  Finally,  it  is  appropriate  to  observe  that  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal have found that all the requirements of
    paragraph 41 of the rules were met.  Mrs De Silva gave  clear  evidence
    that the appellant still wishes to  visit  the  United  Kingdom.   This
    decision, and the earlier decision of the judge, will be  available  to
    be placed before the overseas post and the Entry Clearance Officer,  in
    support of any further application for  entry  clearance  that  may  be
    made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed, no fee award may be made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
