
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th February 2015                        |On 11th March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              mrs Shahina anwer
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal issued on 27th  November  2014  allowing,
    apparently under the Immigration Rules and  Article 8 ECHR, the  appeal
    of the Appellant against the decision of the  Respondent  made  on  7th
    April 2014 to refuse entry clearance to visit her brother  in  the  UK.
    The Respondent in this case is the Entry Clearance Officer Abu Dhabi.

 2. Judge Lal acknowledged that  the  Appellant  was  only  entitled  to  a
    limited right of appeal under the Human  Rights  Act  and/or  the  Race
    Relations Act due to changes made in the law with effect from 25th June
    2013.  He then however went on to  consider  the  appeal  in  terms  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) had refused the  application  because
    he was not satisfied that the Appellant was supported by her husband as
    claimed.  She had not demonstrated the source of funds in her husband's
    bank account.  He was not satisfied that she intended to leave  the  UK
    at the end of her visit.  Judge Lal,  having  considered  the  evidence
    before him found that the Appellant had  shown  that  she  intended  to
    leave the UK  at  the  end  of  her  visit  and  that  indeed  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 were met.  He allowed   the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. He then went on to consider Article 8, taking  into  account  that  the
    Appellant had acted as a mother figure to the Sponsor.  He referred  to
    'the unique set of circumstances' in the case and  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

 5.  It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that Judge Lal erred
    in failing to give adequate reasons for finding that there was a family
    life between the Appellant and the Sponsor sufficient to engage Article
    8.  He failed to have regard to Kugathas v SSHD [2003} EWCA Civ 31  and
    MS (Article 8 - family life  -  dependency  -  proportionality)  Uganda
    [2004] UKIAT 00064 in which it was said  that  in  circumstances  where
    family life is put forward as existing between an adult child  and  his
    parents there need to be further elements of dependency involving  more
    than emotional family ties.  It was submitted that the judge failed  to
    explain what the "unique particular facts" apparently relied on by  him
    are in this case.

Findings

 6. I find that Judge Lal erred in law firstly in allowing the appeal under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules and secondly in allowing it under
    Article 8 ECHR.  I do accept that when  considering  Article  8  in  an
    appeal against the refusal of a visit visa the ability of the Appellant
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 41 may be a  valid  consideration
    but Judge Lal actually considered the evidence  and  the  documentation
    before him  and  effectively  overturned  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  He had no jurisdiction to do that.

 7. With regard to Article  8  I  agree  with  what  is  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State in the grounds.  The Judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the circumstances of the case were unique.  He
    did not give reasons for finding that there was family life between the
    Appellant and her brother such that Article 8 was engaged.

 8. I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The Sponsor appeared before me.  I explained to  him  as  simply  as  I
    could that his sister had only had a limited right of appeal.  He  said
    that the Judge had gone over the papers that he  had  and  had  decided
    that the appeal should succeed under the Rules.   I  explained  to  him
    that the Judge had no jurisdiction to do that.  It  does  seem  however
    that the issue before the ECO was the intention  of  the  Appellant  to
    return to her husband.  The Presenting Officer and I both explained  to
    the Appellant what would be necessary to make a successful application.
     He did say that his sister had sponsored members  of  the  family  and
    they had all returned to Pakistan  and  indeed  although  many  of  his
    family members now live in the UK one part of the family  had  returned
    to Pakistan because they wanted their children brought  up  there.   He
    has another relative in Pakistan, a sister I believe, who  has  a  five
    year visit visa.  He  pointed  out  that  his  sister  has  never  left
    Pakistan before.  She is quite nervous of coming here.  She was like  a
    mother to him because their parents  died  a  long  time  ago.   He  is
    anxious for her to see the life he has in the UK.  He said he  and  his
    family visit Pakistan every three years or so  but  he  has  a  special
    relationship with his sister and wants her to see his family life here.



10. Having considered the evidence before me I find that the Appellant  has
    not established  that  she  enjoys  a  family  life  with  the  Sponsor
    sufficient  to engage Article 8 and that the  appeal  under  Article  8
    falls to be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

There is no appeal before me under the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appeal  is
dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  N A Baird                           Date: 9th March 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


