
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02154/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th November 2016                      |On 29th November 2016            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        MRS JEZIA Hanzouli Ep Jaouadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mounir Ben Laid Jaouadi - Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Tunisia born on 1st November  1987.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance for a visit visa  to  the  United
    Kingdom for one month.  Her application was refused by the Secretary of
    State on 9th March 2015 on  the  basis  that  the  documents  that  the
    Appellant chose to provide did not  demonstrate  any  significant  ties
    that the Appellant personally may have to her country of residence such
    as may encourage or guarantee her  return  at  the  conclusion  of  her
    proposed visit.

 2. The Appellant appealed the refusal of the Secretary  of  State  on  the
    grounds that it was a breach of her human rights pursuant to Article  8
    of the European Convention of Human Rights.  That appeal came before  a
    panel of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shergill  and  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Chohan sitting at Birmingham on 27th May 2016.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 29th June  2016  the  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 4th July 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  The simple point that the Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon was that the Secretary of State did  not  accept  that  there  was
    scope for Article 8 engagement in bare visit applications and relied on
    the fact that the starting point of the European Court of Human  Rights
    jurisprudence is that Article 8 did not impose a general obligation  on
    states to respect the choice of residence of a  married  couple  or  to
    accept a non-national for settlement in that country.

 4. On 10th October 2016 Designated Judge Woodcraft granted  the  Secretary
    of  State  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Woodcraft  considered  that
    arguably, the panel failed to make clear what the interference  was  in
    the party's  family  life  given  that  the  Sponsor  could  visit  the
    Appellant at any time and the disruption in their family life  occurred
    because the Sponsor had chosen to come to the  United  Kingdom  leaving
    the Appellant behind.  He considered that arguably a visit  to  see  if
    the Appellant wanted to make a settlement application at a  later  date
    did not amount to a  very  compelling  reason  in  accordance  with  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process the Secretary  of  State  is  consequently  referred  to
    herein as the  Respondent  and  Mrs  Jaouadi  as  the  Appellant.   The
    Appellant's previously instructed solicitors AKL advised  the  Tribunal
    on 15th November that they were no longer acting but that  the  Sponsor
    Mr Mounir Ben Laid Jaouadi, the Appellant's husband, would  attend  and
    give evidence in person.  It is on that basis that I hear this  appeal.



Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Armstrong points out that the panel had noted that at  paragraph  10
    that the Sponsor was a  credible  witness,  that  he  gave  a  credible
    account of his wife's situation and that the  visit  was  motivated  in
    part as a marital family visit so the Appellant could  see  the  United
    Kingdom for the first time.  He  noted  that  the  Sponsor,  who  is  a
    British citizen, lives in the  UK  and  that  the  Appellant  lives  in
    Tunisia with the two children of the family who  are  now  respectively
    aged 6 and 3.  He submitted that there was no breach of  Article  8  on
    the basis that the Appellant was visited regularly by the  Sponsor  and
    he contends difficult to see in such  circumstances  how  a  breach  of
    Article 8 could possibly ensue.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

 7. I invited the Sponsor to explain his position to me.  He states that he
    has been living for  a  considerable  period  of  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that he is a British citizen and that  his  two  children  are
    British citizens.  The Appellant is of course a Tunisian national.   He
    is a postman and he has been doing that job for the past twelve  years.
    He very much would like his wife and two children to come and live with
    him in the UK.  He indicates that his wife has advised him that she  is
    not sure whether she wants to do so and the reason  that  he  sought  a
    visit was to persuade her to come over to see if she liked the  country
    and if she  did  then  he  would  be  prepared  to  make  a  settlement
    application.

 8. He advised that they were married in Tunisia and  that  he  returns  to
    Tunisia on approximately four occasions every year  thus  acknowledging
    that he has  regular  physical  contact  with  the  Appellant  and  his
    children.  He emphasises that his application is motivated by a  desire
    to allow the Appellant to see the UK.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The issue before the Upper Tribunal  is  whether  or  not  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    find having had the benefit of hearing the  Sponsor  and  Mr  Armstrong
    that there was.  Whilst acknowledging  and  indeed  confirming  on  the
    brief evidence I have heard from Mr Mounir Jaouadi, the  Sponsor,  that
    he is a credible witness it has to be remembered that  this  appeal  is
    purely based on Article 8  grounds.   This  is  an  Appellant  who  has
    regular contact with her Sponsor.  Indeed he visits her at  least  four
    times a year.  It is difficult if not impossible in such a situation to
    conclude that the current arrangement constitutes a situation  that  by
    denying a visit visa there would be a breach of the Appellant's Article
    8 rights.  In such circumstances I find that there are material  errors
    of law and I set aside the decision of the panel.

12. It seems appropriate to add an addendum paragraph to this matter having
    discussed the appeal with both Mr Jaouadi and with  Mr  Armstrong.   Mr
    Jaouadi indicates that his wife has now made two applications for visit
    visas and they have both been refused on the basis  that  she  may  not
    leave the UK at the end of that visit.  Ironically the Sponsor's  issue
    is that he is only making the application because  he  would  like  the
    Appellant to find  out  if  she  would  like  to  be  here.   It  seems
    appropriate that if the Appellant wishes to come to  the  UK  that  she
    should couch her application in a settlement application.  Mr Armstrong
    explained to the Sponsor that there were many benefits in that  insofar
    as it did not mean that if the Appellant were granted a visa under such
    an application that she had to remain.  She could if she  wished  leave
    of her own volition.  It is not for this side  of  the  bench  to  pass
    comment on the merit of such application save  for  the  fact  that  it
    seems clear to me that there is considerable sense in such an approach.
     The issue as to whether a settlement application would succeed has not
    been aired but that would be a totally different application before the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  It is a matter that I know the Sponsor wishes
    to go away and consider with his currently instructed solicitors albeit
    that they did not attend this appeal.

Remaking the Decision

13. However being satisfied, as I am, that the factual matrix of this  case
    neither creates a situation whereby the Appellant could  succeed  under
    Article 8 inside the Rules, or indeed that  there  are  any  compelling
    circumstances bearing in mind the contact that  is  maintained  between
    the Appellant and the  Sponsor  that  she  could  succeed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Having found that there is a material error of  law
    in the decision of the panel I set aside the panel decision and  I  re-
    make the decision allowing the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

I find there is a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  I re-make the decision dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application was made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

