


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
VA/02362/2015

                                                       VA/02367/2015

                                                       VA/02368/2015

                                                       VA/02365/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London           |          Decision and Reasons       |
|On  27th November 2017                 |Promulgated                          |
|                                       |On 15th December 2017                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between
                            ASHRAF RAHMAN SHIPLU
                           ASHRAFUZZAMAN ABDULLAH
                                 LABLU LABLU
                                JILAKHA BEGUM
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                     entry clearance officer -bangladesh
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C. Mannan, instructed by way of Direct Access.
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants are citizens of  Bangladesh,  who  made  applications  for
   entry clearance to visit the United Kingdom for a  period  of  six  weeks
   primarily in order to visit a family relative who was terminally ill.
2. Those applications  were  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
   decisions taken on 10 March  2015.  Each  Appellant  received  a  refusal
   notice setting out the reasons given for refusing their applications  for
   entry  clearance.  Each  notice  purported  to  take   account   of   the
   compassionate nature of the application but stated  that  each  Appellant
   must  show  that  they  qualify  for  a  visa  by  explaining  their  own
   circumstances. It was further acknowledged that a  letter  of  invitation
   been provided with supporting documents and that the  sponsor  was  in  a
   position to maintain and accommodate each  Appellant  during  the  visit.
   However the decision letters went on to state that "your sponsor is  only
   one element of the application and I must assess the information you have
   provided about yourself separately from that provided by  your  sponsor."
   The  entry  clearance  officer,  after   considering   each   Appellant's
   particular financial circumstances and evidence provided, concluded  that
   he was not satisfied that they had  presented  a  complete  and  accurate
   picture of their personal and economic circumstances in India. It  is  of
   note that the Appellants in this appeal are all nationals of  Bangladesh.
   Furthermore, the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  they
   would leave the United Kingdom at the end of their  visit  or  that  they
   were genuinely seeking entry as visitors for a period not  exceeding  six
   months. Each application was refused because the ECO was  not  satisfied,
   on the balance of probabilities that they met  the  requirements  of  the
   relevant paragraph of the United Kingdom Immigration Rules.
   At the end of the decision letters, the following is set out:
   "Your right of appeal is limited to the grounds referred  to  in  section
   84(1) (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."


3. The appeal was heard on 30th September 2016 by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Abebrese who on that occasion heard evidence from the  sponsor,  Mr
   Miah. The appeals were dismissed for the reasons set out in the  Decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  on  8  May
   2017 permission was refused by FTT Judge Ford. However further grounds of
   permission to the Upper Tribunal were provided and on 1 August 2017 Upper
   Tribunal Judge Rimington granted permission for the following reasons:
         "It is argued  that  grounds  in  respect  of  the  application  of
         permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  were  indeed
         served. The Appellants have now obtained legal advice.  Nonetheless
         time was extended by the Tribunal in considering  the  application.
         The grounds to the upper Tribunal have now been  amended  to  state
         that the judge's decision (i) applied the  wrong  burden  of  proof
         (ii)  was  contradictory  in  that  it  appeared  to  allow   third
         Appellants appeal only to then dismiss the appeal and further (iii)
         failed to consider Article 8 at all. I note human  rights  was  the
         only basis of the appeal. I grant permission of  the  grounds  (ii)
         and (iii) identified above only. The judge clearly directed himself
         on the appropriate burden and standard of proof."


5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on the 20th September  2017,  Mr
   Mannan appeared on behalf of the Appellants and Mr Nath on behalf of  the
   Respondent. There had been a number of  large  bundles  provided  to  the
   Tribunal  principally   dealing   with   the   financial   and   personal
   circumstances of the individual Appellants. With  the  assistance  of  Mr
   Mannan, he provided a composite bundle which he stated included  all  the
   relevant  documentation.  The  bundles  had  not  been  received  by  the
   presenting officer.


6.  It became clear at that hearing that there  was  agreement  between  the
   advocates that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law as identified in  the  grant  of
   permission at (iii) namely that the judge had failed to deal with Article
   8 at all.  Mr Mannan had submitted that the judge was plainly aware  that
   the nature of the visit was  on  compassionate  grounds  for  the  family
   members to visit their relative in United Kingdom who was terminally ill.
   However, there was no reference in the determination to the  identity  of
   their family relative or those compassionate circumstances which had been
   referred to in the application form but also  at  the  beginning  of  the
   decision letters in relation to each Appellant. He also submitted that  a
   further reason that had been given was to visit a new-born child  of  the
   family. Thus he submitted there was evidence before the judge upon  which
   he should have taken into account and made an assessment of the Article 8
   issues.


7. In determination promulgated on the 21st September 2017 I  set  out   the
   decision on the  error of  law as follows:


    "8. Mr Nath behalf of the Respondent agreed with  that  assessment.  In
    the light of the agreement  reached  between  the  advocates  that  the
    decision did disclose the making of an error on a point of law,  it  is
    only necessary for me to set out why I agree with them.
    9. The Appellants appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber. Their
    appeal rights were limited and in essence they could only  bring  their
    appeal on human rights grounds.
    10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that  the  Appellants  had
    not adequately addressed the concerns expressed by the ECO  in  respect
    of paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of the  Immigration  Rules.  However,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not appear to take into account that this
    was an appeal limited to human rights grounds which in practical  terms
    on the facts of this case meant limited to Article 8 grounds,  and  was
    not an appeal under the Immigration Rules. Accordingly, an  ability  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules was not determinative of
    the outcome in the appeal. It was a matter  that  might  sound  in  the
    proportionality assessment, that is to say the evaluation  pursuant  to
    the  fifth  of  the  Razgar  questions,  but  it  was  not  in   itself
    determinative or not of the existence of  family  life  which  was  the
    starting point for any appeal brought under the limited grounds.
    11. The Judge does not advance any further analysis or consideration of
    the facts of family life and does  not  deal  with  the  issue  of  the
    existence of family life. There was some information,  albeit  limited,
    which related to  the  compassionate  nature  of  the  visit  that  was
    intended which had been set out in the application form and recited  at
    the beginning of the decision letters. The determination fails to  deal
    with this issue at all. At the time of the  hearing,  the  sponsor  was
    acting in person on behalf of the Appellants and  it  does  not  appear
    that he  was  asked  any  questions  that  related  to  the  Article  8
    assessment which was the starting point for the appeal.
    12. For those reasons, the decision  cannot  stand  and  shall  be  set
    aside. Both advocates agree that the correct course is  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision  after  hearing  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and  considering  the  documentation  provided.  Therefore  the
    appeal will  be  listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  with  the  following
    directions.
    13. Any further documentary evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Appellants
    shall be filed and served on the Tribunal and the Presenting  Officer's
    Unit   no later than 7 days before the resumed hearing in a bundle that
    has an index and is paginated. The Appellants shall serve  and  file  a
    copy  of  the  composite  bundle  (provided  by  Mr  Mannan)  upon  the
    Presenting Officer's Unit (if not already done so) within  21  days  of
    this determination being served."


8. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 27 November 2017 to re-
   make the decision. At that hearing the Appellants were again  represented
   by Mr Mannan and the Secretary of State by Mr D. Clarke.


9. Since the appeal had been before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  21st  of
   September 2017, there had been decisions made  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
   dealing with the issue of family life in entry clearance  visit  appeals;
   those decisions are Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v Kopoi  [2017]
   EWCA Civ 1511 and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Onuorah
   [2017] EWCACiv 1757. The parties were aware of those  decisions  and  had
   copies available. In addition Mr Mannon referred to the Tribunal  to  the
   decision in Abassi and another (visits-bereavement -  Article  8)  [2015]
   UKUT 463.




10. As set out above, directions were given on the previous occasion  as  to
   the documentation to be filed and served  by  the  parties.  However  the
   sponsor had sent to the Tribunal bundles  of  documentation  relating  to
   each Appellant. Those bundles consisted of the evidence relating to their
   financial and other  circumstances.  Those  documents  had  already  been
   provided in a composite bundle that  Mr  Mannan  had  organised  for  the
   previous hearing. In addition under cover of a letter dated  17  November
   2017 (received by the Tribunal on 23 November 2017) the sponsor  sent  to
   the Tribunal the  following  documents;  a  witness  statement  from  the
   sponsor dated 18 November 2017,  a  statement  by  the  sponsor  for  the
   hearing on 20  September  2017,  a  copy  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   decision and the grounds of appeal against the decision of the First-tier
   Tribunal and the grant of permission.

11. As to the issues, Mr Mannan confirmed that the issue  for  the  Tribunal
   was  to  consider  the  human  rights  aspect  and  not   the   financial
   circumstances. He made reference to the bundles  of  documents  that  had
   been subsequently provided and made reference to a witness  statement  at
   HB10 and that it was accepted that Mr Uddin had not  seen  his  relatives
   for six years and that he could not sponsor them which is why his  eldest
   son, Mr Miah, had sponsored the application. Mr Mannan confirmed that the
   financial aspects were not challenged but  that  the  focus  was  on  the
   compassionate circumstances of the case which were  not  factored  in  by
   either the entry clearance officer or the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
   Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State agreed that the  issue  was
   one of human rights and if Article 8 was engaged to consider  factors  in
   the proportionality assessment.


12. I indicated to the parties that it would be helpful for the  sponsor  in
   his  oral  evidence  to  provide  details  as  to  the  nature   of   the
   relationships between the parties and the  specific  Appellants  in  this
   appeal. Despite the adjournment there  had  been  no  witness  statements
   dealing with this aspect or any written evidence. However it was possible
   to construct a family tree which  provided  an  overview  of  the  family
   relationships in issue.


13. I heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsor.  He  confirmed  that  he  had
   provided a witness statement dated 18 November 2017, found in the bundle,
   and the sponsorship declarations that he had made (see HB9). He explained
   in his evidence that his father, Mr Uddin,  had  three  sisters  and  two
   brothers. They all resided in Bangladesh save for his brother Burnhan who
   worked in Saudi Arabia. He described the family relationships between the
   Appellants  and  Mr  Uddin.  Jilakha  Begum  was  his   sister   and   Mr
   Ashrafuzzaman Abdullah is the son of Salma Begum, Mr Uddin's sister.   Mr
   Ashraf Rahman Shiplu is the son of Jilakha Begum and Mr  Lablu  Lablu  is
   the son of Lechu Begum, Mr Uddin's other sister.


14. He confirmed in his evidence that the applications for  entry  clearance
   were made in February 2015 and were decided in  March  2015.  His  father
   died on 1 September 2017. He stated that  his  father's  letter  (HB  10)
   confirmed that he had not visited Bangladesh and the family  members  for
   more than six years at the date of the letter. As to the purpose  of  the
   visit, he stated that his father was very ill and that he had  wanted  to
   go to hospital in Bangladesh but they would not let  him.  He  could  not
   travel as he was taking medication. He stated that he could not go,  then
   he would like to see his relatives. He  looked  after  his  brothers  and
   sisters and had good relationships. He confirmed that he  wanted  private
   treatment in Bangladesh but that the doctors had said that he  could  not
   travel. He said that Mr Uddin's parents had died when he was young and he
   had looked after his brothers and sisters.


15. He was asked in evidence in chief why Lechu Begum and  Salma  Begum  had
   not sought to visit the United Kingdom at this  time.  The  sponsor  made
   reference documents at pages 107 and 111 that she could not visit as  she
   had had an operation. In respect of Salma, she could  not  visit  because
   she had had a bypass operation. He confirmed there  was  no  evidence  of
   this  but  there  was  a  letter  at  page  83  relating  to  her  family
   circumstances.


16. The sponsor made reference to Mr Uddin's brothers. One brother lived  in
   Saudi Arabia but could not apply to visit because he could not take  time
   off work. His other brother had children and a wife  and  was  needed  to
   look after the property and that he was not  able  to  visit  the  United
   Kingdom "for their safety".


17. Mr Mannan asked the sponsor about the grounds  of  appeal  that  he  had
   drafted which referred to errors that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had
   made (in relation to compliance of immigration rules). The sponsor stated
   that he had supplied all the material to the judge including the disputed
   evidence and made a hearing bundle. He thought it was unnecessary to keep
   all of the papers and are therefore made to bundles after that.


18. He was asked a number of questions in cross examination. It was  put  to
   him that in relation to Lechu Begum, she had  an  operation  in  February
   2015 and was discharged therefore was there any reason why she could  not
   travel since her discharge? The sponsor referred to the  letter  at  page
   111 giving the reasons that she could not come as she could  not  travel.
   He was asked that since that time, has there been any reason why she  had
   not been able to visit? The  sponsor  made  reference  to  the  operation
   having taken place and that she was not fit  enough  to  travel.  He  was
   asked if he had any other  evidence  that  was  more  recent  as  to  her
   circumstances.


19. In relation to Salma Begum, he was asked if there was  any  evidence  as
   to her operation. Beyond the letter at page 83, the sponsor  stated  that
   there was no other evidence. He explained that he was not legally trained
   and did not know it was required. It was put to him that  that  was  2  �
   years ago and did he know if she had recovered? The Sponsor  stated  that
   he did not know.


20. As to the  circumstances  of  Mr  Uddin's  brother  in  Bangladesh,  the
   sponsor was asked why he could not leave his  family  and  property.  The
   sponsor stated that it was exam time  for  the  children  and  that  they
   needed to go to school. It was suggested that  the  children  could  stay
   with other male relatives and family members but the sponsor stated  that
   "no one who could be trusted to look after his wife  and  children".  The
   sponsor made reference to a visit he made 8 to 10 years ago.  As  to  the
   circumstances of Mr Uddin's brother in Bangladesh she stated that he  was
   not able to have any time off work.
21. He was asked questions about Mr Uddin's illness and  confirmed  that  he
   had been ill for a period of four years before the application  was  made
   in 2015. He first had a diagnosis in 2013. He stated that  they  did  not
   visit because it was "not serious".  When  asked  about  other  types  of
   contact, the sponsor said that there  was  contact  via  telephone.  When
   asked why there was no evidence of this, he stated that he did  not  know
   it was a requirement. The sponsor stated that they had  also  used  Whats
   app communications.


22. When asked about financial support from Mr Uddin  to  family  relatives,
   he said that he did not support them. The sponsor  stated  that  he  gave
   financial support to Mr Shiplu and his mother on  special  occasions  for
   example Eid by way of gifts. He confirmed that there  was  no  dependency
   but they would send gifts.


23. He confirmed that the nephews were married  but  with  no  children.  He
   further confirmed that Mr Uddin last saw his nephews eight years ago (six
   years at the time of the letter at HB 10). The sponsor confirmed that  he
   had not visited Bangladesh for 7 to 8 years. When asked why, he stated it
   was impossible to do that because of his job (he is a bus driver) and  he
   has young children. His wife also had medical problems.


24. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each  of  the
   parties. They are set  out  in  the  record  of  proceedings.  Mr  Mannan
   submitted that there had been  a  significant  error  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's decision in not considering family life between the  relatives
   and not looking at the compassionate  circumstances.  He  submitted  that
   this was not a family visit but to visit  Mr  Uddin.  He  submitted  that
   whilst the evidence demonstrated that there had not been visits  made  in
   the intervening years, the sponsor had given detailed explanations as  to
   why the more immediate family members were unable to visit before and had
   not made applications in March  2015.  He  said  that  the  evidence  was
   "compelling and candid". In this  context  he  referred  to  the  written
   evidence at HB 10, from Mr Uddin that he was  not  able  to  sponsor  the
   family relatives as he was a pensioner. He submitted that the family were
   very close and the sponsor have provided a sponsorship declaration at  HB
   9 agreeing to give them all financial support for  the  duration  of  the
   visit.


25. He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal did not look at the  documents
   relating to Mr Uddin's illness (at HB5-7)  and  that  material  had  been
   before the Entry Clearance Officer. There  was  no  indication  from  the
   evidence that the sponsor or any of the family members had  breached  any
   immigration rules. As regards the refusal decisions, the evidence of  the
   sponsor was that he had created bundles and submitted all  the  documents
   to the ECO and that all that information was there at  the  time  of  the
   applications. At the Tribunal he had only handed in documents relating to
   the issues set out in refusal letter  but  that  he  had  already  posted
   documents.


26. In relation to the law, he did not seek to go behind  the  decisions  of
   the Court of Appeal however, the circumstances of the present  Appellants
   were significantly different than those in the cases referred to  by  the
   Court of Appeal.


27. Mr Clarke, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the
   appeal should be dismissed. He made reference to  the  decisions  of  the
   Court of Appeal and that the decision of Abbasi could  be  distinguished.
   In that decision,  the  Tribunal  had  not  considered  the  decision  of
   Kugathas therefore the decision of Abbasi was of a limited nature. On the
   evidence before this Tribunal, all four Appellants were adults  and  each
   had their own independent family units.  Whilst  cases  are  highly  fact
   sensitive, love and affection is insufficient to found  family  life.  He
   submitted that there was a paucity of evidence in this case and that  the
   last time any visits were made were approximately eight  years  ago.  Any
   assertions  made  about  contact   in   the   intervening   periods   was
   uncorroborated.  Whilst  there  may  have  been  contact,  it  does   not
   demonstrate evidence that goes beyond normal emotional ties.  Furthermore
   he submitted there was no evidence of dependency from the relatives. This
   would include financial dependency but the evidence of  the  sponsor  was
   that he would provide  money  on  special  occasions.  In  conclusion  he
   submitted taking all the evidence into  account  that  it  had  not  been
   established that there was "family life" in  accordance  with  the  legal
   definition.


28. He further submitted that the evidence as  to  why  the  more  immediate
   family relatives had not visited Mr Uddin in  was  not  satisfactory  and
   that the evidence did not support the claim  that  they  were  unable  to
   visit.


29. Mr Mannan by way of reply submitted that family life did not rely  on  a
   narrow definition and that it was not suggested in  the  authorities  you
   could not have family life with someone who resided abroad. He  submitted
   it was important to look at the purpose of the application which  and  in
   line the strength of the family life. In this case  the  purpose  of  the
   application suggested that family life was "very strong".


30. Mr Manning made reference to the decision in Abbasi and that  the  facts
   of this appeal were covered by the ratio of that decision.


31. At the conclusion of the evidence I was  at  my  decision  which  I  now
   give.


Discussion:


32. Article 8  provides:
      "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
      life, his home and his correspondence.
      (2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
      exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
      and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
      security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
      the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
      morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
33. Since the appeal had been before the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  21st  of
   September 2017, there have been three decisions  made  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal dealing with the  issue  of  private  and  family  life  in  entry
   clearance visit appeals; those decisions are SSHD v Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ
   1393, Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ  1511
   and Secretary of State for the Home Department v Onuorah [2017] EWCA  Civ
   1757.


34. In his submissions Mr Mannan did not seek  to  distinguish  the  present
   case from those decisions but  sought  to  rely  on  the  Upper  Tribunal
   decision in Abbasi and another (visits-bereavement-Article 8) [2015] UKUT
   463. Mr Mannan relies upon the nature of  the  family  life  between  the
   family members who are seeking to visit the United  Kingdom.  He  submits
   that it is possible to have a "family life" with someone  who  is  abroad
   and that the facts of these appeals,  there  is  a  "strength  of  family
   life". He relied upon the evidence of the sponsor, who had given evidence
   about the contact and visits made and also reasons  why  members  of  the
   immediate  family  were  not  able  to  visit  (due  to  their   personal
   circumstances) but that in their place, other relatives were to visit  as
   was their  their duty.
35. My starting point is that set out in the decision of SSHD v Onuorah
   [2017 EWCA Civ 1757 at paragraphs 22 and 35  and the question of whether
   an applicant is able to get through the gateway into Article 8 and thus
   whether Article 8 is engaged. At paragraph 22, Singh LJ stated:
    "That prior question depends, for present purposes, on whether it has
    been established that there was family life (or private life) between
    the relevant persons."
36.  The leading authority on the ambit of "family life" for the purpose of
    Article 8 is Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31. In the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer v
    Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511, it was held at paragraph 19 that this
    decision remained ""good law" (see R (Britcits) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    368).


37. The relevant paragraphs of the decision in Kugathas were cited with
    approval in Kopoi and in Onuorah at paragraph 31 as follows:


    " 31. At paras. [17]- [19] Sales LJ said:
           "17. The leading domestic authority on the ambit of 'family
           life' for the purposes of Article 8 is the well-known decision
           of this court in Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] INLR 31. The court found
           that a single man of 38 years old who had lived in the UK since
           1999 did not enjoy 'family life' with his mother, brother and
           sister, who were living in Germany as refugees. At para. [14]
           Sedley LJ accepted as a proper approach the guidance given by
           the European Commission for Human Rights in its decision in S v
           United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196, at 198:
           'Generally, the protection of family life under Article 8
           involves cohabiting dependents, such as parents and their
           dependent, minor children. Whether it extends to other
           relationships depends on the circumstances of the particular
           case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year old
           son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
           protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal
           emotional ties.'
           He held that there is not an absolute requirement of dependency
           in an economic sense for 'family life' to exist, but that it is
           necessary for there to be real, committed or effective support
           between family members in order to show that 'family life'
           exists ([17]); 'neither blood ties nor the concern and affection
           that ordinarily go with them are, by themselves or together',
           sufficient ([19]); and the natural tie between a parent and an
           infant is probably a special case in which there is no need to
           show that there is a demonstrable measure of support ([18]).
           18. The judgments of Arden LJ and Simon Brown LJ were to similar
           effect. Arden LJ also relied on S v United Kingdom as good
           authority and held that there is no presumption that a person
           has a family life, even with members of his immediate family
           ([24]) and that family life is not established between an adult
           child and his surviving parent or other siblings unless
           something more exists than normal emotional ties, such as ties
           of dependency ([25]).
           19. Kugathas remains good law: see e.g. R (Britcits) v Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368, [61] and
           [74] (Sir Terence Etherton MR), [82] (Davis LJ) and [86] (Sales
           LJ). As Sir Terence Etherton MR pithily summarised the position
           at [74], in order for family life within the meaning of Article
           8(1) to be found to exist, 'There must be something more than
           normal emotional ties'."
   1. Later, at para. [30], Sales LJ said:
           "In my view, the shortness of the proposed visit in the present
           case is a yet further indication that the refusal of leave to
           enter did not involve any want of respect for anyone's family
           life for the purposes of Article 8. A three week visit would not
           involve a significant contribution to 'family life' in the sense
           in which that term is used in Article 8. Of course, it would
           often be nice for family members to meet up and visit in this
           way. But a short visit of this kind will not establish a
           relationship between any of the individuals concerned of support
           going beyond normal emotional ties, even if there were a
           positive obligation under Article 8 (which there is not) to
           allow a person to enter the UK to try to develop a 'family life'
           which does not currently exist."
38.  In Court in Kopoi also  cited with approval a passage from Mostafa
   (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) at paragraph 29:
   1. "In general terms, I consider that the Upper Tribunal (Mr Justice
      McCloskey, President, and UT Judge Perkins) in Mostofa (Article 8 in
      entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) was correct to observe at [24]
      that "... it will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person
      other than a close relative will be able to show that the refusal of
      entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1)"; and I think
      the Upper Tribunal made pertinent comments about this when it
      continued: "In practical terms this is likely to be limited to cases
      where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close life
      partners or a parent and minor child and even then it will not
      necessarily be extended to cases where, for example, the proposed
      visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the time
      that the people involved spend together" (albeit I would wish to
      reserve my opinion whether even these comments might have expressed
      the position too widely, in light of the principle stated
      in Abdulaziz). Clearly, on this approach, the respondent's case does
      not fall within the scope of Article 8(1)."


39.  I have therefore considered the factual circumstances of the
   respective Appellants in the light of the case law referred to in the
   preceding paragraphs.


40.  The four Appellants made applications to visit Mr Uddin, a British
   citizen living in the United Kingdom on 18 February 2015. Whilst he was
   unable to sponsor their visits due to his medical conditions (set out in
   the evidence at HB 10, HB5, HB6 and HB7), Mr Miah, who is his son, was to
   provide the maintenance and accommodation for the four Appellants in the
   event that any visit took place. There is no dispute that he has the
   resources and accommodation available to do that. The evidence
   demonstrates that Mr Uddin had invited members of the extended family for
   a visit because he was suffering from number of medical conditions and
   described himself as terminally ill (see  HB10; letter 14/1/2015). A
   letter exhibited at HB1 made reference to him having had "prostate
   cancer, kidney disorder, diabetes and a heart condition and is unable to
   travel and would like the relatives to visit him." The medical evidence
   provided at HB5 (dated 25th of November 2014) demonstrated that he had
   been undergoing treatment for cancer and had received treatment in the
   form of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Is not possible to state what the
   outcome of the treatment was at the date of that letter. In a further
   letter exhibited at HB6, dated 1 December 2015, and therefore some months
   after the applications were made in February 2015, it made reference to
   the progressive nature of his condition and that the treatment was not
   with "curative intent" and that he would continue to deteriorate. The
   Tribunal has not been provided with any further evidence that postdates
   the letter of December 2015. However Mr Uddin died in September 2017.
41. I make the following findings from the evidence before me. Mr Uddin had
   been living in the United Kingdom since 1963 (I refer to the oral
   evidence of the sponsor). He has a number of family relatives living in
   Bangladesh. He has three sisters; Jilakha Begum (who is one of the
   Appellants in this appeal), Lechu Begum and Salma Begum. He also has two
   brothers; one living in Bangladesh Haris and one working in Saudi Arabia.
42. The four Appellants are extended family members of Mr Uddin. Ashraf
   Rahman Shiplu, born in 1988 is the son of Jilakha Begum (who is also an
   Appellant). Ashrafuzzaman Abdullah born in 1991 is the son of Salma Begum
   and Lablu Lablu is the son of Lechu Begum. All four Appellants are adults
   and on the evidence before me I am satisfied that each have established
   independent family units of their own. The evidence relating to them
   demonstrates that they are married (although Mr Lablu and Mr Abdullah do
   not have children) and all live in extended family households.
43. Whether the protection of family life and Article 8 extends to
   relatives (other than those of parents and dependent minor children)
   depends on the particular circumstances of the case. Relationships
   between adults (as they are here) would not necessarily acquire the
   protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence of further
   elements of dependency involving "more than the normal emotional ties". I
   have therefore considered the evidence as to the nature of the
   relationships between the adults involved. I do so in the context of Mr
   Mannan's submission that there is a "strength of family life "established
   here.
44. As to evidence of previous contact between the family members, I have
   reached the following findings on the evidence before the Tribunal. Mr
   Uddin has been living in the UK since 1963. Whilst the evidence of the
   sponsor was that prior to this date he had "looked after his brothers and
   sisters" this could not extend to the Appellant Jilakha Begum as she was
   born in 1964 which was after the date he had left Bangladesh.
45. It is common ground that none of the Appellants have visited the UK to
   visit Mr Uddin or any other family relatives save for Mr Ashraf Rahman
   Shiplu who visited the UK in 2009 for a period of approximately three
   months and then returned home to Bangladesh.
46. From the evidence before me, Mr Uddin has not seen his relatives in
   Bangladesh for more than six years as at the date of the letter of 14
   January 2015(I refer to the letter exhibited at HB10). Mr Miah, the
   sponsor and his son, has not visited his extended family in Bangladesh
   for approximately eight years.
47. Thus the evidence demonstrates that there has been no recent and
   meaningful contact by way of visits for at least the last 6 to 8 years.
   There have been a number of reasons given as to why the close family
   relatives (such as sisters and brothers of Mr Uddin) have not sought to
   visit. In the case of Lechu Begum the sponsor's evidence was that as a
   result of her medical problems she was unable to travel therefore her son
   was to visit the UK in her place. The evidence in this regard is set out
   at page 111 and page 107 of the bundle. It demonstrates that she was
   admitted to hospital on 20 January 2015 but was discharged on 2 February
   2015 after having had a gallbladder operation. However the application
   made for the visits were not made until 18 February 2015, after her
   operation and to discharge from hospital. It is not been adequately
   explained or indeed evidenced as to why she did not seek to visit
   herself. But in any event, even if that were the case, whilst in her
   letter she makes reference to having a duty to visit her brother, as Mr
   Clarke submits that has been no explanation as to why she has not sought
   to visit her brother on any earlier occasion .
48. As regards Salma Begum, the sponsor's evidence was that she could not
   visit as she had had a bypass operation. In cross-examination he had
   stated that this had occurred after the applications had been made. When
   asked if there was evidence in support of the circumstances by Mr Clarke,
   he made reference to page 83 which was a letter at from her giving
   reasons as to her inability to travel. The letter does not make reference
   to any operation but does make reference to her own family circumstances.
49. Mr Miah in his evidence explained that Mr Uddin's brother had not been
   able to visit because he was required to look after his property and his
   family "for their safety." In cross-examination he was asked why he could
   not visit with the children. The sponsor's evidence was that it was exam
   time. When asked why the family could not live with other male relatives
   whilst the visit was undertaken, the sponsor stated "no one can be
   trusted to look after his wife and children." He did, however, make
   reference to a visit that was made approximately eight years ago. When
   asked why he had not sought to visit in the intervening eight year
   period, the sponsor's evidence was that he could not come as there was no
   one to look after the land. Mr Uddin's remaining brother was working in
   Saudi Arabia and the sponsor's evidence was that he could not attend
   because he could not get the time off work.
50. It is therefore the sponsor's evidence that for a number of reasons as
   set out above, none of the immediate family members (save for Jilakha
   Begum) have been able to visit and that the intention was to send their
   children in their places.
51. In general terms I have not found the evidence to be satisfactory
   concerning the reasons why the immediate family members did not seek to
   visit Mr Uddin when the applications were made in February 2015. As set
   out above the evidence relating to Lechu Begum demonstrated that she had
   the operation prior to the applications being made and there was no
   updating evidence or any evidence to demonstrate circumstances
   thereafter. The evidence relating to Mr Uddin's brother as to why could
   not visit did not satisfactorily explain why he was unable to leave
   Bangladesh or why it was necessary for the family's safety that he
   remained.
52. However whether or not there were any such good reasons, the fact
   remains that there has been no explanation given as to why there has been
   no meaningful contact by way of visits to Mr Uddin in the last 6 to 8
   years.
53. As to other forms of contact, when family members live in different
   countries contact often takes place via Skype, telephone or by Whats app
   messaging service. There has been no evidence provided as to this type of
   contact however I have no reason to disbelieve the sponsor who said that
   the family relatives would contact Mr Uddin by the use of such methods of
   communication.
54. As to any forms of dependency, I am satisfied on the evidence before me
   that it does not demonstrate any form of real dependency, financial or
   otherwise. When asked in evidence about support given, the sponsor said
   that Mr Uddin did not provide any financial support for his relatives. He
   said that he (that is the sponsor) did give family support to Mr Shiplu
   and Jilakha Begum on special occasions such as gifts for Eid. At the end
   of the evidence the sponsor stated that he wanted to add the following to
   his evidence "Mr Uddin did financially help his sisters until their
   marriages. I help the children, it is normal tradition to help each other
   out."
55. I am satisfied that any support given by Mr Uddin prior to his sister's
   marriage was many years ago. The evidence does not support any form of
   financial dependency between the family members. Indeed in the
   applications made for entry clearance it was stated that they were
   financially independent by reason of their respective businesses and
   employment. The giving of gifts on special occasions and special
   celebrations such as Eid and on marriages is entirely usual but does not
   demonstrate any financial support or dependency. I have no doubt that the
   extended family living in Bangladesh have maintained a level of contact
   and that they clearly have affection and love for each other, as all
   families do. However the relationships between them on the evidence
   before me does not demonstrate anything more than the normal emotional
   ties between family relatives.
56. Mr Mannan did not seek to distinguish between the right to respect for
   "family life "and that of "private life". His submission was that when
   looking at the purpose of the visit (to visit a family relative who was
   very ill) underlined the strength of family life. It is right to observe
   that in his general submissions he sought to place a visit by family
   members to a relative living in the UK in the circumstances of Mr Uddin,
   to fall within the category of cases set out in the decision of Abbasi
   (as cited). In that case it was held that the refusal of the visa to
   foreign nationals seeking to enter the United Kingdom for a finite period
   for the purpose of mourning with family members the recent death of a
   close relative of visiting the grave of the deceased is capable of
   constituting a disproportionate interference with the rights of the
   persons concerned under Article 8 of the ECHR. The decision went on to
   state that "the question whether Article 8 applies and, if so, is
   breached will depend upon the fact sensitive context of the particular
   case".
57. The facts of that decision concerned two Appellants who were brothers
   who applied for a period of four weeks to visit their grandfather's grave
   and mourn, along with family members in the United Kingdom. It was
   refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on the basis that they had not
   accurately presented their circumstances or their intentions of wanting
   to enter the United Kingdom and the ECO was not satisfied that they would
   leave the UK at the end of the visit.
58. It had been argued that the decision was incompatible with their rights
   under Article 8 of the ECHR. In that case the applications for entry
   clearance had been made very shortly after the death of their grandfather
   in September. The application was for the purposes of reunification of
   all family members for the purposes of mourning (those from Pakistan and
   those in the United Kingdom).
59. After considering decisions of the European Court, the Tribunal held
   that the judge's finding that the appeal did not fall within the ambit of
   Article 8 was "unsustainable" and that the judges error was "driven by an
   impermissibly narrow approach to the scope of Article 8 protection and
   the concentration of the Appellants family life in Pakistan to the
   exclusion of both their family ties in the United Kingdom and the central
   purpose of their proposed visit."
60. I have considered the decision in the context of the more recent
   jurisprudence set out in the decisions of the Court of Appeal. In doing
   so I have reached the conclusion that the decision of Abassi is
   distinguishable from the particular circumstances of the present appeal.
   The Tribunal in Abassi made no reference to the decision of Kugathas in
   reaching its conclusions on the ambit of Article 8 and in particular
   whether or not family life could be engaged or whether the Appellant had
   Article 8 family life connections with anyone in the United Kingdom. As
   set out above, the decision in Kugathas remains good law and applicable
   in this context.
61. None of the cases referred to in Abbasi concerned the rights of entry
   into a contracting state by a person from outside of the contracting
   state. Although Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v United Kingdom and
   SS(Malaysia) make it clear that there needs to be a family life with a
   person in the UK (the contracting state) and it is the impact of the
   decision on that person in the UK which effectively brings the case
   within Article1 ECHR jurisdictionally, the Tribunal in Abbasi did not
   refer to the jurisprudence in Kugathas when determining whether the
   Appellant had an Article 8 family life connection with anyone in the UK.
   Nor did the Tribunal in Abbasi  refer to any Strasburg jurisprudence
   (which could displace the comments in Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v
   United Kingdom ) in support of any contention to extend Article 8 in
   entry cases to protect the private lives of those not in this country.
   Whilst attendance at funerals and memorial services may, as a matter of
   fact, have some relevance when considering whether the test in Kugathas
   is met as between an applicant and any family members he or she is
   visiting here, given the comments in Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v
   United Kingdom and SS (Malaysia) it remains a question whether attendance
   at a funeral or memorial service can engage Article 8 in an entry appeal
   per se.
62. The Court of Appeal have now considered the point about private life in
   SSHD v Abbas [2017] EWCA Civ 1393 and concluded that there is no
   obligation on an ECHR state to allow an alien to enter its territory to
   pursue private life.  Family life within the State can be relied on but
   this is only because the obligation rests in a large part on the fact one
   of the family members is already present in the Contracting State and
   that family life is unitary (see Khan v United Kingdom (2014) 58 EHRR
   SE15).


63. Some of the jurisprudence referred to in the decision of Abassi has
   been the subject further discussion in Onuorah (as cited) and in
   particular Sabanchiyeve v Russia [2014] 58 EHRR 14 (see paragraph 42 of
   Onuorah). However as set out, the circumstances of that case are
   completely different to the particular factual circumstances in Onuorah
   and also on the factual circumstances of the present Appellants for the
   reasons set out at paragraphs 42 and 43 of that decision.


64. Even if I were wrong in my conclusions above, the decision in Abbasi
   concerned matters relating to "death, burial, mourning and other rites"
   and this was not the basis of the applications made. The evidence
   demonstrates that Mr Uddin had invited members of the extended family for
   a family visit as result of his medical condition. I have set out a
   pr�cis of that material earlier in this determination.  The Tribunal has
   not been provided with any further evidence that postdates the letter of
   December 2015 in which the progressive nature of his medical condition
   was described and it was stated that his condition would deteriorate.  It
   is not known what happened in the intervening two year period. Mr Uddin
   died in September 2017. Therefore the basis of the application was not
   relating to the circumstances as identified in the case of Abassi.


65. Furthermore on the particular facts of this case, the purpose of the
   visit extended beyond that of visiting Mr Uddin. While ostensibly the
   Sponsor has stated that the visit was to be for the purposes of visiting
   his father, who was too unwell to travel, the evidence of the Appellants
   themselves make reference to this being a general family visit. The
   letter from his sister Salma Begum (exhibited at page 83) whose son is
   the Appellant Ashrafuzzaman Abdullah, makes reference to the purpose of
   the visit which is to visit Mr Uddin and "other family members."
   Similarly the evidence from Lechu Begum exhibited at page 107 (who is the
   mother of Lablu Lablu), makes reference to her son visiting her brother
   and other family members. The sponsor's declaration at HB9 at paragraph 2
   similarly makes reference to the family relations having not seen his
   young son who was aged two years. Thus from the evidence before the
   Tribunal this appears to be a general family visit although I would
   accept that this may have been prompted by the circumstances of Mr
   Uddin's illness.


66. A further difficulty is that there is no evidence for the Tribunal that
   the Appellants are seeking to visit the United Kingdom now for the
   purposes of mourning or to visit family relatives in this context.
   Despite there having been an adjournment and the lack of evidence
   relating to family and private life which had been advanced before the
   First-tier Tribunal, no further evidence has been provided from the
   Appellants themselves as to the continuation of the applications for
   visits in the light of the present circumstances. Thus it has not been
   established on the factual circumstances before me that this is the basis
   now of their appeals on human rights grounds. Consequently for those
   reasons I accept the submissions made by Mr Clarke that on the particular
   facts of these appeals, it is not been established that Article 8 is
   engaged and that there is "family life" as it is defined.


67. In reaching this decision it does not preclude circumstances in which
   there are compassionate circumstances that underpin a family visit. The
   current immigration rules provide a mechanism by which family visits can
   be made to the United Kingdom and will be for an individual Appellant to
   provide the evidence not only as to why they seek a visit at that
   particular time but to demonstrate that the rules are met. In this case
   the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied as to the financial and
   personal circumstances of the four Appellants and therefore refused their
   applications for the reasons given in their respective decision notices.
   There is an available remedy in law to challenge the decision under the
   immigration rules which is by way of judicial review of the decision.
   This does not rely on establishing a breach of Article 8 rights but
   whether on the material before the entry clearance officer it was not
   rationally open to him to reach such a conclusion.  Though the sponsor
   has provided a large amount of documentation on behalf of the Appellants
   to demonstrate their compliance with the immigration rules, the ambit of
   this hearing has been to consider the only ground of appeal which is on
   human rights grounds. The conclusion reached is that on the particular
   facts of this case Article 8 is not engaged. However that does not
   preclude any further applications made for visit visas by the Appellants
   involved, to visit family members in the United Kingdom under the
   immigration rules and no doubt the Entry Clearance Officer will give
   careful consideration to the documents which evidence their financial and
   personal circumstances in Bangladesh in any future application.



DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside. The  appeals
are dismissed on human rights grounds.





                               Signed: SM Reeds



                                Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
                                14th December 2017















































