
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02779/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              MRS SHAHAD BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Marcell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 12th December 1971.  The
    Appellant had applied for entry clearance as a family  visitor  to  the
    United Kingdom for eight weeks.  Her application  was  refused  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer on 2nd April 2015.  The Entry Clearance Officer
    was aware that the Appellant  had  previously  been  refused  a  spouse
    settlement visa on 4th July 2007 which was later dismissed  on  appeal.
    He further noted that the Appellant had applied for entry clearance  as
    a family visitor to visit the UK in order to support her  daughter  who
    will be undergoing bariatric surgery in the UK.  In a  detailed  Notice
    of Refusal the Entry Clearance Officer set out why he was not satisfied
    as to the Appellant's intentions in wishing to travel  to  the  UK  and
    that he was not satisfied that the Appellant genuinely intended a short
    visit only and that the Appellant would leave at the end of her  visit.
    Further, he was not satisfied that the Appellant  could  be  maintained
    and accommodated by herself adequately or meet the costs of her  return
    or onward journey from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sullivan sitting at Richmond on 16th December 2015.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 4th January  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.  Judge Sullivan noted that the  basis  of  appeal
    was that there was a breach of the Appellant's rights under  Article  8
    of the European Convention of Human Rights, contending that  there  was
    evidence to show that the Appellant's daughter Shazia Khan has  serious
    medical conditions, is awaiting surgery and  would  need  her  mother's
    help and support at that crucial time.

 3. On 26th January 2016  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the Tribunal had failed to have
    regard to material matters and that the Tribunal's evaluation under the
    principles set out in Razgar were flawed.

 4. On 13th June 2016 Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Hollingworth notes that at paragraph 27 of the  decision
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has referred to  not  having  been  shown
    documentary evidence of the financial circumstances of  the  Appellant,
    Sponsor or Mrs Khan at the date of  refusal.   Present  on  the  bundle
    containing the reasons for refusal dated 2nd April 2015 is,  he  notes,
    financial documentation relating to Mr Arshud Khan.  Under the  heading
    of "Sponsorship Declaration" Shazia  Khan  and  Arshud  Khan  make  the
    statement  as  it  is  referred  to  in  support  of  the   Appellant's
    application for entry clearance.  At paragraph 27 of  the  decision  he
    notes that the judge has referred  to  not  being  satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor has sufficient income to maintain himself, his  minor  children
    and the Appellant without recourse to public funds.  The judge goes  on
    to state this is a relevant  consideration  when  weighing  the  public
    interest.  The documentation referred to predates the refusal.  In such
    circumstances he considered that there was an arguable error of law  as
    the judge had not considered evidence relevant to the  public  interest
    and he consequently granted permission to appeal.

 5. On 5th July 2016 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24  response  opposes  the  Appellant's
    appeal and submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed  himself
    appropriately.  They contend the judge had regard to the  existence  of
    family life between the Appellant and her daughter and that  the  judge
    weighed in all material factors in considering the Article  8  exercise
    and was entitled to find on balance that the Appellant would not return
    to Pakistan at the end of the visit.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Ms Victor-Marcell.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Ms Victor-Marcell submits that  the  main  point  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 27 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  and  that  it
    was  contended  that  the  necessary  financial  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, Sponsor or Mrs Khan have not been  shown  despite  the  fact
    that they were in the Respondent's bundle at pages 45 to  61,  and  she
    submits that that was the main reason that permission was refused.  She
    further contends that there are errors at paragraphs 28 and 29 and that
    a reference is made to three children rather than two at paragraph  28,
    and that the judge has failed to generally consider the evidence.   She
    further submits that the fact  that  there  had  been  an  unsuccessful
    application  for  leave  to  enter  for  settlement  some  seven  years
    previously did not mean that the Appellant  was  trying  to  circumvent
    immigration control.  She states it has been contended throughout  that
    the Appellant's visit is to enable her to be present when her  daughter
    undertakes bariatric surgery (which still has not taken place) and that
    the refusal to grant entry clearance shows evidence of bias.

 8. She submits that there is evidence available about the circumstances of
    the Appellant's children in Pakistan referring to a contended error  at
    paragraph 31 of  the  judge's  decision,  pointing  out  that  this  is
    addressed by the Appellant at  paragraphs  24  to  27  of  her  witness
    statement and that whilst agreeing that the Appellant has  children  to
    return to, she submits that the circumstances  are  very  different  to
    when her application for settlement was refused  previously.   Further,
    so far as the inadequacy of funds is concerned, she  submits  that  the
    judge should have looked at the funds in her daughter's  account.   She
    maintains the argument that this is a breach of the  Appellant's  human
    rights under Article 8 and submits that the appeal should be allowed.

 9. Mr Tufan points out that the only appeal extant before me is one  based
    on human rights and that the judge has given due consideration to  this
    and has listed the Razgar principles at paragraph 7 and thereafter gone
    on to consider proportionality and has made findings that Article 8  is
    not engaged.  He emphasises that the manner in which the  parties  live
    with the Appellant in Pakistan and the Sponsor and daughter in  the  UK
    is how the family have chosen to live.  He refers  me  to  the  leading
    authorities and points out that the judge has  made  a  proportionality
    assessment that was open to him.

10. In response Ms Victor-Marcell points out  that  the  judge  found  that
    Article 8 was engaged and  that  he  should  have  considered  all  the
    factors.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Authorities

13. The approach to be adopted on visit visa appeals pursuant to Article  8
    is set out in the following authorities:

      i) Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)

             "1.  The first question to be addressed in an  appeal  against
                  refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor  where  only
                  human rights grounds are available is whether article 8 of
                  the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is not, which  will  not
                  infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
                  to embark upon an assessment of the decision  of  the  ECO
                  under the rules and should not do  so.  If  article  8  is
                  engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at  the  extent  to
                  which the claimant is said to  have  failed  to  meet  the
                  requirements of the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the
                  proportionality  balancing  exercise  that  must   follow.
                  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
                  (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

             2.   As compliance with para 41 of HC 395 is not a  ground  of
                  appeal  to  be  decided  by  the  Tribunal,  any  findings
                  concerning that will carry little  weight,  especially  if
                  based upon arguments advanced only by  the  appellant.  If
                  the appellant were to make a fresh application  for  entry
                  clearance the ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard
                  to the assessment carried out by the judge but will not be
                  bound by those findings to treat the appellant as a person
                  who, at least at the date of the appeal hearing,  met  the
                  requirements of paragraph 41".

     ii) Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC)

             "In the case of  appeals  brought  against  refusal  of  entry
             clearance under Article 8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to
             satisfy the Immigration  Rules  is  not  the  question  to  be
             determined by the Tribunal but is capable of being a  weighty,
             though not determinative, factor when  deciding  whether  such
             refusal is proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
             immigration control".

Findings

14. It is fair to say that the principal findings as  matters  of  law  are
    therein set out in the authority of Adjei above.  It has to be accepted
    in this appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that Article  8
    was engaged and there is no cross-appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against that.  Consequently it is necessary to look at  the  extent  to
    which the claimant has failed to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rule.
    This is not dictated  primarily  by  any  reference  to  the  financial
    requirements.  Whilst it may well have been an error for the  judge  to
    fail to give due and proper consideration to such documentation, and to
    have recited the wrong number of children at paragraph 28, I find  that
    such findings are not material.

15. At paragraph 20 the judge has given due consideration to the Article  8
    considerations in the facts of this case and made a  finding  that  the
    Appellant does not currently share family life with  Mrs  Shazia  Khan.
    He then gives reasons for that.  Thereafter he sets out at paragraph 21
    why he finds that the right to respect for family life is engaged.  The
    judge has then gone on at  paragraphs  31  to  34  to  provide  a  very
    detailed analysis of the factual circumstances relating to  the  health
    of Shazia Khan and the proposed surgery.  He  has  noted  the  position
    with regard to the prospective surgery of Mrs  Khan  and  has  come  to
    important findings that he is not satisfied that  the  Appellant  would
    leave the United Kingdom after a period of six to eight weeks.  Such  a
    finding is fundamental in the judge's decision  and  one  that  he  was
    entitled to make when balancing the public interest with  the  interest
    of the Appellant and members of the family.  The judge has carried  out
    a thorough investigation and analysis and  has  made  findings  he  was
    entitled to enable him to assess the proportionality exercise  that  is
    necessary.  In  such  circumstances  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses no material error of  law  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material errors of  law
and the appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 17th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 17th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

