
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/02438/2015
                                                               VA/02435/2015
                                                               VA/02432/2015
                                                               VA/02431/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 November 2016                           |On 2 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|                |Noshaba Yousaf                            |First Appellant |
|                |[M H]                                     |Second Appellant|
|                |[S H1]                                    |Third Appellant |
|                |[S H2]                                    |Fourth Appellant|


                        (Anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Shah, Solicitor from 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants in this case are closely related members of the  same
       family.  They appealed unsuccessfully  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       against the decision  of  the  respondent,  by  an  Entry  Clearance
       Officer, to refuse them entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as
       visitors.

    2. The application of the first appellant, Noshaba Yousaf, was  refused
       under paragraph 41  of  HC  395  and  additionally  under  paragraph
       320(7A) of HC 395.  It was refused under paragraph  320(7A)  because
       the respondent was satisfied that the application was supported by a
       "falsified or non-genuine document".  Further the fact that she  had
       relied upon a  false  document  caused  the  respondent  not  to  be
       satisfied that she intended only a short stay.  She  concluded  that
       the first appellant did not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Rules
       specific to visitors.

    3. The application of the second  appellant,  [MH]  was  refused  under
       paragraph 46A of HC 395 which applies only to  visitor  applications
       by children.   The  second  appellant  was  born  in  2012  and  his
       application was dependent on that of  his  mother.   The  respondent
       decided that as the first appellant was not travelling to the United
       Kingdom and there was no suggestion that he would travel without her
       the application would be refused because  the  respondent  was  "not
       satisfied as to your intentions". Similar decisions were made in the
       cases of the third appellant, [SH1] who was born  in  2004  and  the
       fourth appellant, [SH2] who  was  born  in  2005.   The  notices  of
       immigration decision relating  to  each  of  their  cases  makes  no
       mention of paragraph 320(7A) of HC 395.

    4. The appellants were told, correctly, that they could only appeal  on
       human rights grounds.  They lodged  appeals  and  the  appeals  came
       before First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid.  Judge Reid, correctly, began
       by asking herself if Article 8 was "engaged" and she decided in each
       case that the relationship between the  proposed  visitors  and  the
       people they wished to see in the United Kingdom was not one that the
       United Kingdom was obliged to promote. That being so  there  was  no
       breach of Article 8 and there was nothing more to decide.  The Judge
       dismissed the appeals.

    5. This left the first  appellant  with  a  sense  of  grievance.   The
       respondent has decided that she had acted dishonestly in support  of
       an application.  The consequence of that is that she  will  probably
       be unable to obtain a visit visa to enter the United Kingdom  for  a
       period of ten years and I was told in submissions, and accept,  that
       it is very likely that being refused  admission  to  United  Kingdom
       because of deception will make it difficult or impossible for her to
       gain permission to visit any other country lawfully during a similar
       period.

    6. When the First-tier Tribunal gave permission to appeal to the  Upper
       Tribunal it made it plain that "permission is granted limited  to  a
       consideration of the merits under paragraph 320(7A)". It must follow
       from this that permission was only granted in the case of the  first
       appellant because hers was the only appeal that was at all concerned
       with paragraph 320(7A).

    7. It follows  that  the  appeals  of  the  second,  third  and  fourth
       appellants were not before me and the decisions  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal in their appeals must stand.

    8. It is quite clear that Judge Reid did  not  consider  refusal  under
       paragraph 320(7A) beyond  acknowledging  that  it  was  one  of  the
       reasons for refusal.

    9. As is explained above, the appellants  were  each  told  that  their
       right of appeal was limited to the grounds referred  to  in  Section
       84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The
       material parts of this states that an appeal must be brought on  one
       or more of the following grounds:

  "(c) that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
  Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act contrary  to  Human  Rights
  Convention)  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's   Convention
  rights;"

   10. As the First-tier Tribunal decided, correctly, that the appeal could
       not succeed under Article 8 grounds there was no point in the  judge
       deciding further  if  the  application  was  decided  rightly  under
       paragraph  320(7A).   If  that  decision  is  erroneous  it  is   an
       immaterial error. There is no appeal against part of the decision.

   11. It follows from this that persons aggrieved by  decisions  of  Entry
       Clearance Officers under paragraph 320(7A) which can be appealed  on
       human rights grounds should bring separate  proceedings  by  way  of
       judicial review if they want to  challenge  a  decision  made  under
       paragraph 320(7A).  I have not been able  to  imagine  circumstances
       where a bad decision under paragraph 320(7A)  would  contravene  the
       United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on  Human
       Rights and no such contravention was alleged here.

   12. It follows that I uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       In the case of the first appellant the appeal is  dismissed  and  in
       the case of the second, third and  fourth  appellants  there  is  no
       appeal before me.  The First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
       their appeals is unchanged.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the First Appellant is dismissed.

The other purported appellants do  not  have  an  appeal  before  the  Upper
Tribunal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 December 2016                |





