
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02451/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 05 March 2014                                |On 20 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                             MRS SUKHWINDER kaur
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  new delhi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision   of
    Immigration Judge Geraint-Jones QC who dismissed her appeal against the
    respondent's refusal to grant her a visit visa.  It  appears  from  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal that an earlier application was  also
    unsuccessful.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer set out the matters which concerned him  in
    his decision of 18 December 2012 and they were  subject  to  the  usual
    entry clearance review which  maintained  the  decision.  The  decision
    turned both before the Entry Clearance Officer and  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the question of the appellant's intention to return to
    India at the expiry of her visa, and upon  whether  she  was  genuinely
    seeking entry as a visitor.

 3. The determination is challenged on rationality grounds as  set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal.  The appellant provided a  number  of  documents
    and two proofs of evidence (described as witness  statements),  one  of
    which was adopted by the appellant's daughter-in-law at the hearing and
    therefore may bear some weight to the extent that she is aware  of  her
    mother-in-law's  intentions,  the  other  being  a  document  typed  by
    somebody and unsigned by the appellant  which  can  carry  very  little
    weight.

 4. The crucial passage in the determination of Judge Jones is at paragraph
    11 in which he says

         "...Whilst I bear in mind the appellant's implied assertion in  her
         witness statement, I still have to ask whether the preponderance of
         the evidence allows me to conclude that it is  more  probable  than
         not that it is her state of mind or intention that she will  depart
         the United Kingdom at or before the expiry of her visa period.   In
         my judgment the overall evidence is equivocal on that issue and not
         sufficient to tip the balance of probabilities beyond 50%  so  that
         it could probably be said that it is more probable  than  not  that
         the appellant holds the requisite intention."

 5. The oral evidence of the  sponsor  engaged  to  some  extent  with  the
    documentary  problems  identified  in  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal, and also revealed existence of  a  large  extended  family  in
    India which had never previously been mentioned. The determination does
    not assess the sponsor's credibility but, given that the issue  is  the
    intention of the appellant, that is not, on  the  particular  facts  of
    this application, fatal to the determination.

 6. For myself, I find the description of the evidence as  equivocal,  that
    is 50/50, to  be  generous  to  the  appellant.   It  is  difficult  to
    understand the Immigration Judge's reasoning in paragraphs  10  and  11
    and if the appellant's case were stronger, I might well  have  regarded
    his reasoning as sufficiently weak to amount to  a  material  error  of
    law.

 7. However, given the very weak evidence which the appellant presented,  I
    do not consider that in this particular case, even  had  the  reasoning
    been more cogent, the conclusion would have been different.  I  do  not
    set the determination aside and the dismissal of the appellant's appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point  of  law.  I  do  not  set  aside  the
decision.


Signed [pic]               Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

