
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02980/2015 &

                                                    VA/02981/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 July 2017                         |On 11 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

              Mr Alawdeen adamkanige Mohamed - first Respondent
           mrs fathima sadhaana seinul abdeen - second respondent
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as  "the  Respondent"  and  Mr  Alawdeen
    Adamkanige Mohamed and Mrs Fathima Sadhaana Seinul Abdeen as "the first
    and second Appellants" respectively.

 2. Both Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka. They  sought  entry  to  the
    United Kingdom as visitors. The Entry Clearance Officer  refused  their
    applications in a decision dated 17 December 2014. They  duly  appealed
    and following a  hearing  at  Taylor  House  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal L Rahman allowed the appeals on human rights grounds.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 9 June 2017. His reasons  for  the  grant
    were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rahman promulgated on 6  December
             2016 whereby the appeal against  the  decision  to  refuse  to
             grant leave to enter as family visitors was allowed.

          2. I am satisfied that the application  is  in  time  as  it  was
             received on 14 December 2016.

          3. Having found that family life  was  not  engaged  between  the
             Appellants  and  Sponsors,  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
             materially erred in  then  findings  that  there  would  be  a
             disproportionate  interference  in  their  family  lives   and
             consequently allowing the appeal. All grounds may be argued".

 4. Thus the appeals came before me today.

 5. In his submissions Mr Whitwell expanded the grounds seeking  permission
    to appeal. Firstly, that the Entry Clearance Officer's principle ground
    of appeal is that the Judge misdirected himself in finding the  refusal
    of the Entry Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  the  Appellants  an  entry
    clearance constituted an interference of a gravity crossing the minimum
    threshold for engagement of Article 8 of the ECHR. He further submitted
    that the Judge had erred  in  his  proposition  that  a  refusal  of  a
    visitor's entry clearance to enter  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  short
    period of time was an interference with Article 8 in a case where there
    is no family life. Further that having found at paragraphs 55 to 57  of
    his decision that he was not  satisfied  that  there  was  family  life
    between the Appellants and the UK Sponsors the Judge had made a  flawed
    finding by concluding that he was satisfied that the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer interfered with family and private life rights.
    Secondly the Judge erred in any event in relation to  his  analysis  of
    private life. It is the Entry Clearance Officer's contention  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance in a  visit  case  does  not  constitute  an
    interference with the private life of Appellants. Mr Whitwell  referred
    me to the authorities of Abbasi and another  (visits  -  bereavement  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC)  and  SS  (ECO-Article  8)  Malaysia
    [2004] UKIAT 00091.

 6. Mr Lewis argued that at paragraph 46 and 47 of the decision  the  Judge
    had effectively recorded the concession by the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer in relation to Article 8. For  completeness  I  set  out  those
    paragraphs here. They states:-

          "46. Mr Graham stated that he  relied  upon  the  entry  clearance
              officers (sic) decisions dated  3rd  December  2014  and  the
              entry clearance managers (sic)  review  dated  4th  September
              2015. The appellants had  a  limited  right  of  appeal.  The
              immigration rules were not  satisfied  especially  given  the
              limited information provided with respect to the movement  of
              money. If the appellant had a business it  was  unusual  that
              they  failed  to  provide  any  business  account  with   the
              application or since their refusal. He questioned whether the
              personal  accounts  were  suitable.  There   was   inadequate
              information   to   determine   the   appellant's    financial
              circumstances in Sri Lanka.

          47. With respect to article 8 of the ECHR, Mr Graham  stated  that
              in some cases adult siblings can have a  sufficiently  strong
              bond between them. There was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
              sponsor's evidence was not credible. There was no  reason  to
              doubt that there was a strong relationship between the second
              appellant and her brother in the UK. He  accepts  that  there
              was a justifiable reason for the appellants to want  to  come
              the UK. He accepts that there is still a  justifiable  reason
              for the appellants to want to come to the UK namely, to visit
              their  nephew's  grave,  to  visit  the  second   appellant's
              father's grave, and to take  part  in  the  annual  religious
              ceremony to mark the death of the second appellant's  nephew.
              He accepts that the second appellants (sic) brother  and  her
              sister-in-law would have been traumatised with the  death  of
              their child  and  that  they  would  have  wanted  moral  and
              emotional support from the appellants. Mr Graham stated  that
              he accepts that there are good and strong  ties  between  the
              second appellant and her brother in the UK  and  that  it  is
              arguable that they may satisfy article 8 of the ECHR."

 7. Further that the Judge had then gone  on  throughout  the  decision  to
    consider what amounted to a "traditional family visit" where  emotional
    ties had gone beyond the norm. This case is very  similar  to  that  of
    Abbasi and whilst ultimately the decision here might not  be  one  that
    other Judges might come to it nonetheless was open to be  made  on  the
    findings.

 8. I find that that is the case. I have deliberately set out paragraphs 46
    and 47 of the Judge's decision as I find  that  they  do  amount  to  a
    concession by the Home Office Presenting Officer  that  the  Appellants
    have given credible evidence as to the existence of family  life.  That
    being the case Mr Whitwell's arguments in relation to the Judge  erring
    so far as private life rights are concerned fall away.  The  Judge  has
    then considered  relevant  authority  and  effectively  carried  out  a
    balancing exercise before coming to the conclusions that he did. Whilst
    I appreciate Mr Whitwell's submissions in relation to paragraphs 55  to
    57 of the Judge's decision I nonetheless look  at  the  appeal  in  the
    context of the concessions that I find have been  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at hearing and in those circumstances conclude  that
    the Judge was entitled to deal with the appeal in the way that  he  did
    and conclude that the Appellants should both succeed.

 9. I emphasise that each case turns upon its own facts and here  there  is
    in my view a concession made by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  at
    hearing which entitled the Judge to come to a decision that was open to
    be made on the evidence.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










