

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/02149/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 12 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (Abu Dhabi)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          AKHTAR AZIZA SYEDA RIZVI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr P Wilding, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    .No representative


                                  DECISION

   1. The Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") has  been  granted  permission  to
      appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Rourke  who,
      by a decision promulgated on 19  January  2016,  allowed  Mrs  Rizvi's
      appeal against refusal to grant entry  clearance  as  a  visitor.  The
      decision to refuse entry clearance was made on 26 February 2015 and so
      Mrs Rizvi was able to challenge the decision only on  the  basis  that
      refusal  brought  about  an  impermissible  infringement   of   rights
      protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.


   2. Although the respondent does not have  legal  representation  in  this
      appeal, as was the case before the First-tier Tribunal,  her  son,  Dr
      Syed Khurram Raza, attended and spoke on her behalf.


   3. The ECO refused the application for entry clearance for  a  number  of
      reasons.  On the basis of the evidence  provided  the  income  of  Mrs
      Rizvi's son, who was to sponsor and fund the proposed visit, could not
      be verified; given her history  of  previous  extended  stays  in  the
      United Kingdom, he was not satisfied that a brief family visit was all
      that was genuinely intended;  the  applicant's  own  circumstances  in
      Pakistan, including the whereabouts of  her  husband,  were  uncertain
      which reinforced concerns about her intentions.


   4. The judge was satisfied that the ECO was correct to conclude that  Mrs
      Rizvi could not meet the requirements of the immigration  rules.  This
      was because, having reviewed her history of previous  visits,  he  was
      satisfied that she had not  correctly  identified  her  intentions  in
      securing previous grants of entry clearance as a visitor, recording at
      paragraph 16 of his decision :


           "I find, therefore, that the Appellant's intention has not  been
           to visit UK, but effectively reside here for large parts of each
           year and thus she has failed to comply with the rules."


   5. In reaching that conclusion the judge made a number of clear  findings
      of fact:

        a. In the past four years Mrs Rizvi  had  spent  no  less  than  28
           months in the United Kingdom;

        b. During those visits there had been no concerns about maintenance
           and accommodation, and no  reason  to  suppose  there  would  be
           during any future visit;

        c. Mrs Rizvi's husband also held a valid visit visa;

        d. The duration of her intended stay as set out in her  application
           was "a best guess" and could well be more than  the  two  months
           stated;

        e. Mrs Rizvi has three sons living in the United  Kingdom  each  of
           whom continue to visit her in Pakistan "in rotation";

        f. Mrs Rizvi's brother, Mr Sued Rizvi, has serious health  problems
           and if not granted entry clearance for this visit, she  may  not
           see him again before his death in the United Kingdom.


   6. The judge found that article 8 of the ECHR was engaged:


           "I do consider, in this case that there has been an interference
           with the right to respect for family life as, in the  connection
           between  the  Appellant  and  her  son,  there  are  exceptional
           circumstances,  such  as  dependency   and   long   periods   of
           cohabitation. I also note that the Appellant wants to visit  her
           elderly and very ill brother."


      And went on to give  the  following  reasons  for  finding  that  such
      interference would be disproportionate:


           "... it is entirely possible that the appellant will not be able
           to see her brother before his death and  her  brother  will  not
           have the comfort of the visit of his only sister."


            "It is uncontested that the Appellant has always, in the  past,
           complied with visa requirements..."


           "Her sons clearly have been able to more than adequately support
           and accommodate her."


           "A short-term visa would allow her to  comfort  her  brother  at
           perhaps the end of his life, without allowing her to repeat  her
           previous pattern of effective shared residence."

   7. And so, on that basis, the judge allowed the appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds.

   8. The grounds upon which the ECO has been granted permission  to  appeal
      are that if the judge is to be taken as having found that family  life
      existed between Mrs Rizvi  and  her  adult  relatives  in  the  United
      Kingdom then he was wrong to do so. Therefore, article 8 was not  even
      engaged. In purporting to  strike  a  balance  between  the  competing
      interests in play, the judge failed to have proper regard to the  fact
      that she had  not  disclosed  her  true  intention  in  seeking  entry
      clearance. Family life was not established between Mrs Rizvi  and  her
      brother for the purposes of article 8 and she received regular  visits
      from her sons and so the refusal did not interfere with  that  pattern
      of visits.


   9. I have no doubt at all that the judge made a material error of law  in
      arriving at his decision to allow this  appeal.  First,  there  is  no
      sustainable finding that family life existed between Mrs Rizvi and her
      brother,  and  nor  could  there  be  as  that  was  not   conceivably
      established on the evidence. Second, although at paragraph 19  of  the
      decision the judge said that there  were  "exceptional  circumstances,
      such as dependency and long periods of co-habitation", nowhere in  the
      decision is to be found any  reasoning  to  support  such  conclusion.
      Therefore, it was not open to the judge to allow the appeal  on  human
      rights grounds on the basis of the relationships with either her  sons
      either. Her sons had established a pattern of regular visits to her in
      the past that would continue  in  the  future  and  so  there  was  no
      rational basis for allowing the appeal of someone who could  not  meet
      the requirements of the rules on human rights grounds on  that  basis.
      The judge has failed altogether to have regard to the public  interest
      arguments in play. As was observed by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   Kaur
      (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC) at paras 24 and 25:

           " 24. It is also important to bear in mind that  there  are  two
           dimensions to the way in which the immigration rules  serve  the
           public interest: not just on the general level, by setting out a
           regulatory  framework  of  immigration   control   and   thereby
           establishing "a reasonable relationship with the requirements of
           Article 8 in the ordinary run of cases" (SS  (Congo)  at  [40]);
           but also  on  the  particular  level,  by  establishing  in  any
           individual case why a grant of entry clearance  is  not  in  the
           public interest.  Accordingly we are entitled to  consider  that
           when  a  visit  is  refused  because  of  failure  to  meet  the
           requirements of paragraph 41, that ordinarily shows that  it  is
           not considered in the public interest for a visit to be  granted
           in those circumstances.


          25. Against this background, the need (emphasised  in  Adjei)  to
          look at the extent to which the applicant is said to have  failed
          to meet the  requirements  of  the  rules  is  important  for  an
          additional reason.  For if an applicant has failed  to  meet  the
          rules, that is apt to demonstrate that  the  refusal  is  in  the
          public interest at a general and particular level."

  10. Having found as a fact that Mrs Rizvi had, to put it as generously  as
      possible, misused the visitor route to entry clearance in the past  so
      that that the application was correctly refused under the  immigration
      rules, and having failed to identify any sustainable basis upon  which
      it  could  be  demonstrated  that  protected  family  life  had   been
      established, either with her adult sons or with her brother,   it  was
      not reasonably open to the  judge  to  find  that  this  appeal  could
      succeed on the basis of rights protected by article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Further, the only real point identified by the judge  as  speaking  in
      the respondent's favour was the fact that there had  been  significant
      periods of cohabitation with her sons in the United  Kingdom  but,  of
      course, it was precisely because she had done so  while  present  with
      leave granted for a brief family visit that the application was  found
      to be one that fell to be refused under the immigration rules. It  was
      a clear error of law, also, for the judge to leave out of  account  in
      assessing proportionality of the refusal the fact that the failure  to
      meet the requirements  of  the  rules  in  those  circumstances  spoke
      cogently against the grant of leave as  a  visitor  on  the  basis  of
      article 8 rights.


  11. For these reasons the decision of the judge to allow the appeal is set
      aside and a fresh decision must be made to allow  or  to  dismiss  the
      appeal.


  12. Dr Raza was invited to make submissions in respect of the  respondent.
      He accepted that as the real intention was  for  his  mother  to  live
      permanently with him and his brothers at  their  family  home  in  the
      United  Kingdom,  the  application  for  a  visit  visa  was  not  the
      appropriate one to make. He recognised that as the real intention  was
      that his mother should reside permanently in the United Kingdom at the
      home shared by his brothers and himself, the  appropriate  application
      was for entry clearance as a dependant relative. He is satisfied  that
      such an application would meet  the  requirements  of  the  applicable
      rule, given that he could point to the fact that they had accommodated
      his mother in the family home for 28 months during the last four years
      during which  period  she  had  been  maintained  comfortably  without
      recourse to public funds.  He explained  how  that  would  be  a  more
      satisfactory way of providing for his  mother,  in  any  event.  While
      reliance had been placed on securing lengthy periods of  residence  in
      the United Kingdom on the basis of applications for entry clearance as
      a visitor, it had been necessary for him or one  of  his  brothers  to
      accompany his mother on her return to Pakistan to await the grant of a
      fresh visit visa before returning to the United Kingdom. This involved
      considerably unnecessary expense as well as disruption of  the  family
      life of the brother concerned.


  13. Why, then, did the respondent not simply apply for entry clearance  as
      a dependant relative? The answer provided by Dr Reza is  one  that  is
      discouraging. He explained that although the  family  was  financially
      secure and so could comfortably meet any financial requirements of the
      immigration  rules  and  there  was  ample  and  clearly  satisfactory
      accommodation and support available for his mother, it  was  generally
      recognised that it was  extremely  difficult  to  secure  a  dependant
      relative visa and the likelihood was a refusal that would have  to  be
      challenged on  appeal,  which  could  take  a  year  to  be  resolved.
      Meanwhile, the respondent was anxious to be  able  to  travel  to  the
      United Kingdom because her brother is seriously ill and  she,  as  his
      only sister, is intent upon seeing him before his death.


  14. Having heard at some length from Dr Raza I have no hesitation, at all,
      in finding him to be a witness of complete integrity who has disclosed
      with commendable frankness the true position as  it  presents  itself.
      Even though he now properly accepts that the application was correctly
      refused under the immigration rules, I have no doubt  whatsoever  that
      in bringing his mother to stay for extended periods on  the  basis  of
      securing entry clearance as a visitor he had no intention, and nor did
      she, of acting in a way that was contrary to the  terms  of  the  visa
      granted or exploitative. He points  out  that  his  mother  has  never
      overstayed any period of leave granted and would  not  do  so  in  the
      future.


  15. However, I can see no proper basis for  allowing  the  appeal  against
      refusal of entry clearance as a visitor, because  entry  clearance  is
      not sought for that purpose but so that the respondent can remain with
      her relatives in the United Kingdom.  On the  basis  of  the  evidence
      provided today by Dr Reza it may well be that it is  now  possible  to
      put forward evidence of special dependency  such  as  is  required  to
      establish  the  existence  of  protected  family  life   between   the
      respondent and her sons. That takes the respondent no further in  this
      appeal because it cannot be the case that rights protected by  article
      8 could be deployed to secure the grant of leave  as  a  visitor  when
      that is not the nature of the leave in fact sought.


  16. It is to be hoped and expected that if the respondent now submits  the
      application that is the appropriate  one  for  her  to  pursue,  as  a
      dependant relative, the Entry Clearance Officer will take note of  the
      need for a rapid decision so that,  if  granted,  the  respondent  can
      travel to the United Kingdom to see her brother while that is still  a
      possibility. The respondent and her sons will also need to ensure that
      they are fully sighted upon the current requirements  to  be  met  and
      that sufficient evidence is provided in support of the application. In
      that regard they will wish to consider carefully the current published
      guidance in the IDIs. In particular, they will, no doubt, ensure  that
      evidence is provided of the reason for and the nature of  the  support
      provided to their mother when participating in the pattern of visiting
      now established by the appellant's sons and why, for example,  it  was
      not considered sufficient  to  provide  the  financial  resources  for
      someone else to provide that support to the respondent in Pakistan.


   Summary of decision:


  17. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke made an error of  law  such  as  to
      require that his decision to allow the appeal is set aside.


  18. I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss  Mrs  Rizvi's  appal  against
      refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor.
  19. Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    5 April 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


