
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02821/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 September 2016                     |On 03 October 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RABHA GHOUAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a national of Algeria. In  a
    decision sent  on  16  March  22016  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Swinnerton allowed her appeal on the basis of being satisfied "that the
    [claimant] meets the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules". The appellant (hereafter the ECO) has permission  to  challenge
    that decision.

2.   Prior  to  the  hearing  in  a  letter  dated  14  September  2016  the
    claimant's representatives wrote stating that the  claimant  no  longer
    intends to participate in the forthcoming appeal as  she  has  acquired
    French nationality.  Had  this  letter  specifically  requested  me/the
    Upper Tribunal Judge to treat the appeal as  withdrawn,  I  would  have
    done so on these bare facts.  However the letter limited  itself  to  a
    notification of non-participation and indeed contemplates that  I  will
    dismiss the appeal ("We would be grateful if you could notify  us  once
    the appeal has been dismissed").

3.   Accordingly I proceed to dispose of the appeal. However my decision  is
    to allow the ECO's appeal. It was manifestly wrong of the FtT judge  to
    have allowed the appeal under para  41  of  the  Rules  as  he  had  no
    jurisdiction to do so.  By virtue of changes made to  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  amending  s.55A,  the  only  grounds
    available in visitor cases are human rights or race discrimination.

4.   If the judge's reasons  had  established  in  substance  that  the  ECO
    decision was contrary to human rights or anti-discrimination law, I may
    have still accepted the decision to allow the claimant's appeal as  not
    materially wrong. But the judge failed to address these at all  and  on
    the stated facts there was at most sufficient evidence of the existence
    of family life (the claimant being married to  Mr  Mustapha  Badoioui).
    There was not sufficient evidence either of an interference  with  that
    right or a disproportionate interference.  In particular,  it  had  not
    been established why it would violate Article 8 if the couple  were  to
    continue to enjoy family life in France, where the sponsor had visited.

5.   Accordingly, the FtT judge materially erred in law.

Notice of Decision

6.   For the above reasons:

    The FtT materially erred in law.

7.   The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal as  she  has
    not established that her Article 8 rights would be violated.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 30 September 2016
                  [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

