
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02880/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th October 2016                      |On 28th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dhabi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mrs Zaheda Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, Khirri Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO") has been granted permission  to
    appeal against the decision of a First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gribble)
    which in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19th  April  2016  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against  the  ECO's  refusal  to  grant  her  entry
    clearance for the purposes of a family visit.  For the sake of  clarity
    throughout this decision, I shall  refer  to  the  respondent  as  "the
    Claimant" reflection her position before the FtT.

Background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born 6th August 1949.  She is now
    67 years of age.  She applied for entry clearance  so  that  she  could
    visit her adult son ("the Sponsor").  She also intended  to  visit  her
    elderly mother and various other family members, all of  whom  live  in
    the UK.  Her mother is now 86 years of age and is unable to  travel  on
    account of her age related illnesses.

 3. It is correct to say that the Appellant has visited the UK in the  past
    and returned to Pakistan at the end of those visits.  She has also been
    refused entry in the past.

 4. The ECO in the present appeal, after  consideration  of  the  documents
    before him, refused the Claimant's application under  paragraph  41  of
    the Immigration Rules. He was  not  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  was
    genuinely seeking entry as a visitor only  and  that  she  intended  to
    leave the UK at the end of her visit.  The grounds leading the  ECO  to
    make this decision centred on the following factors.  She  lives  alone
    in her property in Pakistan.  All her near family relatives live in the
    UK. The only relatives living in Pakistan are a maternal uncle and  his
    wife who live nearby. She  is  financially  supported  by  the  Sponsor
    having no source of income of  her  own.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied
    therefore that the Appellant had shown sufficient ties to Pakistan such
    as to ensure she would return and that she was a genuine visitor.

 5.  The  Claimant  appealed  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer's   decision
    acknowledging that her only route of appeal was upon a claim  that  the
    refusal infringed her rights protected by Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The
    grounds put the Claimant's case on this basis:

         "This family visitor case was progressed from  the  outset  on  the
         basis that the Appellant intends to visit her British  Sponsor  son
         Mr Nadeem Akhtar, her British widowed mother Mrs Farzand Begum, her
         six British siblings including her eldest  brother  and  additional
         family members in the United Kingdom for four months.

         The supporting paperwork including our firm Khirri Solicitors cover
         representations letter dated 19th February  2015,  the  Appellant's
         letter dated 19th February 2015 her  maternal  uncle  Mr  Mohammed
         Zaman Choudhry plus this uncle's wife Mrs  Maqsood  Begum's  letter
         also dated 19th February 2015, the sponsorship declaration and  the
         submitted medical evidence, clearly set out that the named  widowed
         mother and named eldest brother are as a result of their ill-health
         unable to travel to Pakistan  at  the  present  time  and  for  the
         foreseeable future".

The FtT Hearing

 6. When the Claimant's appeal came before the FtT, the judge was handed  a
    letter from the Appellant's widowed mother Mrs Begum. This  letter  was
    only handed in at the hearing and was of course evidence which the  ECO
    had not seen, when making his decision. The ECO was not represented  at
    the FtT hearing.

 7. The judge when reaching his decision placed  great  reliance  upon  the
    evidence contained in the letter. He found the letter showed  that  the
    Appellant and her mother were "very close emotionally" on  this  basis.
    It would seem that the Appellant became a widow in 1991  following  the
    death of her husband after a long illness.  Her mother stayed with  her
    in Pakistan from March 1989 to August 1991 to help her  care  for  him.
    Likewise when Mrs Begum's husband, the appellant's  father  suffered  a
    stroke in Pakistan in 1990 she was helped in  caring  for  him  by  the
    Appellant.  This, it was said, meant a " close bond" was formed between
    the Appellant and her mother.

 8. The judge found that he had no reason to doubt the documentary evidence
    before him and no reason to  doubt  the  contents  of  the  letter.  He
    recorded that "this suggests and the copy passports confirm,  that  the
    Appellant's mother had spent a great many years in  Pakistan  with  the
    Appellant due to them jointly caring for the  Appellant's  husband  and
    later the Appellant's father."  He  then  made  a  finding  that  these
    amount to rather unique circumstances.  On this basis, he  allowed  the
    appeal.

Onward Appeal

 9. The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds seeking permission set out that the FtT had misdirected  itself
    in law in the following way.  The FtT had found incorrectly, that there
    was family life between the Appellant and Mrs Begum. That  finding  was
    based on  a  misapplication  of  the  relevant  jurisprudence  and  was
    therefore improperly reasoned. The grounds went  on  to  say  that  the
    ECO's case is that the "status quo" between remains and that  therefore
    there were simply no grounds available for allowing to  the  judge  for
    finding that family life had been interfered with.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Mrs Pettersen appeared for the ECO; Mr Khan for the Claimant.
     Mrs Pettersen's submissions followed the grounds  seeking  permission.
    As I understand them, they were twofold;

      1) First it could not be said that Article 8 family life  was  engaged
         on the facts put forward in this  appeal.  The  FtT's  reasons  for
         saying Article 8  was  engaged  were  misconceived.   The  "unique"
         relationship between the Appellant and her mother,  which  is  what
         was relied upon in this appeal could not be  categorised  as  other
         than normal emotional ties between adult relatives.

      2) Further the FtT's in [41] that the Immigration Rules  were  met  in
         this appeal was inadequately reasoned  and  could  not  assist  the
         Appellant in any event.

11. Mr Khan, on behalf of the Claimant, submitted that the judge  had  made
    fully reasoned findings on  why  the  ECO's  decision  amounted  to  an
    interference with the Appellant's Article 8 family life.  The judge had
    found that the emotional ties between the Appellant and her mother were
    greater than  normal  emotional  ties.  Reasons  were  given  for  that
    finding. The decision should stand.

12. Added into this equation, the Appellant's mother was  now  too  old  to
    travel.  By refusing the application the  ECO  was  breaking  the  bond
    between  the  Appellant  and  her  mother  and  this  amounted  to   an
    unjustifiable interference.

13. Mr Khan added that having found that Article 8  was  engaged,  the  FtT
    judge had gone on to make a finding at [17] that  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules were met.  He pointed  out  that  the  judge  had
    taken into consideration Section 117B of the 2002 Act and had therefore
    allowed  the  appeal.   Those  considerations  amounted  to  sufficient
    reasons and the decision should stand.

14. At the close of submissions I reserved my decision, but did enquire  of
    the parties, in the event that I found material error  of  law  whether
    the decision could be remade by me.  Mr Khan expressed the view that in
    the event of an error being found, the matter should be set  aside  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing and for  that
    Tribunal to re-make the decision. However, he was unable  to  say  what
    further evidence would be available and what further submissions  would
    be made.

Consideration

15. I am satisfied  that  the  FtT  decision  discloses  an  error  of  law
    requiring the decision to be set aside  and  remade.   I  now  give  my
    reasons for this.

16. The starting point  in  this  appeal  and  the  first  question  to  be
    addressed is whether Article 8, ECHR is engaged at all.  This  approach
    is on the basis that the  sole  ground  for  appeal  available  to  the
    Appellant is that the ECO's  decision  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with her  Article  8  rights.  (Race  relations  does  not
    feature in this appeal)

17. At [19] after discussing the circumstances on whether family  life  can
    be said to be engaged between adults, and after  reminding  himself  of
    the decision in Singh and Another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 the judge said the following;

         "In this case I find on  the  evidence  that  there  is  'something
         more'.  There is a deep mutual appreciation between the women  that
         goes beyond mere love and affection".

18. The evidential basis  for  this  finding  relies  upon  historic  facts
    relating to the mutual support that the Appellant and her  mother  gave
    one another when their respective husbands were ill. There is no  clear
    reasoning why the judge finds that those facts (as  unchallenged)  show
    that this support is more than the normal emotional ties between  adult
    relatives.  What  is  described  is  what  happens  in  normal   family
    circumstances.  Whilst the judge correctly referred to Singh  and  Anor
    when saying that there has to be something more than  normal  emotional
    ties between adult relatives I find  he  should  have  drawn  upon  the
    guidance set out in the Court of Appeal case of Kugathas EWCA Civ  2003
    which clearly sets out the propositions that;

         (1) Generally the protection of  family  life  involves  cohabiting
         dependents in the same country

         (2) relationships between adults would not necessarily acquire  the
         protection of article 8 without further elements of dependency.

19. In the present appeal, both women have lived apart for  several  years.
    The Appellant has her home in Pakistan and manages her life there.  Her
    mother lives in the UK and  has  done  for  many  years.  There  is  no
    question of financial dependency upon  one  another.  Both  women  live
    their lives apart and have done for many years. I find  therefore  that
    the judge erred in saying that Article 8 was engaged in this case.

20. The Appellant wishes to visit her family abroad but the ECO refused the
    application under paragraph 41 of the Rules looking at the  application
    from the point of view of the public interest being protected.  He made
    a decision that the Appellant was not a  genuine  visitor.  No  grounds
    were put before the ECO to show that there was a particularly  pressing
    reason or the visit.  The Appellant's mother is elderly and  unable  to
    travel herself but the application was made on the basis that this  was
    no more than a visit to see family relatives.  Certainly  none  of  the
    contents of the letter were placed before the ECO.

21. Finally it is right to say that the judge seemingly finds at [17], that
    having accepted the " unique circumstances" which he sets out  in  [16]
    he is satisfied that immigration rules are met  in  this  case.  It  is
    unclear what it is the judge is saying here,  but  I  do  not  see  any
    proper reasoned findings of why he says the Immigration Rules are  met.
    I  assume  that  this  is  something  which  may  be  factored  into  a
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 outside the  Rules.  However
    in undertaking that assessment  the  judge  looks  at  and  takes  into
    account S117B, and says at [21] and again at [23] that  the  "Appellant
    is financially independent" It is hard to see where  the  evidence  for
    this finding comes from.  So far as  I  can  see  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, contained in the documents submitted,  shows  that  far  from
    being  financially  independent  she  is  in  fact  financially  wholly
    dependent upon her UK relatives, mainly her son. This  is  one  of  the
    features which no doubt  was  in  the  ECO's  mind  when  refusing  the
    application in the first place.

22. For the foregoing reasons I am satisfied that the decision of  the  FtT
    discloses material error of law and I set it aside. The ECO's appeal is
    allowed. There being no further evidence to put before me I remake  the
    decision.  I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  dismissing  the   appeal.



Notice of Decision

The ECO's appeal is allowed.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
set aside. I remake the decision dismissing the original appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the original appeal, I make no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


