

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: va/02989/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 18 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BILPIN KUMAR YADAV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan, Maya and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant in this appeal was the Respondent in the appeal before  the
   First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Respondent  the  Appellant.  For  ease  of
   reference I refer to them as the Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  Claimant
   respectively. The Claimant is a citizen of India born on 10 June 1987. On
   31 March 2014 he applied for a visit visa. He was refused entry clearance
   on 3 April 2014. He appealed  that  decision  under  section  82  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was  limited  by
   section 84 (1) (c) of the same Act. His appeal was allowed by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge D S Borsada in a decision promulgated on 19 March 2015.


2. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision.
   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  on  1  June
   2015 on the basis that there was an absence of any mention in  the  brief
   decision of consideration whether the connections  between  the  Claimant
   and the sponsor went beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties.  It  was  also
   considered by Judge Lambert that there was arguably inadequate  reasoning
   as to why the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  was  disproportionate
   given the availability of a fresh application.

   The Grounds


3. The grounds assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
   account relevant case law as to the  existence  of  family  life  between
   adult siblings. Whilst the sponsor and  family  are  described  as  close
   family relatives in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  the  Judge  had
   failed to give reasons to address the Entry Clearance  Officer's  concern
   that the Claimant was unable to answer basic questions about his  cousin,
   the sponsor, with whom the Judge described him as having  a  particularly
   close relationship.  It  is  argued  that  the  finding  is  inadequately
   reasoned and is not borne out by the evidence  and  that  the  Claimant's
   family life was with his relatives in India, rather than those in the UK.
   Further, the proportionality assessment was  inadequate  as  it  did  not
   explain why the refusal of a visa which only allowed the  parties  to  be
   together  temporarily  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with
   Article 8 rights. The Judge was using Article 8 as a  general  dispensing
   power.


   The Hearing


4. Mr Mills acknowledged that Judge Bosarda dealt  the  appeal  with  before
   there was much case law on Article 8 and visit appeals. Only if Article 8
   was engaged then the Judge needed to look at  paragraph  41.  In  Mostafa
   (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal
   considered that it would  only  be  in  unusual  circumstances  that  the
   refusal of entry clearance would come within 8 (1). This relationship was
   that of a cousin. It was not open to  the  Judge  to  find  that  it  was
   properly engaged. None of the reasoning could be criticized in the  plain
   meaning of the words but in the legal sense it was wrong. There needed to
   be dependency and something compelling. This was a cousin who  wanted  to
   visit. Mr Chohan had made points about ECO's in Dehli but  this  was  not
   relevant. The decision should be set aside and dismissed outright.


5. Mr Chohan submitted that the case of Mostafa was  not  prescriptive.  The
   submission was  that  Judge  Bosarda  did  consider  the  facts  and  the
   circumstances and the fact that the ECO had gone beyond the normal  remit
   by exploring determinations from previous hearings. There was a  coherent
   consideration. Mostafa was promulgated after the Judge's decision and  it
   did not seek to suggest that the relationship  was  excluded.  There  was
   very little opportunity for him to satisfy the requirements  of  a  visit
   visa in the future.


6. Mr Mills submitted that there were a number of authorities  going  up  to
   Strasbourg stating that more than normal ties were are required.

   Discussion and Findings


7. I have had regard to Mr Chohan's skeleton argument before  coming  to  my
   conclusions in this appeal.


8. With effect from 25 June 2013, section 52 of the  Crime  and  Courts  Act
   2013 amended section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
   2002 so that there is no right of appeal against  the  refusal  of  entry
   clearance in a family visitor case except on grounds  alleging  that  the
   decision shows unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under section 6  of
   the Human Rights Act 1998.

9. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article  8.  The  appeal
   before the First-tier Tribunal had proceeded by way of submissions  only.
   The entry clearance officer had refused the application on  a  number  of
   grounds, one of which was  that  on  the  basis  of  past  interviews  in
   relation to previous applications the Claimant was unable to answer basic
   questions about his claimed cousin. In the Claimant's  witness  statement
   before the First-tier Tribunal he stated that he was the  sponsor  Ramon-
   deep Manak's nephew. He said that they saw each  other  as  brothers  and
   that when asked to  explain  the  relationship  by  the  Entry  Clearance
   Officer he said  that  Ramon-deep's  father  and  his  father  were  like
   cousins. He states that he did not state that his father and Ramon-deep's
   father were biological brothers.  He  then  states  that  they  were  not
   closely related.


10. With regard to other relatives in the UK, the  Claimant  stated  in  his
   witness statement that he has an aunt in  the  UK  who  is  his  father's
   biological sister. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings at
   paragraph 7 of the decision in relation to the existence of family life:


      "Turning to the human rights appeal: I am satisfied that  family  life
      exists between the appellant and his UK relatives and in particular  I
      accept that he has a particularly close relationship  with  Ramon-deep
      Singh Manak, his cousin. That relationship has clearly existed  for  a
      long time and given that the appellant has had several visits  to  the
      UK before, an important part of that relationship has  involved  'face
      to face' visits. There is also the not unreasonable desire  to  attend
      family weddings in this country which he has done  so  in  the  recent
      past. The appellant clearly  has  a  rich  family  life  with  his  UK
      relatives and this has always meant visits to the UK for such  special
      family occasions. In those circumstances I am  satisfied  that  family
      life does exist in this case and that  such  is  the  nature  of  that
      interference that the operation of Article 8 has been fully engaged."

11. There was a clear issue with regard to the nature and  strength  of  the
   Claimant's relationship with the sponsor. The First-tier Tribunal did not
   have the benefit of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
   00112 (IAC) and subsequent cases on the application of Article 8 in entry
   clearance cases. However, it is settled law that the existence of  family
   life is not confined to parents and children and  may  include  the  ties
   between near relatives. Family life will not normally exist between adult
   relatives for Article 8 (1) purposes unless there is dependency over  and
   above normal emotional ties: see Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  and  Singh
   and Another [2015] EWCA Civ 74. The First-tier Tribunal failed to  direct
   itself in relation to the applicable law and made no findings to  resolve
   the issue in relation to the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
   sponsor and the Claimant which was highlighted  in  the  entry  clearance
   decision. He did not find more than the normal  emotional  ties.  In  the
   circumstances the First-tier Tribunal failed to give  sufficient  reasons
   for finding that family life existed.


12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error
   of law. I was asked by Mr Mills to re-make the decision in the appeal  by
   dismissing it. However, I consider  that  this  is  a  case  where  clear
   findings of fact need to be made regarding the relationship  between  the
   Claimant  and  sponsor  and  his  other  UK  relatives.  The   First-tier
   Tribunal's findings did not adequately address the matters in issue and I
   find that in the light of Part 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements for the
   Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper-Tier
   Tribunal, the extent of judicial fact finding is such  that  this  matter
   should be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.


13. There was no direction for anonymity and  none  is  appropriate  on  the
   facts of the case.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set  aside  and  in  the
   light of the fact finding required the appeal will be heard in the First-
   tier Tribunal.


15. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date 18 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
