
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2015                            |On 10th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              ms Sylvia Dacres
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - kingston

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Muirhead (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup, promulgated on 14th November 2014, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on 3rd November 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Sylvia Dacres.  The  Respondent  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Jamaica who was born on  4th  July
    1942.  She  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 26th March 2014, refusing her application  for
    an entry clearance to visit her sponsoring daughter  and  her  husband,
    both of whom are present and settled in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  sponsoring  daughter,  Mrs  Dixon
    Wynter, that the Appellant was her mother.  The Appellant, when she was
    a child, lost her speech, but this  aside,  she  has  no  other  health
    problems.  She took work as a domestic worker in Jamaica.  She married.
     She then separated from her husband, Mrs Dixon Wynter sends  money  to
    Jamaica.  However, the  Appellant  also  has  five  other  children  in
    Jamaica "who all help her and seventeen grandchildren two of whom  live
    in the UK.  They are 21 and 7 years old".  (Paragraph 10).

 4. It is a feature of this appeal that, "the Appellant has been to the  UK
    twice, in 2004 for a wedding and in 2007 for a funeral" and always  she
    has returned back to Jamaica (paragraph 11).

 5. The judge at the outset made it clear that, in circumstances where  the
    Appellant was unrepresented by a legal representative, that,  "although
    there is no express reference to Article 8, I find that the appeal does
    give rise to Article 8 issues" (paragraph 7).  But the judge also added
    that, "I will also consider whether, notwithstanding  the  concerns  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer, the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules," because "the burden of proof is
    on the Appellant to show that she met the requirements of the Rules  at
    the date of the decision and that her appeal should  succeed  on  human
    rights grounds" (paragraph 8).

 6. The judge then observed that the Entry Clearance Officer had  expressed
    concerns with respect to the Appellant's financial circumstances.   She
    held that this omission "was addressed and the appeal bundle  contains"
    an account (paragraph 15).  The judge also observed that, as far as the
    Appellant was concerned, "she has the good fortune to have a large  and
    supportive family in Jamaica and is also in receipt of payments made by
    her daughter in the UK" although her financial circumstances in Jamaica
    "are not good and she is dependent on her family" (paragraph 16).

 7. It was in these circumstances that the  judge  went  on  to  then  make
    specific findings in relation to  the  application  for  a  visit  visa
    itself.  The judge observed that  consideration  had  to  be  given  to
    whether the Appellant intends to settle  unlawfully  in  this  country,
    whether she has a good immigration history, whether she has substantial
    ties to Jamaica, and whether the credibility of the Sponsor is  in  her
    favour (paragraph 18).  Against this background, the judge  held  that,
    "the Appellant has visited the UK before without difficulty and  would,
    ............ , have been looking forward to this visit".   He  observed
    that the chances of her seeing her relatives in the UK  could  only  be
    exercised "infrequently" given the nature  of  the  position  that  the
    Appellant was in.  (Paragraph  22).   Therefore,  the  judge  concluded
    that, "I find that Article 8 can be engaged  when  a  family  visit  is
    refused and I find it is engaged in this case in which the  Appellant's
    family would appear to be of great importance  to  her".   Given  these
    findings, the judge then turned to the burden  of  proof  and  observed
    that,  "it  is  for  the  Respondent  to  show  that  the  decision  is
    proportionate, in other words that it is an appropriate response to the
    concerns identified by her" (paragraph 24).  Regard was  given  by  the
    judge to the fact that he was "considering  whether  a  genuine,  short
    ............ family visit to a daughter who  is  working  and  who  can
    accommodate  the  Appellant  has  any  adverse  impact  on  the  public
    interest" (paragraph 24),  and  especially  when  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 "are met and in  particular  that  the  Appellant  intends
    returning to Jamaica" (paragraph 24).  The judge held that the decision
    by the Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  in  circumstances  where
    Article 8 was engaged, was not a proportionate  one.   The  appeal  was
    allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred by not  assessing
    whether Article 8 was engaged through any form of  dependency  and  the
    proportionality  exercise  was  inadequate.   On  7th   January   2015,
    permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 30th March 2015,  Ms  Kenny,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, placed reliance  upon
    the case of MS (Article 8 - Family Life - Dependency - Proportionality)
    Uganda  [2004]  UKIAT  00064,  and  emphasised  the   requirement   for
    "dependency".  In that case the Tribunal made it  clear  that,  "it  is
    accepted law that in circumstances where family life is put forward  as
    existing between an adult child and his parents ... there  need  to  be
    further elements of dependence involving  more  than  emotional  family
    ties ...".  The judge in this case had not been able to show  what  the
    extra element of dependency was over and above emotional  family  ties.
    Therefore, he had erred in law.

10. For his part, Mr Muirhead submitted that the  Appellant  had  lost  the
    power of speech when she was a child and this was noted by the judge at
    paragraph 16 of  the  determination.   He  drew  my  attention  to  his
    skeleton argument.  He submitted that  the  case  of  MS  (Uganda),  as
    relied upon by the Respondent, was disingenuous.  These cases all  deal
    with applicants  who  do  not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  who  are
    overstayers who have breached the  Immigration  Rules,  and  were  then
    seeking leave to remain in the UK beyond that which is allowed  by  the
    Rules.

11. The right approach, submitted Mr Muirhead, was that  set  down  by  the
    House of Lords as long ago as the case of Beoku-Betts [2008]  UKHL  39,
    which makes it clear that the family life  has  to  be  of  the  entire
    family as taken as a social unit, and not simply the family life of the
    single individual who is applying to remain in the UK.   This  is  also
    how the case of Huang [2007] UKHL 11 approached the matter at paragraph
    18 of the determination when the point was made that, "human beings are
    social animals.  They depend on  others.   Their  family,  or  extended
    family, is  the  group  on  which  many  people  must  heavily  depend,
    socially, emotionally and often financially ...".

12. In reply, Ms Kenny submitted that it was not proper  to  refer  to  the
    Immigration Rules because this was an Article 8  appeal  and  therefore
    the position in Article 8 jurisprudence alone must be considered.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

14. Insofar as any suggestion of an "element of  dependency"  is  good,  as
    submitted by Ms Kenny, it is clear that the  judge  did  have  evidence
    before him, which she accepted, of the Appellant being  in  a  position
    where "her financial circumstances in Jamaica are not good and  she  is
    dependent on her family" .  The judge also observed that the  Appellant
    "is also in receipt of  payments  made  by  her  daughter  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 16).  This  plainly  demonstrates  a  dependency  that  goes
    beyond mere emotional ties.  Furthermore,  the  judge  recognised  that
    there was a "close relationship with her daughter in  Jamaica"  between
    the Sponsor and the Appellant, and in the light of the birth of  the  7
    year daughter to the Appellant, these  ties  needed  to  be  maintained
    (paragraph 20).

15. However, the matter does not rest with the requirement, if this  indeed
    be a requirement, of "further elements of dependency".  The case of  MS
    (Uganda) is indeed, as Mr Muirhead makes clear, a case arising  from  a
    situation where the Rules  have  not  been  met,  where  a  person  has
    remained outside the Rules, where there is a degree of  unlawful  stay,
    and where there is an attempt to seek to remain in this country through
    other means.  The position with respect to visit appeals is  quite  the
    opposite.

16. This is clear from the fact that, not only do the cases of  Beoku-Betts
    and Huang address the situation differently, but that the  recent  case
    of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112, now  makes
    it clear that, rather than an "element of dependency" what is necessary
    to  show  is  whether  a  visitor  applicant  can  meet  the   standard
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, because although this is not the
    question to be determined by the Tribunal, it is "capable  of  being  a
    weighty thou  not  determinative  factor  when  deciding  whether  such
    refusal is proportionate".

17. In this case, this is precisely the situation that the judge finds  the
    Appellant in.  The Appellant has visited before.  She came in 2004  for
    a wedding and she came in 2007 for a funeral and  she  always  returned
    (paragraph  11).   There  are  strong  ties  in  her  family  which  is
    commendable for its love and affection  for  each  other  and  for  the
    support that they give each other, and the judge is absolutely clear in
    concluding that the existence of the Appellant's ties  in  Jamaica  are
    such, that she will return back to the country, as she has always  done
    in the past, after making a short visit to see  her  family  "whom  she
    will only see infrequently".  It was for the Respondent Entry Clearance
    Officer to show that the decision was proportionate (see paragraphs  23
    and 24) and this the Respondent failed to do.  There is  no  basis  for
    this Tribunal interfering in this determination.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th April 2015



