
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA022422015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2016                       |On 24 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                VISA OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr SHAHID SOHAIL
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     No attendance and not represented.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This matter comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
       granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dated 20 April 2016.  The
       appeal relates to a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boardman
       promulgated on 19 February 2016. For ease of reference and  for  ease
       in following this decision, I shall continue to refer to Mr Sohail as
       the Appellant and the Visa Officer as the Respondent.


    2. The Judge had allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
       decision to refuse his  application  for  entry  clearance  based  on
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


    3.  The  application  for   entry   clearance   related   to   difficult
       circumstances whereby the Appellant had sought entry  to  the  United
       Kingdom for a period of four weeks to see his brother who was  dying.
       The brother was called Mr Mohammed Arif. Sadly he passed away by  the
       time the appeal came to be heard. The  Sponsor  was  another  of  the
       Appellant's brothers called Mr Ghulam Farid.


    4. The Judge had considered the matter on the papers,  as  requested  by
       the Appellant.


    5. The Respondent's grounds of appeal against the Judge's  decision  can
       be summarised as stating that:


        a) Case law showed that family law within the meaning of Article  8
           will not normally exist between adult siblings;


        b) None of the criteria from the cited case law  was  met  in  this
           case. There was no evidence that the Appellant and Sponsor enjoy
           family life in the United Kingdom;


        c) The Judge referred to the case of Abbasi  and  another  (visits-
           bereavement-Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00463  (IAC)   but   that
           concerned family life of those already in the contracting  state
           and that was not so in this case;


        d) The Judge had not made a finding as the whether paragraph 41  of
           the Immigration Rules had been met and he failed to have  regard
           to the decision in Kaur (visit appeals: Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT
           00487 (IAC); and


        e) The proportionality assessment was not adequate.


    6. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell said that he adopted the grounds
       of appeal. There needed to be something at paragraph 26 which set out
       more because to elaborate it beyond usual family life.  There  was  a
       material misdirection in law. The findings as to proportionality were
       challenged.   Was   the   accommodation   suitable   or   statutorily
       overcrowded? The determination was silent on  whether  the  Appellant
       will return. The public interest depends on the circumstances. It was
       not quite clear. This was factored in at  paragraph  33.  Abbasi  was
       distinguishable. The nature of the family life was that it could  not
       be met elsewhere. The prayers could be repeated elsewhere. It was not
       being said that Abbasi was not good law.


    7. I had reserved my decision.


    8. Firstly dealing with the Respondent's  grounds  that  there  were  no
       adequate findings in respect of accommodation, it is clear  that  the
       ground of appeal is wrong. The Judge noted at paragraph 11, page 4 of
       the decision, that there was a property inspection report before him.
       The Judge then made findings at paragraph 30(e) of his decision  that
       he accepted the  evidence  in  respect  of  the  suitability  of  the
       accommodation.


    9. The Judge also made clear and unequivocal findings in respect of  the
       Appellant's intention to return to Pakistan  after  the  visit.   The
       Judge had seen various net worth and other documents relating to  the
       Appellant.   Therefore  there  is  nothing  in  those  grounds.   The
       Appellant is a businessman running a plastics business  to  which  he
       would return. He also has a family in Pakistan to return to.


   10. The Appellant had visited the United Kingdom in the  past.  This  was
       said to be an opportunity to grieve in England.


   11. It is obvious that being able to pray and to pay one's respects at  a
       grave or monument with other family members who live  in  the  United
       Kingdom is very different from doing so from thousands of miles away.
       This was not lost on the Judge.


   12. It is against the background of the Judge being satisfied in  respect
       of the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules that  he
       went on to consider Article 8. He did so by reference to  the  recent
       case law.


   13. That case law included the decision in Abbasi.  Paragraph  1  of  the
       Judicial headnote makes it clear that,


       1.   The refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking to enter  the
       United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose of  mourning  with
       family members the recent death of a close relative and visiting  the
       grave of the deceased is capable of constituting  a  disproportionate
       interference with the rights of the persons concerned under Article 8
       ECHR.


   14. The Upper Tribunal said at paragraph 12,


       12.  The analysis in [11] above highlights the need for a structured,
       sequential approach in cases of this kind  and  in  Article  8  cases
       generally: see Razgar v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27,  at  [17].  The  first
       question for the tribunal is whether the benefit, or  facility  which
       the Secretary of State is requested to confer  -  in  this  case,  an
       entry visa for the specific and time limited purpose  advanced  -  is
       protected by Article 8. If this yields  an  affirmative  answer,  the
       second question is whether the impugned decision interferes with  the
       claimant's right to respect to private and/or family  life.  If  this
       question also is answered affirmatively, the enquiry then  shifts  to
       the territory of Article 8(2), raising  the  third  question,  namely
       whether any of the specified legitimate  aims  is  engaged.  If  this
       produces  a  negative  answer  a  breach  of  Article  8  is  thereby
       established. On the other hand, if a legitimate  aim  is  identified,
       the fourth, and final,  question  to  be  addressed  is  whether  the
       interference is  a  proportionate  means  of  promoting  the  aim  in
       question. It is in  this  context  and  at  this  stage  that  issues
       relating to the  extent  and  impact  of  the  interference  will  be
       considered in the balancing exercise.


   15. In this case the not only did the Judge refer to the Upper Tribunal's
       decision in Abbasi he also referred to other case law which  included
       references to the Court of Appeal's judgment in Kughathas.


   16. The Judge went through the Razgar v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2004] UKHL 27  matters.  The  Judge  concluded  that  the
       matters for which entry clearance was sought constituted a matter  of
       private and family life protected by Article 8(1).  The  decision  to
       refuse entry interfered with those family and private life rights  of
       the Appellant but also the British family  members.  The  Judge  said
       that although the legitimate aim was immigration control  but  noting
       that both maintenance (which was  accepted  by  the  Respondent)  and
       accommodation (which was proved to the  Judge's  satisfaction)  meant
       that the factors in s117B Immigration Nationality and Asylum Act 2002
       did not arise.


   17. The Judge noted at paragraph 33(d) that this was an exceptional case.
       It was. He noted it was fact specific.


   18. Despite the Respondent's references to the Upper Tribunal's  decision
       in Kaur that adds little to the  Respondent's  case  because  of  the
       mistaken belief in the original grounds that  the  accommodation  and
       intention aspects were not dealt with by the Judge. They both were in
       clear terms.


   19. In the circumstances, the Respondent's grounds of appeal, mistaken as
       they are, do not show that there is a material error of law.  On  the
       contrary, the Judge's decision shows a careful, detailed and  correct
       exposition of the law with  clear  findings  of  fact.  This  was  an
       unusual case to which  great  attention  was  given  and  the  public
       interest was specifically and  fully  considered  with  great  weight
       given to it.


   20. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge did not involve the making  of
a material error of law and stands.

The Visa Officer's appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's appeal remains allowed. As does the  order  making  the  fee
award in his favour.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 16 May 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
