
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/02562/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Thursday 20 August 2015           |On Tuesday 25 August 2015            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS SANCHA RANI JABEGU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Praisoody, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance  Officer,  New  Delhi.   For
       ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were  in  the
       First-Tier Tribunal  albeit  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
       technically the Appellant in this particular appeal.

    2. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born  on  1  January  1945  and
       therefore now aged 70 years.  She applied on 11 April 2014 for a visa
       to visit her daughter, son-in-law and two grandchildren in the UK for
       6 months.  That application was refused on 15 April 2014 on the basis
       that the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  she  is  a
       genuine visitor or that she intends to  return  to  Nepal  after  her
       visit.

    3. The Appellant's appeal to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  was  allowed  by
       Judge Joshi  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  17  March  2015  ("the
       Decision")  on  the  basis  that  the  refusal  of  the  visa  was  a
       disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

    4. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed on the basis that the Judge  had
       not provided reasons for finding that there was family  life  between
       the Appellant and her daughter's family in the UK and  without  that,
       generally, Article 8 ECHR  would  not  be  engaged.    Permission  to
       appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth  on  the
       basis that the Judge's reasoning on this issue was insufficient.

    5. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine  whether  the
       First-Tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

   Submissions

    6. At the start of the hearing, I drew the representatives' attention to
       the decisions in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
       00112 (IAC), Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT  0261  (IAC)
       and the Court of Appeal's judgment in Singh and anor v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 which  appeared  to
       me to be relevant to the issues in the appeal before me.

    7. Mr Walker submitted that there were no issues  of  dependency  beyond
       the usual emotional ties in this case  so  that  the  Judge  was  not
       entitled to find that family life existed.  If there  was  no  family
       life, then as the authorities suggested, since this was a visit  case
       where the potential visitor lived outside the UK, Article 8 would not
       normally be engaged.  The Judge had therefore fallen  into  error  by
       simply accepting that Article 8 was engaged and going on to  consider
       proportionality.

    8. Ms Praisood reminded me that this was just  a  visit  visa  and  that
       Article 8 should be judged accordingly; the Appellant is not  seeking
       to settle  in  the  UK.   This  could  be  a  "once  in  a  lifetime"
       opportunity for the Appellant who is an elderly  lady  to  visit  her
       family in the UK and see how they live here.  She suggested that  the
       test for whether there is a breach in Article 8 in such circumstances
       should not be the same as in cases where a person sought to settle in
       the UK.  I reminded her that case-law suggested that it was  not  the
       same test because often consideration of  Article  8  in  such  cases
       would not engage Article 8 at all and the stage of a  proportionality
       assessment would not be reached.  The  issue  was  therefore  whether
       there was a level of dependency which led to Article 8 being  engaged
       in this case which might have properly led the Judge to conclude that
       there was family life which engaged Article 8, that  there  would  be
       interference with the right to respect for that family life and  that
       the decision was disproportionate when that interference was  weighed
       in the balance.

    9. Ms Praisoody pointed to the fact that the daughter in the UK was  the
       Appellant's only daughter, the  rest  of  her  children  being  sons.
       Although her  grandchildren,  now  aged  16  and  18,  visited  their
       grandmother in Nepal in 2011, they were unable to return due  to  the
       cost.  The cost of buying a ticket for four people to go to Nepal was
       more than the cost of buying the Appellant a ticket to  come  to  the
       UK.  She also pointed to section  55  and  indicated  that  I  should
       consider the impact on the Appellant's minor grandchildren.

   10. She also submitted that there was unfairness to the Appellant  caused
       by the change in the law which meant  that  the  Appellant  could  no
       longer appeal the Respondent's decision on the basis that it was "not
       in accordance with the law".  I pointed out that  the  Appellant  was
       not without a remedy in this regard as she  could  bring  a  judicial
       review of the Respondent's decision if  the  reasoning  were  flawed.
       The reasoning could only be examined by the Tribunal though  if  (per
       Mostafa) the proportionality stage of the Article 8  assessment  were
       reached.

   Error of law decision and reasons

   11. Following the submissions, I indicated  that  I  was  satisfied  that
       there is an error of law in the Decision and would provide my reasons
       in writing.  The representatives agreed that no further  evidence  or
       submissions were required and that I should  proceed  to  re-make  my
       decision on the basis of the evidence before the First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge and the submissions recorded in the Decision and those made  to
       me.  I now proceed to set out my reasons.

   12. The reasoning in relation to Article 8 is to be found at [20] to [27]
       of the  Decision.  Paragraphs  [20]  to  [21]  set  out  the  Judge's
       reasoning in relation to the first two questions to  be  answered  by
       the Razgar test as follows:-

           "[20] The decision in R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department ex parte Swati 1986 1 All ER 717 held that a  refusal
           of entry clearance as a family visitor can engage Article 8.   I
           accept that the appellant is a mother of a British  citizen  and
           her refusal of entry can engage Article 8.  I am satisfied  that
           the refusal is an interference by a public  authority  with  the
           exercise of the appellant's right to  respect  for  private  and
           family life.  The appellant's family life in the United  Kingdom
           consists of her daughter,  son-in-law  and  grandchildren.   She
           also has children and grandchildren in Nepal.

           [21]  I have considered  whether  such  interference  will  have
           consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage Article 8.
            I am persuaded that the consequences for the appellant and  her
           family if she is not permitted to enter as  a  visitor  will  be
           grave.  She will not be able to see her daughter, son-in-law and
           grandchildren in the United Kingdom"

   13. There is no prior consideration of the case-law concerning the  issue
       of when family life can be said to exist between adults.   As  stated
       by the Court of Appeal in Singh:

           "In the case of adults, in the context of  immigration  control,
           there is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence  or
           absence of family life for the purposes of  Article  8...It  all
           depends on the facts.  The love and affection between  an  adult
           and his parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding
           of a family life.  There has to be something more."

   14. It is of course accepted that the Appellant has family ties with  her
       daughter and her daughter's family in the UK.  However,  family  ties
       do not automatically equate with family  life  for  the  purposes  of
       Article 8. There  is  also  an  issue  whether  the  interference  is
       sufficiently grave as to engage Article 8.    The  issue  of  whether
       there is  family  life  was  simply  not  considered  by  the  Judge.
       Although the judgment in Singh is more recent, the jurisprudence pre-
       dating it makes clear that it is more than just a blood tie which  is
       required when dealing with the issue of whether  family  life  exists
       between adults.  There is no indication that the Judge addressed  her
       mind to this.

   15. The Judge cannot be faulted for failing to  refer  to  the  cases  of
       Mostafa and Adjei since neither was reported prior to the date of the
       hearing.  However, based on those decisions, there is a  clear  error
       of law also in the assumption (without reasoning) that Article  8  is
       engaged in a case such as this.  At [24]  in  Mostafa,  the  Tribunal
       recorded that:

           "...it will only be in very unusual circumstances that a  person
           other than a close relative  will  be  able  to  show  that  the
           refusal of entry clearance comes within  the  scope  of  Article
           8(1).  In practical terms this is likely to be limited to  cases
           where the relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other
           close life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it
           will not necessarily be extended to cases  where,  for  example,
           the  proposed  visit  is  based  on  a  whim  or  will  not  add
           significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people  involved  spend
           together. "

       The decision in Adjei makes the point even more  clearly  at  [9]  as
       follows:-

           "...The first question to be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
           refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where  only  human
           rights grounds are available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is
           engaged at all.  If it is not, which will  not  infrequently  be
           the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  embark  upon  an
           assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules and should
           not do so...."

Decision and reasons

   16. Having found that there is an error of law  in  the  Judge's  finding
       that family life exists in this case  and  that  Article  8  ECHR  is
       therefore engaged, I therefore set  aside  the  Judge's  findings  in
       relation to Article 8 ECHR and I go on to re-make the decision.

   17. The evidence is set out at [8] to [12] of the  Decision  and  I  have
       also had regard to the written evidence submitted  by  the  Appellant
       which consists of a one page letter to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       from the Appellant dated 28 March 2014 and a four page statement from
       the Appellant's son-in-law.  I do not repeat  what  is  said  in  the
       Decision in relation to the evidence as there is no dispute as to the
       facts.  In short summary, the Appellant's daughter lives  in  the  UK
       with her husband and two children.  The Appellant's son-in-law is  in
       the British army and until 2007 was travelling  extensively  but  the
       family has been mainly settled in the UK since then.   The  Appellant
       has one other son who has been temporarily  working  in  the  UK  and
       whose wife remains in Nepal and three other children living in  Nepal
       along with their children.

   18. The evidence in Mr Sireng's statement  is  to  the  effect  that  the
       Appellant's entire family life is in Kathmandu and that the Appellant
       wishes to continue  to  live  there  and  has  no  intention  of  not
       returning at the end of  her  visit.  I  obviously  do  not  read  Mr
       Sireng's statement as suggesting that he is  intending  to  determine
       the issue of law as to family life from what he says but it is  clear
       that the majority of the Appellant's family are in Nepal.  Mr  Sireng
       also says however that the Appellant "plays a significant part in all
       our lives, especially that of my children and wife".   Unfortunately,
       there is no elaboration on that statement.  I accept  Ms  Praisoody's
       submission that there is an emotional tie between the  Appellant  and
       her daughter in the UK, particularly since she is the  only  daughter
       and the rest of the children are male.  However, there is  simply  no
       evidence on which I can find that there is any particular dependency.
        Any financial dependency in Nepal is on the Appellant's son  as  set
       out in the Appellant's letter and not on her daughter's family in the
       UK.

   19. It is also clear from the evidence given to the  First-Tier  Tribunal
       that the family in the UK can visit the Appellant in Nepal  and  have
       done so in the past.  I accept what is said at [12] of  the  Decision
       that it is "much easier" (and cheaper) for the Appellant to  come  to
       the UK than for the family to go to Nepal but there  is  no  evidence
       that this is not possible.  I also accept Ms  Praisoody's  submission
       that there is a difference between the family visiting Nepal and  the
       Appellant being able to visit her family in the UK and see  how  they
       live here.   However, whilst I do not seek to downplay the importance
       of this for the Appellant or her  family  in  the  UK,  none  of  the
       foregoing provides a reason for a finding that a family  life  exists
       between the Appellant and her daughter and her daughter's  family  in
       the UK or that the refusal of  the  visa  amounts  to  such  a  grave
       interference with her life as to engage Article 8 ECHR.

   20. Ms Praisoody submitted that section 55 is engaged by the fact that at
       least one of the Appellant's grandchildren in  the  UK  is  a  minor.
       Again, though,  there  is  no  evidence  as  to  the  impact  on  the
       Appellant's grandchildren of their grandmother being unable to  visit
       them in the UK. Whilst I can  readily  accept  that  the  Appellant's
       grandchildren  might  be  pleased  to  receive  a  visit  from  their
       grandmother in the UK, there is simply no evidence that there is  any
       welfare impact on the  Appellant's  grandchildren  generated  by  the
       refusal of the visa.  They live with their parents in the UK and will
       continue to do so.   As noted above, they can visit their grandmother
       in Nepal and have done so in the past.

   21. For the above reasons, I dismiss the Appellant's appeal under Article
       8 ECHR.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision

I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer's appeal and therefore dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

