
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02263/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2017                               |On 4 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                              MR PERRY SARKODIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, USA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Nelson-Iye, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Entry Clearance Officer has been granted permission to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese allowing the  appeal  of
    the appellant against refusal to grant him entry clearance  to  the  UK
    for a period of fourteen days.

2.   The immigration history of the appellant indicates that he was  refused
    entry clearance into the United Kingdom in 2010 on the  basis  that  he
    did not hold an electronic travel ticket.  Furthermore, the  record  of
    the respondent shows that he was refused twice at port, this  being  in
    2010 and also once in New York on 16 January 2013.

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer refused entry clearance  to  the  appellant
    as a visitor because he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a
    genuine visitor who intended to leave at the end of his  visit  to  his
    sister in the UK.

4.   The appellant was granted a restricted right of appeal as contained  in
    Section 84(1)(b) and (c)  of  the  2002  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act.  The restricted appeal rights for visitors coming to  visit
    family members in the UK applied to any application made on or after 25
    June 2013.  As this instant application was made on 12  February  2015,
    it was subject to the appeal restriction.  The restriction  meant  that
    the appellant's only argument was whether the refusal to  grant  him  a
    visit visa violated his Article 8 rights.

5.   It was clear from the decision that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's appeal in accordance  with  the  restriction  contained  in
    Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act.

6.   The judge considered the appeal under paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  By doing so, I found that the judge erred in law.

7.   Mr Nelson-Iye conceded that the judge erred in  law  for  this  reason.
    Accordingly, I found that the judge's decision  could  not  stand.    I
    heard submissions from the parties in order to remake the decision.

8.   The facts of this case are not in dispute.  The appellant  is  a  self-
    employed cab driver earning 1,830 in the United States of America.   He
    is single and has three dependent children.  He provided a copy of  his
    birth certificate, the birth certificates of  his  children,  a  letter
    from Yellow Cab Company dated 10 March 2015, a variety of bills, and  a
    Halifax Bank statement.

9.   His sponsor and sister, Ms Jackie Boachie, is  a  British  national  of
    Ghanaian descent born on 12 December 1960.  She is employed as  a  chef
    in South Croydon and has been  in  this  employment  since  2007.   Her
    current income is 22,000 per annum.

10.  She said her brother, the  appellant,  is  a  national  of  the  United
    States of America and has been settled in that country for  almost  two
    decades.   He  supports  his  two  children  born  in  2001  and   2004
    respectively.

11.  She resides in a two bedroomed property which is rented  to  her.   She
    resides with her son.

12.  In respect of Article 8, Mr Nelson-Iye relied on the witness  statement
    provided by the sponsor.  At paragraph 6 the sponsor said she has  been
    in constant communication with her family ever since  her  arrival  and
    stay in the UK.  She has made frequent visits to see  her  family  back
    home in Ghana, and, also to the USA severally to see  her  brother  and
    his family.

13.  At paragraph 7 she said it was during such family visits with  her  son
    to the USA in 2007 that her brother expressed an interest in  taking  a
    holiday and visiting them in the UK.  She and  her  son  were  ecstatic
    about this news and looked forward to his visit since it was to be  his
    first ever visit to the UK.

14.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on the legal authorities which had been  submitted
    by Mr Armstrong.  He relied in particular on  Ghising  (family  life  -
    adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160  (IAC)  in  his  attempt  to
    persuade me that family life can exist between adult siblings.

15.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on paragraph 54 of Ghising which  relied  on  what
    Sedley LJ said in Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.   Sedley  LJ  accepted   the   submission   that
    "dependency" was not limited to economic dependency.

         "But if dependency  is  read  down  as  meaning  'support'  in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or  'effective'  to  the  word
         'support', then it represents in his view the  irreducible  minimum
         of what family life implies".

16.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied also on paragraph 58 of Ghising  which  cited  the
    decision of SSHD v HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583 in which  Sir  Scott
    Baker considered the judgment in Kugathas and  held  that  "undoubtedly
    the applicant had family life while he was growing up and the Court  of
    Appeal would not regard it as suddenly cut  off  when  he  reached  his
    majority".

17.  Mr  Nelson-Iye  submitted  that  the  appellant  and  his  sister  were
    siblings of the same family unit until they each  reached  the  age  of
    majority and set up home on their own.  He submitted that the  Kugathas
    interpretation of family life has been said to be too rigid.   Although
    the respondent and the applicant are both grown-ups, they have kept  in
    touch with each other.  At paragraph 73 of Ghising the Tribunal  agreed
    with the judge's finding that the applicant had a private life  in  the
    UK which encompassed his relationship  with  his  parents,  sister  and
    extended family, as well as his social life and studies.  He  submitted
    that the Upper Tribunal went on to find  that  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the consequences of removal were not so grave as to engage Article
    8 was applying too high a threshold of engagement for Article 8.

18.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that  there  was  a  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his sponsor.  The sponsor has visited  the  appellant  in
    the USA.  The appellant has made three attempts to visit the  UK  which
    have all been turned down.  Private life exists because of  the  visits
    made by the sponsor to the appellant in the USA and  the  contact  they
    normally have outside of these visits.  Bearing  in  mind  the  judge's
    positive findings, Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that the interference of the
    private and  family  life  established  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant would be disproportionately interfered with  if  the  refusal
    decision is maintained.

19.  Mr Armstrong submitted that  Article  8  case  law  sets  a  very  high
    threshold in the consideration of family and private life between adult
    siblings.  He submitted that the sponsor  and  the  appellant  live  in
    different  countries.   Maintaining  the  decision  would  not  be   an
    interference in their private and family life because whatever way they
    communicate with each other will continue as it currently exists.

20.  Mr  Armstrong  relied  on  the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal.   At
    paragraph 4 the respondent relied on paragraph 8 of  MS  (Article  8  -
    family life - dependency - proportionality) Uganda [2004]  UKIAT  00064
    wherein it was held:

         "It is accepted law that in circumstances where family life is  put
         forward as existing between an adult child and  his  parents  [...]
         there need to be further elements of dependency involving more than
         emotional family ties.  This was reaffirmed in Salad  [2002]  UKIAT
         06698 relying on the early  case  of  Advic  v  United  Kingdom,  a
         Strasbourg case decided in September 1995".


21.   Mr  Armstrong  submitted  that  there  was  no  further  evidence   of
    dependency.  The sponsor and the appellant live in separate  countries.
    They keep in touch and the sponsor visits the  appellant  in  the  USA.
    Relying on paragraph 25 of Kugathas  he  submitted  that  there  is  no
    presumption of family life in this  case.   This  is  because  Kugathas
    stated in paragraph 20 in relation to visits:

         "Neither blood ties not the concern and affection  that  ordinarily
         go with them are, by themselves or together in my  judgment  enough
         to constitute family life.  Most of us have close relations of whom
         we are extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us, from time
         to time; but none of us would say on those grounds  alone  that  we
         share a family life with them in any sense capable of coming within
         the meaning and purpose of Article 8".

22.  Mr Armstrong relied on paragraph 6 of the  respondent's  grounds  which
    relied on ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834  which  stated  that
    whilst there can be family life between adults, the issue will  be  how
    dependent the older relative is on the younger ones, and  whether  this
    dependency represents more than "normal emotional ties".   Paragraph  7
    of the grounds relied on Ghising which stated that "adults will need to
    be  valuing  and  depending  on  each  other  for  mutual  support  and
    affection", with financial/emotional dependence, e.g. daily contact.

23.  Mr Armstrong submitted that in this case none of these criteria  appear
    to be met.  They live in different countries and have different  lives.



Findings

24.  In the light of the case law cited in the Secretary of State's  grounds
    of appeal and also relied on by Mr. Nelson-Iye, I find that there is no
    family life between the appellant and the  sponsor  even  applying  the
    irreducible minimum of what family life implies.  Ghising  was  a  case
    that involved a relationship between  a  parent  and  an  adult  child.
    Hence the finding by Sir Scott Baker in  HK  (Turkey)  that  while  the
    applicant had family life whilst he was growing up, he would not regard
    it as suddenly cut off when he reached his majority.

25.  In the instant case, the appellant was born on 14 July 1964.  He is  52
    years old.  The sponsor was born on 12 December 1960.  She is 56  years
    old.  I accept that they were family members of the  same  family  unit
    but for many years now, they have not shared the same family unit. They
    have each formed their own family unit. The sponsor said in her witness
    statement that the appellant has been  settled  in  the  USA  with  his
    family for almost two decades now.  Therefore, the irreducible  minimum
    level of what family life  implies,  if  dependency  is  read  down  as
    meaning "support" in the  personal  sense,  "real"  or  "committed"  or
    "effective", adding those words to the word "support" does not apply in
    this case.   There  is  indeed  no  financial  dependency  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  On the evidence and applying  the  relevant
    case law I find there is no family life between the appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

26.  I go on to consider the private life element of Article  8.   From  the
    evidence the private life between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  in
    terms of visits seems to be one-sided.  The sponsor and her son are the
    ones who have visited the appellant in the USA  on  several  occasions.
    Because the  appellant  has  on  three  occasions  been  refused  entry
    clearance to the UK to visit the sponsor, he has maintained his private
    life with the sponsor in other ways.  I  am  not  persuaded  that  this
    state of affairs should be allowed  to  continue  indefinitely  in  the
    guise that  maintaining  the  status  quo  is  not  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's private life  with  the  sponsor.   I
    find on the evidence and the  findings  made  by  the  judge  that  the
    continued refusal of entry clearance to  the  appellant  amounts  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the private life that  he  has  with
    his sister, the sponsor.

27.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

28.   No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 3 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



