
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02408/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 July 2017                           |On 17 August 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                             Idayat Tunrayo Oke
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The sponsor, Mr Bashir Adebowale Oke
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  a  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer of 1 April 2015 refusing entry clearance
    as a visitor.  She had intended to visit her partner on the visit.  The
    judge heard evidence from her partner, Mr Oke and found  him  to  be  a
    credible and consistent  witness  and  accepted  his  evidence  in  its
    totality.  She bore in mind relevant Tribunal authorities such  Mostafa
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), Adjei [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC)  and  Kaur  [2015]
    UKUT 00487 (IAC).  She accepted that there was family life between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  She had heard from the  sponsor  that  they
    were engaged and  were  to  travel  together  from  Nigeria  where  the
    appellant lives with their son.  The son was going to remain in Nigeria
    when his parents  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  sponsor  had
    clarified that the appellant and their  child  had  not  moved  to  the
    United Kingdom as he wanted  his  son  to  be  brought  up  in  Nigeria
    learning the culture until he was at least 10 years old.  The appellant
    was simply coming to visit and  see  where  he  stayed  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The judge went on to consider in accordance with the  guidance  in  the
    case  law  authorities  whether  the  appellant  could  have  met   the
    requirements of the  Rules.   She  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that she intended a genuine visit at the end of which  she
    would return to Nigeria.  She weighed this factor  into  the  balancing
    act in relation to the matter of proportionality given that  it  was  a
    human rights appeal and  stated  that  she  was  required  to  consider
    whether there was a strong claim that  compelling  circumstances  might
    exist to justify the grant of leave to enter outside  the  Rules.   She
    found, based on the evidence, that the refusal of the visit visa  would
    not be a disproportionate breach  given  that  the  family  life  would
    continue in the same way as it has always continued and that was by way
    of the sponsor's visits to Nigeria since 2008 when they first met.  The
    judge noted also that the appellant was further entitled to reapply for
    a visit visa or indeed as a partner under Appendix FM if she so wished.

3.   The appellant appealed this decision and permission was  granted  by  a
    First-tier Judge, who observed that the judge appeared to have erred in
    the reference to "compelling circumstances".  She went on to note  that
    it was not clear whether information about the sponsor's  annual  leave
    entitlement was before the judge.  That evidence highlighted that where
    family life could only be continued through visits the ability of  both
    spouses to visit each other could add significantly to  the  time  they
    were able to spend together and it was arguable that that point  should
    have been taken into account with regard to proportionality.

4.   In his submissions Mr Oke said that he worked  in  the  United  Kingdom
    and could not go in and out of Nigeria because  of  his  job.   He  had
    requested the appellant to visit him to resolve this problem.   It  was
    difficult for him to get time off.  He had had a stroke last  year  and
    palliative care.  He worked as a staff nurse  and  this  was  demanding
    work.  He produced all the evidence to the judge and she  had  accepted
    it all.  He argued that the decision in Mostafa was not relevant and he
    hoped that the case would be reconsidered.

5.   In his submissions Mr Jarvis argued that the judge's  approach  was  in
    accordance with the relevant case law.  He found  there  to  be  family
    life and then went on to deal with the issue of  proportionality.   The
    findings were capable of arising from the authorities.  It was for  the
    judge to consider in a non-removal case the consequences of a  decision
    to refuse.  The error was not a material one, if there  was  an  error.
    He accepted that there was not a lot of description of what the sponsor
    said about his work and it was unclear whether he had said that at  the
    time, but the judge had considered the background at paragraph 18.  The
    fact that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules was different
    from the compelling circumstances requirements was  not  applicable  in
    line with SS (Congo) and Agyarko, but there was no right of  appeal  so
    positive findings with regard to meeting the requirements of the  Rules
    was only part of the proportionality picture.  If the  wrong  test  had
    been employed it was not material as it was a lesser test.  The  matter
    was not compelling though the  judge  would  not  have  found  for  the
    appellant on the basis of a lower test.

6.   By way of reply Mr Oke said that the case law was not relevant  to  how
    the judgment was made and he asked the Tribunal to reconsider the case.

7.   I reserved my decision.

8.   I see the force of the point made by the judge who  granted  permission
    that the "compelling circumstances" criterion  can  be  seen  from  the
    decision in Kaur to relate to persons who do not meet the  requirements
    of the Rules although it may be the case that Article 8 is engaged.

9.   However, I see no materiality to that error.  The judge clearly  guided
    herself correctly on the law and took  into  account  of  the  relevant
    evidence and circumstances in  concluding  that  the  claim  could  not
    succeed under Article 8 outside the Rules.  As she noted,  family  life
    would continue in the same way that it has always continued by  way  of
    the sponsor's visits to Nigeria since 2008 when  they  first  met.   In
    light  of  the  judge's  positive  conclusions   on   the   appellant's
    satisfaction of the requirements of the Rules, it may well also be,  as
    she noted, that a further application for a visit visa could  be  made.
    It has not been shown that the judge failed to take  into  account  any
    evidence that was before her with regard to the  family  circumstances.
    As a consequence I agree with Mr Jarvis that any error about  the  test
    employed lacks materiality since it was properly open to the  judge  on
    the  evidence  before  her  to  conclude  that  the  refusal  was   not
    disproportionate bearing in mind that the family life would continue in
    the same way that it always  had  continued.   Accordingly  I  find  no
    material error of law in her judgment and her decision  dismissing  the
    appeal under Article 8 is refused.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 16 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
