
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 3rd February 2016                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                       dr Charles Bekoni Russel Pilli
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, of Counsel instructed by Wornham & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge James of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 29th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Tanzania born 17th October 1965  who
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor.   The
    Appellant wished to visit his two adult sons who were studying  in  the
    United Kingdom, and also to attend business meetings.

 3. The application was refused on 15th April 2014.  The  Respondent  noted
    that the Appellant had previously visited the United Kingdom,  and  was
    satisfied  that  he  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The application was however refused with reference to paragraph 320(7A)
    of the Immigration Rules as it was contended  that  the  Appellant  had
    made false representations in his application form.   Specifically  the
    Appellant had denied having any criminal convictions whereas he had  in
    fact a conviction for driving a motor vehicle with  excess  alcohol  in
    the United Kingdom on 17th November 2011.

 5. The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by the FTT on 18th May
    2015.  The FTT heard evidence from David Woodhead, a business associate
    of the Appellant, and Bryan Russell, one of the Appellant's  two  sons.
    The FTT recognised that the Appellant  had  only  a  limited  right  of
    appeal and  that  he  relied  upon  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).   The  FTT  concluded
    that Article 8 was not engaged either in relation to private or  family
    life and therefore the appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT had materially erred in law by
    considering the Appellant's private and family life separately, and had
    erred in adopting an unduly restrictive approach to private life.   The
    FTT ignored the fact that the Appellant resided in the  United  Kingdom
    between 2001 and 2011.

 7. It was contended that the FTT had erred by finding that  the  Appellant
    did not have any significant family life in the United Kingdom and  had
    failed to properly assess questions 1 and 2 of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.
    It was contended that the FTT should have assessed  whether  there  was
    family life between the Appellant and his  sons,  and  it  was  further
    contended that the judge had made perfunctory and inadequate  findings.



 8. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Holmes of the  FTT,  and  the
    application for permission to appeal  was  thereafter  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and permission was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Reeds in the following terms;
         "Whilst I do not find merit in the grounds  where  it  is  asserted
         that the judge failed to consider family  and  private  life  as  a
         cumulative whole, it is arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  have
         regard to the period between 2001 and 2011  spent  in  the  UK  and
         limited his consideration to circumstances since the conviction and
         no findings of fact are made in this respect.  Furthermore,  whilst
         the judge gave consideration to family life at (35) there  were  no
         findings of fact made  as  to  whether  there  was  any  dependency
         between the adult sons  and  their  father  on  the  basis  of  the
         evidence provided nor any findings made as to  the  genuineness  of
         the visit and intention (see Kaur (visit visas: Article  8)  [2015]
         UKUT 00487).  I therefore grant permission."

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in summary, the FTT had not  erred  in  law.   It  was
    contended that the FTT directed itself appropriately, and  the  grounds
    amounted to a disagreement with findings made.

10. Directions were issued making provision for there to a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

Oral Submissions

11. Mr Pipe relied and expanded  upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  Mr Pipe accepted that before the
    FTT, there was no evidence of dependency between the Appellant and  his
    two sons.  Mr Pipe submitted that in considering private life  the  FTT
    had disregarded the period between 2001 and 2011 in which the Appellant
    had resided in the United Kingdom, and therefore the  FTT  should  have
    found that Article  8  was  engaged,  and  then  gone  on  to  consider
    proportionality.

12. Mrs Petersen submitted that the FTT had  provided  brief  but  adequate
    reasons for the findings made.  It was submitted that the FTT was aware
    that the Appellant had previously spent time  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The task of the FTT was to consider whether there was existing  private
    life, not whether the Appellant used to have  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom between 2001 and 2011.

13. It was submitted that the FTT had been entitled to find that Article  8
    was not engaged either in relation to private or family life.

14. By way of response Mr Pipe maintained the FTT had only  considered  the
    Appellant's private life in relation to the fact that  he  had  visited
    the United Kingdom twice since his conviction on  17th  November  2011,
    and was wrong to disregard the period that the Appellant spent in  this
    country between 2001 and 2011.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. In my view the FTT did not materially err  in  law  for  the  following
    reasons.

17. The FTT took into account all the evidence submitted on behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The oral evidence of  the  two  witnesses  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 8 - 20.  At paragraphs 21 - 23 the FTT  summarises  the  two
    witness statements submitted by the Appellant.  The FTT at paragraph 24
    confirmed  that  the  contents  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  had  been
    considered.  The FTT set out the submissions made by  both  parties  at
    paragraphs 25 - 31.

18. The FTT followed the  correct  legal  approach  when  deciding  appeals
    against refusal of entry clearance, based upon Article 8  of  the  1950
    Convention.  The FTT referred to Adjei [2015] UKUT  261  (IAC),  noting
    that the first question  to  be  addressed  is  whether  Article  8  is
    engaged.

19. The FTT then went on to make reference to the  structured  approach  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

20. It is for an Appellant to show that he has established  private  and/or
    family life that engages Article 8.   In  my  view  the  FTT  erred  at
    paragraph 7 by making reference to the Immigration Rules,  and  stating
    that the Appellant's circumstances were to be considered as at the date
    of the appeal hearing.  The error is not however material.  It is clear
    that the FTT did not  in  fact  consider  the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    correctly concentrated on the issue as to whether Article 8 was engaged
    or not.  Because this is an appeal against refusal of entry  clearance,
    the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  refusal  must   be
    considered, that being 15th May 2014, not the circumstances at the date
    of hearing.  I have stated that this error is not material, because  it
    did not affect the conclusion reached.  The authority for stating  that
    human rights are to be considered at  the  date  of  refusal  of  entry
    clearance is AS (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32.

21. In considering the Appellant's private life, the FTT noted  that  since
    his conviction on 17th November 2011,  he  had  only  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom on two occasions, visiting between 5th  and  15th  April
    2012 and 20th to 29th December 2012.  The  FTT  calculated  that  in  a
    period of 29 months the Appellant spent no more than 21  days  in  this
    country.

22. The FTT was aware, and set out in paragraph 23,  the  Appellant's  case
    that he had been in the UK for various periods between 2001  and  2011.
    It was not the Appellant's case that  he  had  been  resident  in  this
    country permanently for that period nor that he was settled here.   The
    FTT accurately set out in paragraph 23 what  the  Appellant  stated  in
    paragraph 6 of his witness statement dated 5th November 2014,  that  he
    had been resident in the UK for various periods between 2001  and  2011
    in various immigration categories.

23. The issue that the FTT had to consider was whether the Appellant had  a
    private life that would engage Article 8 as at  April  2014,  when  his
    application was refused.  The FTT was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had not proved that at that time he had a private life in the
    UK that would engage Article 8.  I do not find that the FTT disregarded
    the fact that the Appellant  had  spent  time  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 2001 and 2011, and in  any  event,  I  do  not  find  that  was
    relevant in considering the Appellant's private life in April 2014.

24. The FTT was entitled to find that Article 8 was not engaged in relation
    to the Appellant's private life.  The FTT was entitled to find that the
    Appellant's wish  to  visit  the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  business
    meetings did not engage Article 8 on the basis of his private life.

25. In relation to family life, it was accepted by Mr Pipe that no evidence
    of dependency beyond normal emotional ties was presented to the FTT and
    the FTT was  entitled  to  conclude  that  family  life  had  not  been
    established which engaged Article 8.  In my view the FTT  had  in  mind
    the correct  legal  principles,  even  though  there  was  no  specific
    reference to Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112
    (IAC) and I set out below in part, at paragraph 24 of that decision;
         "We are, however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of Article  8(1).   In  practical  terms  this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
         child and even then it will not necessarily be  extended  to  cases
         where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim  or  will
         not add significantly to the time that the  people  involved  spent
         together."

26. Since  the  FTT  decision  was  promulgated,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    promulgated further guidance in Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)  [2015]
    UKUT 00487 (IAC) and I  set  out  below  the  third  paragraph  to  the
    headnote, which makes reference to SS (Congo) which was published prior
    to the FTT decision;
         "3.  Unless  an  appellant  can  show  that  there  are  individual
             interests at stake covered by Article  8  'of  a  particularly
             pressing nature' so as to give rise to a  'strong  claim  that
             compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of LTE
             [Leave to Enter] outside the rules': (see  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
             EWCA Civ 387 at [40]  and  [56])  he  or  she  is  exceedingly
             unlikely to succeed.  That proposition must also hold good  in
             visitor appeals."

27. In conclusion, the FTT in this  appeal,  considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence, and applied the  correct  legal  principles,  and  reached  a
    conclusion open to it on the evidence, and provided adequate reasons.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and no  anonymity  order  is
made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    8th February 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    8th February 2016
