
st
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/02071/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Determination Promulgated             |
|on 17th April 2015                   |on 29th May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                             MR NAJIBZAFAR KHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier  Tribunal  though
    it is the respondent who is appealing in the present proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 18 August 1953.

 3. He applied for a family visit visa. This was refused on 24 March  2014.
    The entry clearance officer was not satisfied he was a genuine  visitor
    intending to leave.  He did not satisfy paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the
    immigration rules. This required an  applicant  to  satisfy  the  entry
    clearance officer as to the period and purpose of the visit. The  entry
    clearance officer questioned why, on the figures given, he was  willing
    to spend the equivalent of four months disposable income or 70% of  the
    funds held in his business account.

 4. An additional reason for refusal was paragraph 320(2)(b). The   heading
    is: `Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom is to be refused' and states :

         (2) the fact that the person seeking entry to the United Kingdom:

             (b) has been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years

         Where this paragraph applies, unless refusal would be  contrary  to
         the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating
         to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal  will
         be outweighed by compelling factors.

    In 1981 he was sentenced to 6 years imprisonment for the importation of
    class A drugs.

 5. On 25 June 2013 section 52 of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act  restricted
    appeal rights for visitors to  the  grounds  contained  in  section  84
    (1)(b) and(c) of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
    In the appellant's case this meant his appeal was restricted  to  human
    rights.

 6. In the Notice of Appeal  it  was  stated  he  had  been  granted  entry
    clearance in June 2011 and 2012 and had  complied  with  the  terms  of
    entry. The entry clearance manager on review pointed out that paragraph
    320 changed in December 2012 whereby a mandatory  refusal  applied.  It
    was also pointed out that the appellant's relatives could visit him  in
    Pakistan or a third country.

The First tier Tribunal

 7. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Hunter on 5 November 2014. The
    decision allowing his appeal on the basis of family life and Article  8
    was promulgated on 5 January 2015.

 8. The judge found the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules in relation to visit visas and  referred  to  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This  states
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest. It also provides that it is in the public  interest,  and  in
    particular in the interests of the economic well-being  of  the  United
    Kingdom that persons who seek to enter the United Kingdom are  able  to
    speak English and are financially independent.

 9. The appellant's wife and his two adult children had been living in  the
    United Kingdom since 2010. His son and daughter  said  that  they  were
    fearful of travelling to Pakistan because on previous visits  they  had
    been subjected to threats and  robbery.  Judge  Hunter  concluded  that
    family life existed between  the  appellant  and  his  wife  and  adult
    children and concluded and  that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  a
    disproportionate interference.

The Upper Tribunal.

10. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  basis  there  was  a
    material misdirection of law by the judge  in  concluding  that  family
    life within the meaning of  Article  8  existed.  Given  the  temporary
    nature of a visit visa it was also submitted that the judge  failed  to
    explain why a refusal was a disproportionate interference with  Article
    8 rights. The judge acknowledged contact continuing through other means
    and had not dealt with the possibility of visits in  a  third  country.
    The respondent also submitted that the generalised fear  of  the  crime
    level in Pakistan was not an insurmountable  obstacle  and  there  were
    risks of crime in the United Kingdom. It was also  submitted  that  the
    judge made a material error of law in dealing with paragraph 320 (2)(b)
    by considering it   only  as  part  of  the  proportionality  exercise.
    Permission to appeal was granted.

11. At hearing reference was made to the decision of Mostafa (Article 8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC). Ms Everett  argued  that  the
    relationships did not engage family life within the meaning of  Article
    8. Mr Ball argued Article 8 was engaged particularly in relation to the
    appellant's wife and that the respondent  was  seeking  to  reopen  the
    merits of  the  decision.  He  referred  me  to  paragraph  65  of  the
    determination and  the  judge's  conclusion  that  family  life  exists
    between them. Paragraph 66 deals  with  the  appellant's  relationships
    with his children  and  again  the  conclusion  was  that  family  life
    exists.Mr Ball submitted the appellant's presence would not be a burden
    upon the State. He had complied with the terms of entry before and  has
    also been granted a Schengen Visa. He pointed out  that  the  appellant
    and his wife are not divorced and it would have been  open  to  him  to
    apply for settlement if he wanted to remain permanently in  the  United
    Kingdom.

Consideration

12. At the end of the hearing I asked the  appellant's  representative  his
    views on whether, in the event of an error of law being found  I  could
    proceed to deal with the matter in accordance with the  Directions.  He
    took instructions and indicated the family preferred that the appeal be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

13. It is my conclusion that the determination of Judge Hunter does contain
    material errors  of  law  and  cannot  stand.  It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that Judge Hunter carefully considered all the  evidence.
    He has closely engaged with the factual background. However, there  are
    two issues on which there  were  material  errors  of  law.  The  first
    relates to the engagement of Article 8.The respondent's  decision  only
    related to a temporary status, namely a short visit with the option  of
    visits either in Pakistan or third countries. Much emphasis was  placed
    upon  the  importance  of  the  visit  to  the  appellant's   children.
    Undoubtedly they welcome seeing their father. However, not only had the
    nature of a visit visa to be considered but also the fact that they are
    adults, leading independent lives. In relation to the appellant's  wife
    the temporary nature of the visit had to be considered as well  as  the
    fact she and the appellant had voluntarily separated. The second  issue
    relates to the  appellant's  criminal  conviction  and  the  effect  of
    paragraph 320 (2) (b).

Family life

14. Regarding the adult children at paragraph 66 the Determination reads:

         "... they both told me they have remained  in  contact  with  their
         father and communicate with him on a regular basis. While there  is
         not a financial dependency I accept that there is a close emotional
         relationship between the appellant and Ms Khan and Mr Zafar."

15. The judge refers to the low threshold required to establish family life
    and concluded family life did exist.  Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31  concerned  an  adult's  relationship  with  his  mother  and  adult
    siblings. The Court of Appeal felt that the following passage  in  S  v
    United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196 was still relevant:

         "... generally, the protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
         involves cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their dependent
         minor children.  Whether it extends to other relationships  depends
         on the circumstances of the particular case.  Relationships between
         adults ... would not necessarily acquire the protection of  Article
         8 of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of  further  elements  of
         dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties."

16. The reference to a further element of dependency did not mean it had to
    be economic. It is however necessary to  show  that  ties  of  support,
    either emotional or  economic  are  in  existence  and  go  beyond  the
    ordinary  and  natural  ties  of  affection  that  would  accompany   a
    relationship of that kind. The appellant bears the burden of  proof  of
    establishing that Article 8 is engaged. Whilst the threshold is low  it
    nevertheless exists and must depend on the context under consideration.
    In the present case the judge's findings are limited  to  the  ordinary
    and natural ties of affection and  there  are  no  other  circumstances
    justifying the  conclusion  that  this  situation  engages  Article  8.
    Consequently I find this amount to a material error of law.

Paragraph 320 (2)(b)

17. The other issue is paragraph 320(2)(b). The judge is clearly influenced
    by the fact the appellant had been successful in an earlier  appeal  at
    which his criminal  conviction  was  considered.  He  quotes  from  the
    earlier determination which refers to the fact  that  the  offence  was
    over 30 years ago. The judge also refers to  the  fact  that  following
    this the appellant complied with the terms of entry and  has  travelled
    extensively. At paragraph 77 the judge  records  that  on  the  current
    application under the rules there is  an  automatic  refusal.  He  then
    feels able to allow the appeal notwithstanding this on the basis of the
    proportionality exercise under Article 8.

18. The permission to appeal suggests that the judge did not deal with  the
    mandatory refusal. In fact the judge  did  and  acknowledged  that  the
    application could not succeed under the  rules.  However,  I  find  the
    approach  to  the   proportionality   issue   misconceived.   This   is
    particularly so in light of the decision of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) .That decision points out that visit
    visas appeals  are now largely based upon Article 8 arguments  and  the
    issue for the tribunal is not an appellant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
    rules. However, their ability  to  meet  the  rules  is  relevant  when
    considering the proportionality argument. The decision  of  Shamin  Box
    [2002] UKIAT 02212 was referred to. It pointed out that the  obligation
    imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family life of those affected by
    the decision. In the Article 8 balancing exercise  the  rights  of  all
    those closely affected  by  the  decision  had  to  be  considered.  At
    paragraph 16 of Mostafa the Upper Tribunal indicated that it  would  be
    almost  certainly  proportionate  to  refuse  entry  clearance  if  the
    appellant did not comply with the rules. In the present case the  issue
    is not so much compliance as a clear fact  that  the  appellant  cannot
    succeed under the rules.  I find there was an error of law in  the  way
    the judge dealt with the proportionality assessment given the fact  the
    immigration rules, as amended, create a complete.

Disposal

19. The judge made clear sustainable findings of fact which have  not  been
    challenged. On reflection, I can see no reason why the matter should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal nor is there  a  need  for  further
    evidence.

20. The appeal cannot succeed under the  immigration  rules  by  reason  of
    paragraph 320 (2)(b).

21.  Dealing with Article 8 the position in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    adult children is adequately covered by Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ
    31.They  are  leading  independent  lives.  They  are  not  financially
    dependent upon the appellant. There are the natural ties  of  love  and
    affection. I do not see  any  demands  greater  than  this.  They  have
    visited the appellant before in Pakistan  and  can  do  so  again.  The
    immigration judge referred to reluctance on their  part  to  travel  to
    Pakistan. They may well have some hesitancy due to concerns  for  their
    safety but their father is able to live there and people do  travel  to
    Pakistan for holidays. They can also meet in third  countries.  Contact
    can also be maintained by other means.

22. The position in relation to the appellant's wife is  more  complex.  On
    the one hand they continue to be married. I bear in mind the nature  of
    a marriage relationship. They continue to have contact.  There  is  the
    bond of the children. The judge recorded that she married the appellant
    in 1985 and they lived together in Pakistan until 2004. She came to the
    United Kingdom. She returned to Pakistan the following  year  when  her
    parents became unwell and resumed living with the appellant.  She  then
    left Pakistan in 2010 for the United Kingdom where she has lived since.
    She has British citizenship. Against this they have chosen to be apart.
    Thee position is different from a married couple who want to live their
    life together. His wife could visit him in Pakistan.

23. I acknowledged that the claim is stronger in relation to his wife  than
    for his children. However, in considering Article 8 the proportionality
    in relation to her is  overshadowed  by  the  effect  of  his  criminal
    conviction on the proportionality issue.  Albeit  his  offence  was  30
    years ago it was a most serious offence for which he received six years
    imprisonment. It was a crime against  society.  The  immigration  rules
    impose a strict sanction in the  circumstance.  The  immigration  judge
    acknowledged the appeal could not succeed under the  rules  because  of
    this. Bearing in mind the  issue  relates  to  a  visit  for  temporary
    purposes  and  that  there  are  alternative  avenues  of  contact   my
    conclusion is that the appellant's conviction  albeit  many  years  ago
    renders the respondent's decision  proportionate  in  relation  to  his
    Article 8 rights.

DECISION

24. The Immigration Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the
    decision and dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules.  The
    decision of the respondent does not breach Article 8.



Signed

Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Immigration Judge of the Upper Tribunal
