
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/02155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 9 December 2016                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                 ADWOA OSAFO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Respondent in this case, the Entry Clearance Officer, appeals  with
    permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman
    promulgated on 8 July 2016.  That appeal was against a decision of  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  Adwoa  Osafo   (hereafter   "the
    claimant") entry clearance as a family visitor in order  to  visit  her
    sister (hereafter "the sponsor") who lives in the United  Kingdom  with
    her family, as she was not satisfied that she met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on  28  June  2016.  The
    judge allowed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  She  directed
    herself as to the five steps to be undertaken in line with the decision
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and concluded  that  all  of  the  five
    questions fell to be answered positively. She found that Article 8  was
    engaged; that there was a sufficient degree of  gravity  in  this  case
    and,  ultimately,  that  it  would  on  the  facts  of  this  case   be
    disproportionate to refuse entry clearance.

 3. The thrust of the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are that, the judge misdirected herself  in  law;  there
    had in this case been no proper findings as to family life  or  whether
    it could continue by the sponsor  visiting  the  claimant  without  her
    disabled son.

 4. When the  matter  came  before  me  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    represented by Mr  Walker.  The  claimant  was  unrepresented.  On  the
    morning of the hearing a telephone communication was received from  the
    sponsor informing the Tribunal of her non-attendance at the hearing. No
    explanation was given. As it  was  plain  the  claimant  had  effective
    notice of the hearing  I  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal.  Mr  Walker
    submitted that it was clear the judge had simply  failed  to  make  any
    findings with respect to whether family life existed or not and thus  a
    proportionality assessment was not called for and, in  any  event,  was
    inadequate. Accordingly the decision was flawed.

 5. I announced my decision at the hearing that I was  satisfied  that  the
    judge erred in law and indicated that I would remake  the  decision  on
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as no further evidence  had
    been filed in support of the  appeal.  Mr  Walker  in  his  submissions
    relied on the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

Discussion

6.    The judge found that Article 8 was  engaged  on  the  basis  that  the
      claimant was "asserting a facet of family life" with her adult  sister
      who she said was unable to travel with her disabled son outside of the
      United Kingdom. The difficulty with the judge's approach  is  that  in
      her  consideration  of  the  question  of  whether  family  life   was
      established, she failed to consider whether the  claimant's  intention
      to visit her sister and members of  the  extended  family  constitutes
      part of "family life" for the purposes of Article 8. In  my  judgement
      what was required, but did not occur, was an analysis of the  evidence
      to identify whether the ties with the individuals relied upon had  the
      necessary quality required, or whether this was in  truth  a  "private
      life" appeal, and the elements of that which were relied upon;  Marckx
      v Belgium [1980] 2EHRR 330 and Singh v ECO New Delhi [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      1075, and Abbasi (visits - bereavement - Article 8 [2015] UKUT 463.

7.    Whilst the judge concluded that there are consequences  of  sufficient
      gravity to engage Article 8 on the  basis  that  family  life  exists,
      there is simply no reasoning for this and no findings  of  fact  which
      could explain to the Entry Clearance  Officer  why  it  was  that  she
      concluded that there was, unusually in this case, family  life.  While
      the judge referred to Abassi  this was not a case where  the  claimant
      was seeking to visit the United Kingdom to mourn the death of a family
      member and, in considering whether family life could only continue  in
      the United Kingdom, the judge failed to consider whether  the  sponsor
      could visit the claimant without her son. Given that  I  am  satisfied
      that these findings were in error, I am  satisfied  also  that  it  is
      material because if family life is not established then the  remainder
      of the questions identified in Razgar would not fall to be  asked.  On
      that basis the judge's decision that the refusal  of  entry  clearance
      was disproportionate cannot stand and accordingly, for these  reasons,
      I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
      the making of an error of law which affected the outcome and I set  it
      aside.

Remaking the Decision

8.    It is sufficiently clear from the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Kaur (Visit appeals Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487  that  the  issue  of
      whether there is family life is of  significant  importance.  That  is
      referred to in particular at paragraph 6 where the principles set  out
      in Mostafa are identified in which it is stated that  it  is  only  in
      unusual circumstances that a close relative will be able to show  that
      the refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1).
      In practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where  the
      relationship is that of husband and wife, other close life partners or
      a parent and minor child. That is not to say that there  cannot  exist
      family life for the purposes of Article 8 between two adult  siblings.
      That much is clear from the Kugathas and Ghising [2012] UKUT 00161 (as
      approved  in  Gurung  &  others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8)  adopting   the
      characterisation of the nature of family life  adopted  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in that case). If a  family  life  does  not  exist  then  by
      definition there can be no interference with it and there is of course
      therefore no need to consider questions 3, 4 and 5  as  identified  in
      Razgar  and  it  would  not  be  possible  to  make  any  finding   on
      proportionality.

9.    It is  plain  on  the  evidence  that  the  relationship  between  the
      claimant and her sister  does  not  constitute  family  life  for  the
      purposes of Article 8. While it is implicit  that  there  is  a  close
      relationship between them, the evidence does not denote the  existence
      of a relationship above the normal and usual emotional ties that exist
      between adult siblings who live independent lives. The explanation for
      the visit is that the claimant wishes to come and see her  sister  and
      her family and to provide her sister with some respite from caring for
      her disabled  son.  While  I  acknowledge  the  compassionate  factors
      surrounding that latter purpose, there is  no  evidential  basis  from
      which I  could  conclude  that  there  is  any  significant  emotional
      dependency between the claimant and her sister or any  member  of  her
      family.

10.   In summary, I find that there  was,  as  at  the  date  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer's decision, no family life between the Appellant and
      the sponsor for the purposes of Article 8. In addition,  I  find  that
      the claimant has failed to show  that  her  private  life  rights  are
      engaged. In respect thereof, the situation in which a  person  seeking
      to visit the United Kingdom will have established  such  a  life  here
      will be rare indeed. In addition, the 'exceptional' nature of  Article
      8 and its applicability to entry cases concerning family life has been
      clearly stated by the IAT in  Sun  Myung  Moon  (Human  rights,  entry
      clearance, proportionality) USA [2005] UKIAT 00112 (see paragraphs  68
      and 73). While I take into account that the claimant has  visited  the
      United Kingdom previously, the evidence does not establish that  there
      is a close connection between her and her  sister's  disabled  son  or
      that they are dependent upon any support the claimant  could  provide.
      In my judgement it is further implicit by the claimant's decision  not
      to pursue her intention to visit the United Kingdom due to a change in
      her family circumstances that they  are  not  so  dependent,  and  the
      absence of the sponsor at the hearing  fails  to  fill  an  evidential
      lacuna explaining why she cannot visit her sister without her son.

11.   Whilst Article 8 has proven to be  versatile  in  its  application  in
      other cases as  illustrated  in  Abassi  that  case  concerned  death,
      burial, mourning and associated rites of family members which  has  no
      applicability here. On the facts of the present appeal,  there  is  no
      conceivable basis for finding that the claimant had a private life for
      the purposes of Article 8. The Article 8 claims based on private  life
      must fail at the first stage under the Razgar approach. On that  basis
      it is unnecessary for me to consider the matter  any  further  and  in
      terms of the Razgar question  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  answer
      questions 2 to 5.

 12.  Further, and in any event, even were I wrong in that matter I  am  not
      satisfied that any interference given the nature of  the  relationship
      which  exists  between  two  sisters  who  have  equally   established
      themselves  independently  and,  who  are  likely  to  continue  their
      relationship by means other than visits through other  communications,
      that  the  interference  is  of  sufficient  gravity  to  engage   the
      Convention in any event.

Decision

13.   The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

14.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 ECHR is set aside.

15.         I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the  claimant's  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR.

No application for anonymity was made and I could  see  no  reason  to  make
such a direction.


Signed      Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

