
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03974/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 27th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              mrs salime abdine
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARRANCE OFFICER - BEIRUT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hashim, Counsel instructed by Mrs Salime Abdine
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Lebanon born on 1st  January  1925.   She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge H Clark dated
    25th February 2015 dismissing her appeal against the refusal  of  entry
    clearance as a visitor on Article 8 grounds.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 4th June 2015 on the grounds that it was  arguable  the
    judge had erred in law in her assessment of proportionality in that  it
    was unclear what weight  had  been  attached  to  the  various  factors
    relevant to such an assessment.

3.   In the Rule 24 response the Respondent  stated  that  the  findings  at
    paragraph 19 of the decision were entirely open to the  judge  and  the
    final sentence of paragraph 21 "simply reassert that the cost and delay
    involved in making a further application are not factors as to make the
    circumstances of the instant  case  such  that  the  wider  aspects  of
    Article 8 are engaged and hence require findings".

Submissions

4.   Mr Hashim, for the Appellant, submitted that having found  that  family
    life existed between the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor,  the  judge  had
    failed to go on to consider proportionality  and  had  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  doing  so.  Paragraph  28  was  an   inadequate
    assessment of Article 8 given the judge's previous  findings  that  the
    Appellant satisfied paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

5.   In response Mr Jarvis submitted that at  paragraph  19  the  judge  had
    found that, whilst there was family life the relationship  did  not  go
    beyond what would normally subsist between a parent and adult child and
    therefore, having found that family life was not sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8, the judge was not required to consider the protection  under
    Article 8(1).  Mr Jarvis submitted that this was supported by the  case
    of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  which  was
    relied on in the grounds of appeal.  The Appellant and Sponsor had  not
    visited each other for twenty years and the judge's  finding  that  the
    nature of family life was not such that Article 8 was engaged was  open
    to him on the evidence.

Discussion and conclusions

6.   The judge found that the Appellant was a genuine visitor and  satisfied
    all  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However,  the  appeal  was  limited  to   human   rights   and   racial
    discrimination following the coming into force, on 25th June  2013,  of
    the amendments to Section  88A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 effected by Section 52 of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act
    2013.  Accordingly, the Appellant's only ground of appeal  was  Article
    8.

7.   The judge made the following findings at paragraphs 19 to 21:

         "19. The Appellant and the Sponsor, her daughter,  clearly  have  a
             loving and supportive relationship.   However,  there  was  no
             evidence to  suggest  that  the  nature  and  quality  of  the
             relationship was anything beyond  that  which  would  normally
             subsist between a parent and adult child.  They clearly have a
             family life however.  They pursue it while the daughter is  in
             the UK and the Appellant is in Lebanon.  They have  chosen  to
             pursue their family life in this manner for some  years.   The
             refusal of entry clearance  to  the  Appellant  to  visit  her
             daughter is an interference with her family life.  She visited
             her daughter when her  husband  was  alive  and  her  daughter
             visits her in Lebanon.

         20.  Although the Appellant has been found to meet the requirements
             of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules I  do  not  find  the
             refusal  of  entry  clearance  in  the  circumstances  of  the
             Appellant  and  her  daughter  is   a   sufficiently   serious
             interference with her family life  as  to  engage  the  United
             Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 to  respect  the  family
             life of the Appellant and her daughter.  Whilst it might  well
             be more convenient for the Appellant to  visit  her  daughter,
             particularly given her daughter's limited leave from her  job,
             there is nothing to prevent her daughter, as she  has  in  the
             past, visiting the Appellant in Lebanon.

         21.  The Appellant could apply again for entry clearance  and  this
             time she would have the benefit of my findings of  fact.   The
             additional  cost  and  delay  are  not   matters   which   are
             sufficiently serious to engage the state's  obligations  under
             Article 8. It is not therefore necessary  to  address  whether
             the  interference  with  the  Appellant's   family   life   is
             proportionate to the legitimate public end of the  maintenance
             of effective immigration controls."

8.   These findings were open to the judge on the evidence before  him.   He
    did not go on to assess  proportionality  because  he  found  that  the
    consequences of the interference were not so serious so as  to  prevent
    family life from continuing as it had done in the  past.   He  accepted
    that it was more convenient for the Appellant to be able to  visit  the
    Sponsor but it did not prevent them  from  exercising  their  right  to
    family and private life.

9.   Accordingly, there was no need for the judge  to  go  on  and  consider
    proportionality. The judge had properly directed himself in  accordance
    with the steps set out in Razgar and his reasons for not  going  on  to
    assess proportionality were adequately set out in the determination.

10.  I find that there was no error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The decision of 25th
    February 2015 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20th July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 20th July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
