
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03211/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 April 2014                            |On 9 April 2014            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                            MISS SIRINA SULEMANA
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


      Representation:
                  For the Appellant: the appellant  was  not  legally
      represented but her father and sponsor, Mr A S Abdulai, appeared
      for her
      For the Respondent: Mr C Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 23 April 1991. She
      has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Zahed ("the FTTJ") who dismissed her appeal against the
      respondent's decision of 18 December 2012 to refuse  to  grant  her  a
      visa for entry to the UK as a family visitor under the  provisions  of
      paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules. Her sponsor is her father, Mr A
      S Abdulai ("the sponsor").


   2.  The  respondent  refused  the  application  because  the  appellant's
      evidence as to whether she was working was inconsistent, she  had  not
      shown how she was supported on a daily basis and provided no  evidence
      to  establish  that  she  was  married  with  one  child.  Her  family
      circumstances were doubted as well as her intention to leave the UK at
      the end of the proposed visit. There were  doubts  about  the  tenancy
      agreement submitted by her sponsor which was printed on the same paper
      as the application form. Finally, there was no evidence that  she  and
      her father were related as they claimed. The application  was  refused
      under the provisions of paragraph 41 (i) (ii) (vi) and (vii).


   3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal on  13  September
      2013. The sponsor appeared for her and gave evidence.  The  respondent
      was represented. In the light  of  the  birth  certificate  which  was
      produced the FTTJ accepted that the appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
      related as claimed as father and daughter.


   4. The FTTJ found that the appellant had not  established  that  she  was
      married or had a child. He concluded that  she  was  not  working  and
      lived in the sponsor's house with his mother. The money in her account
      belonged to the sponsor. She had not shown that she had ties to Ghana.
      Her father, half-brothers and sisters were in  the  UK.  He  concluded
      that she had not established  that  she  was  a  genuine  visitor  who
      intended to leave the UK  after  a  family  visit.  He  dismissed  the
      appeal.


   5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused by a Judge
      in the First-Tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on  renewal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal. The grounds argue that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the
      determination. The conclusions were based on no more  than  suspicions
      as to the appellant's intentions. The FTTJ raised the issue of whether
      the appellant was married and had a child which had not  been  put  to
      her by the respondent. There  was  no  proper  balancing  exercise  or
      adequate reasoning. The FTTJ should have  inferred  that  the  sponsor
      would have given his daughter's hand  in  marriage  and  accepted  his
      evidence that she was married. The sponsor had been in the UK for nine
      years and could have brought his daughter here before  she  became  an
      adult. On the  evidence  the  FTTJ  should  have  concluded  that  the
      appellant only intended to make  short-term  visit  and  then  return.
      There was no credibility finding in respect of the sponsor's evidence.


   6. In reply to my question, the sponsor said that the  evidence  he  gave
      was correctly recorded in paragraph 7 of the determination. He told me
      that there was no documentary evidence of his daughter's marriage. His
      daughter and her husband were of the Muslim faith and her husband  had
      refused to register the marriage. He volunteered the information  that
      evidence could have been provided from a number of people who attended
      the wedding. There was a birth certificate for  his  daughter's  child
      and it was in her possession. It showed her  as  the  mother  and  her
      husband as the father. He could not provide any explanation as to  why
      the original or a copy had not been produced except to say that he did
      not think that it was necessary. He accepted that he had not said that
      he had given his daughter's hand in marriage, only that he  knew  that
      she was married. He submitted that his oral evidence was sufficient to
      overcome the doubts of the respondent and the FTTJ  and  the  lack  of
      documentary evidence. He lived in this country with  his  second  wife
      and their three children. The appellant was his daughter by his  first
      marriage and he had no other children living in Ghana.


   7. Mr Avery submitted that it was puzzling why  no  documentary  evidence
      had been provided as to the appellant's marriage or the  existence  of
      her child. The refusal letter made it clear that  the  respondent  did
      not accept that the appellant was married or that she had a child.  It
      was  clear  that  the  FTTJ  had  properly  considered  the  sponsor's
      evidence. There  was  no  error  of  law  and  the  FTTJ  had  reached
      conclusions open to him on all the evidence. I was asked to uphold the
      determination.


   8. In reply the sponsor said that it was not material that  his  daughter
      and her husband lived in separate houses.


   9. I reserved my determination.


  10. I find that the respondent did put the appellant and  the  sponsor  on
      notice that it was not accepted that she was married or had  a  child.
      The relevant passage in the decision states; "you state that  you  are
      married with one child, however I  am  not  satisfied  that  you  have
      provided adequate evidence to substantiate this".  The  FTTJ  did  not
      raise a new point or catch the appellant and the sponsor  by  surprise
      when this was addressed at the hearing and dealt with as an  important
      factor in the determination.


  11. The information which the sponsor provided at the  hearing  before  me
      makes  it  more  puzzling  as  to  why  documentary  evidence  of  his
      daughter's marriage and the existence her child was not  produced.  He
      is clearly an intelligent man with a good grasp of English. After  the
      issue had been raised by the respondent in what I  find  to  be  clear
      terms I am unable to accept that he and the appellant did not think it
      necessary to produce the original or  a  copy  of  the  child's  birth
      certificate, knowing that  it  existed  and  was  in  the  appellant's
      possession. He said that it showed his daughter's name as  the  mother
      and her husband's name as  the  father.  Even  if,  as  he  said,  the
      appellant's husband refused to allow their marriage to  be  registered
      he volunteered the  information  that  there  were  witnesses  at  the
      wedding who could have confirmed that it had taken place. He  did  not
      offer any explanation as to why this evidence was not provided.


  12. I find that the respondent's and the FTTJ's conclusions were not based
      on mere suspicion but on inconsistencies and a lack  of  relevant  and
      important  documentation  where  there  has   been   no   satisfactory
      explanation for its absence. It is sufficiently clear  that  the  FTTJ
      did not accept the evidence of the sponsor in most important respects.
      His evidence that the appellant was his daughter was accepted  because
      it was supported by her  birth  certificate.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ
      reached conclusions properly open to him on all  the  evidence.  There
      was no reason for the FTTJ to speculate that the sponsor was likely to
      have given his daughter's hand in marriage where he had not said  that
      he had done so. The contention that  the  sponsor  had  not  tried  to
      obtain the appellant's entry to  the  UK  for  settlement  before  she
      became an adult, even if it had been suggested, was not a factor which
      had any material bearing on the issues before the respondent  and  the
      FTTJ.


  13. I find that there are no errors of law and I uphold the determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 4 April
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

