
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
VA/03073/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 November 2017                         |On 8 November 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR. MUHAMMAD GHUFRAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Subhan Shafiq (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant before me, is the Entry Clearance Officer.  However,  for
    ease of reference, in the course of this decision  I  shall  adopt  the
    parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall  in
    this decision, refer to Mr. Ghufran as  the  appellant  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as the respondent.


 2. The appellant is a Pakistani national who appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  26th
    November 2014 refusing his  application  for  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and with reference to paragraph 41  of  the
    immigration rules.  The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant
    is genuinely seeking entry to the UK as a visitor for  the  period  and
    purpose stated, or that he intends to leave the UK at the  end  of  his
    visit.


 3. In the grounds  of  appeal  filed  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  the
    appellant  maintained  that  the  matters  raised  by  the   respondent
    displayed a misunderstanding of the appellant's employment as a Cricket
    Coach, and the circumstances in which  the  appellant  lives  with  his
    extended family, including his parents, brothers and sisters.


 4. At paragraphs [4] to [14] of his decision, the  FtT  Judge  set  out  a
    summary of the  reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for  refusing  the
    application. At paragraph [19] of his decision, the Judge refers to the
    requirements set out  paragraphs  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   At
    paragraphs [24] to  [33],  the  Judge  records  the  evidence  that  he
    received from the appellant's sponsor, Mr Shafiq.  Mr Shafiq  was  able
    to provide the Judge with further  detail  about  appellant's  previous
    visits to the United Kingdom.  He also gave evidence about what he knew
    of the appellant, his work, and his  living  arrangements  in  Pakistan
    from his own visits to the appellant in Pakistan.


 5. The Judge's findings and decision are to be found at paragraphs [37] to
    [44] of the decision.  The Judge found Mr Shafiq to be  an  honest  and
    credible witness and was satisfied that the appellant was  employed  as
    claimed, and that  he  lived  with  his  own  and  extended  family  in
    Pakistan.  The Judge accepted that  in  the  appellant's  absence,  his
    family was cared for by other family members.  The Judge found that the
    appellant had adequate funds and would  be  adequately  maintained  and
    accommodated in the UK during the course of his visit.  The Judge  also
    found that the appellant's circumstances in Pakistan are such  that  he
    was likely to return home as he enjoyed family,  friends,  and  a  home
    there.


 6. The Judge concluded that the appellant's application  came  within  the
    Immigration Rules and the decision of the  respondent,  upheld  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager, was a decision that was not in accordance with
    the Immigration Rules and the law.


 7. The respondent appeals on the ground  that  the  appellant's  right  of
    appeal is limited by s84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    & Asylum Act 2002 (to the ground that the decision is unlawful under s6
    of  the  Human  Rights  Act  (c.42)  as  being  incompatible  with  the
    appellants Convention Rights.  The respondent  claims  that  the  Judge
    therefore erred in allowing the appeal on the basis that the  appellant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted on  31st  August  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes.  The matter comes before me to determine  whether
    the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law, and if so, to
    remake the decision.


 9. The appellant's sponsor, Mr Shafiq attended the hearing before me.   He
    was provided with a copy of the respondent's Grounds of Appeal.  At the
    outset of the hearing, I explained to him that I would  first  consider
    whether the decision of the FtT Judge is infected by an error  of  law,
    and if so, I would consider whether I should re-make the  decision,  or
    remit the matter back to the FtT for hearing afresh.


10. Miss Ahmad relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  in
    light of the statutory framework for appeals,  the  Judge  of  the  FtT
    could not lawfully allow the appeal on the grounds that  the  appellant
    satisfies the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  She  relied  upon
    the decisions of the Court of Appeal in SSHD  -v-  Tahir  Abbas  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1393 and ECO -v- Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ  1511  to  support  her
    submission that an Article 8 claim could not succeed.  She submits that
    the appellant seeks Entry Clearance to visit a family friend, and  that
    on any view of the facts, the appellant cannot establish  that  refusal
    of entry clearance would be a breach of the Article 8 right to a family
    and private life.


11. Mr Shafiq reminded me that the appellant has an impeccable  immigration
    history.  He has travelled to the UK on several  occasions  previously,
    and has always returned to his family in Pakistan.  He submits that the
    Judge of the FtT accepted that the appellant  is  employed  as  he  has
    always claimed, that he has a family in Pakistan, and he is  a  genuine
    visitor.


12. Having heard from the parties, I informed  the  parties  that  I  would
    allow the appeal and set aside the decision of the FtT for reasons that
    I would set out in a written decision. I  would  re-make  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal. I explained to Mr Shafiq that  in  my  judgment,
    the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law in that it  is
    simply not open to a Judge to allow an appeal on the grounds  that  the
    Judge is satisfied that the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  are
    met.


DISCUSSION


13. The appellant's application  for  entry  clearance  was  made  on  10th
    November 2014.  It was considered by the respondent and refused on 26th
    November 2014.  The application was considered under  paragraph  41  of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395).  The respondent was not  satisfied,  on
    the balance of probabilities, that the appellant was genuinely  seeking
    entry as a visitor for a limited period not exceeding 6 months, or that
    he intended to leave the UK at the end of his visit.  Accordingly,  the
    respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  all  of  the
    requirements of paragraph. 41.


14. in relation to applications for entry clearance made  after  25th  June
    2013, it is no longer possible in "family visitor" cases for  a  person
    to appeal on the grounds  that  the  applicant  is  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The right of appeal to the  FtT
    is now limited.


15. Section 84(1) of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") provides that an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an
    immigration decision, must be made on one or more of the grounds  which
    are then set out.  For present purposes, the only  relevant  ground  is
    under para. (c): that the decision is unlawful under section 6  of  the
    HRA.


16. Section 6(1) of the HRA makes it unlawful for a public authority to act
    in a way which is incompatible with a person's  Convention  rights,  as
    set out in Sch. 1.  Article 8, which is to be found in Sch.1, provides:




         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.


         (2) There shall be no interference by a public authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others"


17. The statutory framework does not allow for an  appeal  on  the  grounds
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met.  The  Judge  of
    the FtT proceeds upon the basis that the requirements of  paragraph  41
    of the rules are met,  and  fails  to  consider  at  all,  whether  the
    decision of the respondent is unlawful under section 6 of the HRA.  The
    decision of the FtT Judge discloses a material error of law,  and  must
    therefore be set aside.


18. In re-making the decision, I remind myself that the  applicant  applied
    for entry clearance to visit a family friend, Mr Shafiq, in the UK  for
    a period of 6 weeks.  The Judge of the FtT records the evidence  of  Mr
    Shafiq that the appellant always stayed with  him  during  his  visits,
    apart  from  the  times  when  the  appellant  visits  relatives.   The
    appellant's immediate family including his wife and children remain  in
    Pakistan.


19. In considering whether the decision of the respondent is unlawful under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act, that  is,  whether  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance is in breach  of  Article  8,  I  must  first  consider
    whether it has been established that there is family life  (or  private
    life) between the appellant and his sponsor.


20. I accept the submission made by Miss Ahmad that  on  any  view  of  the
    facts, the appellant cannot establish that refusal of  entry  clearance
    would be a breach of the Article 8 right to a family and private  life.
    The Court of Appeal has authoritatively held that the ambit of  "family
    life" does not embrace a situation such as the  present.   In  ECO  -v-
    Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511, Sales LJ, with whom the  other  members  of
    the Court agreed said at paras. [17]-[19]:


         "17.  The leading domestic authority on the ambit of 'family  life'
         for the purposes of Article 8 is the well-known  decision  of  this
         court in Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31; [2003] INLR 31. The court found that  a  single
         man of 38 years old who had lived in the  UK  since  1999  did  not
         enjoy 'family life' with his mother, brother and sister,  who  were
         living in Germany as refugees. At para. [14] Sedley LJ accepted  as
         a proper approach the guidance given by the European Commission for
         Human Rights in its decision in S v United  Kingdom  (1984)  40  DR
         196, at 198:


             'Generally, the protection of  family  life  under  Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33-year-
             old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
             protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence  of
             further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal
             emotional ties.'


         He held that there is not an absolute requirement of dependency  in
         an economic sense for 'family  life'  to  exist,  but  that  it  is
         necessary for there to be  real,  committed  or  effective  support
         between family members in order to show that 'family  life'  exists
         ([17]); 'neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
         ordinarily go with them are, by themselves or together', sufficient
         ([19]); and the natural tie between  a  parent  and  an  infant  is
         probably a special case in which there is  no  need  to  show  that
         there is a demonstrable measure of support ([18]).


     18. The judgments of Arden LJ and  Simon  Brown  LJ  were  to  similar
         effect. Arden LJ also  relied  on  S  v  United  Kingdom  as  good
         authority and held that there is no presumption that a person  has
         a family life, even with members of his  immediate  family  ([24])
         and that family life is not established between an adult child and
         his surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
         exists than normal emotional ties,  such  as  ties  of  dependency
         ([25]).


     19. Kugathas remains good law: see e.g. R (Britcits)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368, [61]  and  [74]
         (Sir Terence Etherton MR), [82] (Davis LJ) and [86] (Sales LJ). As
         Sir Terence Etherton MR pithily summarised the position  at  [74],
         in order for family life within the meaning of Article 8(1) to  be
         found  to  exist,  'There  must  be  something  more  than  normal
         emotional ties'."


20. Later, at para. [30], Sales LJ said:


         "In my view, the shortness of the proposed  visit  in  the  present
         case is a yet further indication that the refusal of leave to enter
         did not involve any want of respect for anyone's  family  life  for
         the purposes of Article 8. A three-week visit would not  involve  a
         significant contribution to 'family life' in  the  sense  in  which
         that term is used in Article 8. Of course, it would often  be  nice
         for family members to meet up and visit in this way.  But  a  short
         visit of this kind will not establish a relationship between any of
         the individuals concerned of support going beyond normal  emotional
         ties, even if there were a  positive  obligation  under  Article  8
         (which there is not) to allow a person to enter the UK  to  try  to
         develop a 'family life' which does not currently exist."


21.  In my judgement, the appellant has not established on the  facts  here
    that he has established a family or private life with his  sponsor  and
    it is clear from the  authorities  that  relationships  between  adults
    would not necessarily acquire  the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the
    Convention,  without  evidence  of  further  elements  of   dependency,
    involving more than the normal emotional ties.  Here, not only are  the
    appellant and his sponsor not related, but understandably, there is  no
    evidence of any dependency at all.  In my judgement,  there  is,  as  a
    matter of law, no family life or  private  life  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 in the present case.


22. The decision of the respondent is not therefore unlawful under  section
    6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act,  and  the  appellant's  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.


23. I have no hesitation in finding that there is an error of  law  in  the
    determination of the FtT. The determination of the FtT  is  set  aside,
    and the appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  application  for
    entry clearance is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


24. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Blake is set aside.




25. I re-make the decision and the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal
    of his application for entry clearance, is dismissed


26.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          6th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Whilst  the  appeal  before  me  has  been  allowed,  the  appeal  has  been
dismissed.  In the circumstances, I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          6th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

