
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03393/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2015                     |On 21 August 2015                    |
|Oral decision                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                               khalid boubess
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW YORK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Tremont
                    Midwest Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi promulgated on 23 March 2015 in which
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision  made  on  10
    April 2014 to refuse him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.  That refusal was based on two grounds, firstly a  failure  to
    meet the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    second on the basis that paragraph 320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    applied.

 2. In brief the appellant had said that he wished to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to see Manchester United playing and he would be staying for  a
    period of five days between 3 and 8 May 2014.  He had  also  said  that
    his father would be here.

 3. We note that the  appellant  has  three  nationalities  and  passports:
    Lebanese, Jordanian and now Canadian.  The  application  was  unusually
    made for entry clearance as  a  visitor  although  he  is  not  a  visa
    national because a previous application for entry  clearance  had  been
    refused on the basis of a failure to declare  that  he  had  previously
    held Jordanian nationality and a passport.  These matters are  set  out
    in the Entry Clearance Manager's appeal review and  in  the  notice  of
    refusal.

 4. It is, we regret to say, not clear from the decision under appeal  what
    happened at the hearing, (or  even  if  there  was  one)  before  Judge
    Rastogi.  In her decision Judge Rastogi records at paragraph 4 that the
    matter was listed before her, that the appellant had provided a witness
    statement and skeleton argument and a bundle had  been  prepared;  and,
    that a Miss Greening had attended the appeal.  The judge then records:

         "Before I was ready to deal with the case I received a message  via
         my clerk that both Mr Lumb and Miss Greening were of the view  that
         I did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal and as such an  oral
         hearing was not required."

    She then records that she  did  not  have  jurisdiction  and  notes  at
    paragraph 6 that at no stage in the witness statement or  the  skeleton
    argument was Article 8 raised and on that basis she considered she  had
    no jurisdiction.  The judge  did  however  at  paragraph  8  go  on  to
    conclude that in any event there was no breach of Article 8 rights.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had recorded that the appellant's representative had  agreed  that  the
    judge did not have jurisdiction; that this was incorrect; and, that  he
    wanted to have the matter heard but his representative was  advised  by
    the court clerk that the judge was not willing to hear the case as  she
    did not consider she had jurisdiction.  It is  submitted  further  that
    had the hearing proceeded it was likely to  have  been  allowed,  there
    being clear errors in the  current  decision  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    grounds and that the judge had erred in her  assessment  of  Article  8
    family life.

 6. Permission was granted on 16 June 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Heynes  who  observed  that  it  was  not  clear  from  the  Record  of
    Proceedings whether any hearing took place.

 7. We heard submissions from Mr Kannangara who  accepted  that  there  was
    before us no statement from Miss Greening or anyone else who  had  been
    present at the hearing.  We consider that this is a significant  defect
    and we do not accept the fact that a ground of appeal  which  had  been
    signed by a solicitor for him is capable of constituting  evidence  for
    the purposes identified by the Upper  Tribunal  as  necessary  in  Azia
    (proof of misconduct by judge) [2012] UKUT 00096 (IAC).

 8. We do however have significant concerns about  the  decision  of  Judge
    Rastogi.  First there is a Record of Proceedings  in  which  both  Miss
    Greening and the Presenting Officer,  Mr  Lumb  are  mentioned.   There
    appears to be a brief note to the effect that it was  conceded  by  the
    parties that she had no jurisdiction.  The  decision  also  appears  to
    indicate that the hearing took place because both  representatives  are
    named in the record of proceedings yet this is directly  at  odds  with
    what is recorded in the decision which is that there  was  no  hearing.
    Further, we have some concern about the nature of the concession  made.
    The concession appears to be that there is no jurisdiction to  consider
    human rights, being the only ground of appeal permissible  pursuant  to
    Section 84(1) (c) of the 2002 Act, yet this was  clearly  mentioned  in
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  3.  The
    judge therefore appears to have accepted on a somewhat unclear basis  a
    concession which was on its face wrong. Whilst that would not in itself
    have been a basis on which we would have found there was  a  procedural
    error giving rise to an  error  of  law  we  consider  that  given  the
    unsatisfactory nature of the decision which it is not at all  clear  on
    what basis the judge proceeded to determine the appeal, whether it  was
    in an oral hearing or on the papers and accordingly we consider that it
    should be set aside.  We gave that indication at the hearing before  us
    and invited the parties to make submissions on Article 8.

 9. Mr Kannangara accepted and we consider he was right to do  so  that  as
    was  identified  in  the  decision  of  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 that the appropriate course of  action  is
    to answer the five questions set out in  Razgar.   He  submitted  first
    that there was in this  case  a  failure  to  respect  the  appellant's
    private or family life and second  that  the  interference  would  have
    consequences of such gravity potentially to  engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8.  He accepted also  the  considerations  of  the  Immigration
    Rules would only arise if we were to go on to  consider  questions  (4)
    and (5) as set out in Razgar, it of  course  being  necessary  for  the
    first three questions to be answered  in  the  affirmative  before  the
    analysis could properly continue to that stage.

10. Mr Kannangara sought to persuade us that Article 8 was engaged in  this
    case given that the appellant does have a private life  and  that  that
    involved him attending a football match for which he had paid  and  the
    accommodation for  which  he  had  paid  in  Manchester  and  that  the
    intention was also to join his father here who had been travelling from
    Lebanon.  He also submitted that  not  being  able  to  do  so  was  of
    sufficient gravity to engage the operation of Article 8.  With  respect
    we disagree with both of these propositions.  Whilst we accept that the
    appellant  has  a  private  life,  even  assuming  that  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights is engaged in this case given the limits  on
    territoriality enshrined in Article 1  of  the  Convention  we  do  not
    consider that the interference in not being able to attend  a  football
    match in Manchester which members of the appellant's family (who do not
    live  in  the  United  Kingdom)would  be  attending   amounts   to   an
    interference and second we do not  consider  that  the  nature  of  any
    alleged interference reaches anywhere near having sufficient gravity to
    engage the operation of Article 8 although we accept that the threshold
    is low; coming to the United Kingdom to attend a football match is well
    below the low threshold needed to engage that.

11. As we have found  that  both  questions  1  and  2  within  the  Razgar
    framework fall to be answered in the negative, it is unnecessary for us
    to continue to consider the remaining questions and thus we do not need
    to make any findings with respect to the Immigration Rules.

12. For these reasons, we conclude that the decision made was not a  breach
    of the appellant's rights pursuant to Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and for that reason we dismiss the appeal.

13. In conclusion therefore we find first that  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law.  We  set
    it aside and we remake the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on  the
    only ground available, that is, human rights pursuant to Section  84(1)
    (c) of the 2002 Act.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law. We set it aside. We remake the decision by  dismissing  the  appeal  on
all grounds.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

