
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Mavis PfendE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Sponsor in Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by an Entry Clearance Officer against a  decision  by
    First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor,  allowing  the  Respondent's
    appeal against a decision by an Entry  Clearance  Officer  refusing  to
    issue her with a visit visa.

 2. The Respondent is a national of Zimbabwe born on 12 June 1952.   On  28
    May 2014 she applied for entry clearance as a family visitor  to  visit
    her daughter and two grandchildren.  This application was refused on 20
    June 2014 with reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules
    on the basis that false representations had been made in the form of  a
    false bank statement that  had  been  produced  as  part  of  the  visa
    application.  Reference was also made to a document verification report
    which the Entry Clearance Officer said that was held on file.

 3. The Respondent appealed.  Her appeal was limited by virtue  of  Section
    88A to human rights grounds only and on 26 August 2014 the  Duty  Judge
    decided that the grounds of appeal made sufficient reference to Article
    8 that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 4. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  on
    20 April 2015 at Hatton Cross.  The appeal was on the  float  list  and
    there was no representative on behalf of the Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    The Sponsor, who  is  the  Respondent's  daughter,  attended  and  gave
    evidence.  She was unrepresented. In a decision dated  22  April  2015,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor allowed the appeal.

 5. The judge noted at paragraph 7 that the burden of proving the facts  in
    relation to paragraph 320(7A) was upon the Secretary of State  and  the
    applicable standard was that of a balance of probabilities.  He further
    directed himself that the burden was upon the Respondent in respect  of
    all other matters to the  same  standard  of  proof.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 320(7A) the judge directed himself in light of  the  decision
    in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 that the Secretary  of  State  must
    discharge the burden of showing that the Respondent or  a  third  party
    acting on her behalf  had  a  dishonest  intention  when  making  false
    representations.  Crucially at [13] the judge noted that there  was  no
    document verification report in the Secretary  of  State's  bundle  nor
    were the impugned bank statements  submitted.   The  judge  also  heard
    evidence from the Sponsor, who, as he records at [15], adamantly denied
    that any false documents had been submitted with the application.

 6. As a consequence the judge at [17] found that the  Secretary  of  State
    had entirely failed to prove her case that any documents  submitted  by
    the Respondent were false and he found that  no  false  representations
    were in fact made and no evidence had been adduced to  support  the  's
    case.

 7. The judge then went on to consider the appeal with regard to  paragraph
    41 of the Immigration Rules and found at [20] that the  Respondent  has
    rental and pension income in Zimbabwe and there was a very good  reason
    for the proposed visit, i.e. to attend the  Sponsor's  graduation.   He
    went on to find at [21] that the  Respondent  would  have  returned  to
    Zimbabwe in compliance with the conditions of entry clearance and  that
    the Sponsor would be  able  to  accommodate  and  maintain  her  mother
    without recourse to public funds, paragraph 22.

 8. He also noted at [24]  that  the  Sponsor  and  her  two  children  had
    recently visited Zimbabwe, which, he found, provided a clear indication
    that the desire and intention to maintain family ties not only  between
    the Respondent  and  the  Sponsor  but  most  importantly  between  the
    Respondent and her grandchildren in the United Kingdom.

 9. The judge then considered the recent decision in  Mostafa  [2015]  UKUT
    00112 (IAC) and he noted that the President had found  that  Article  8
    had an important role to play when viewed  in  the  context  of  family
    visits and this should be applied purposefully especially when children
    are concerned.  He went on to find  at  paragraph  26  that  there  was
    family life between the Respondent and the Sponsor and/or the Sponsor's
    children and at [27] that the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    interfered with or failed to respect  family  life  to  a  sufficiently
    serious extent in order to engage Article 8 as the  decision  prevented
    the family from being  able  to  come  together.   He  found  that  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was premised upon an allegation
    of dishonesty and had not been supported  by  any  evidence.   He  then
    proceeded to allow the appeal both on the  basis  that  the  Respondent
    satisfied all the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the  Rules  and  in
    light of this it was difficult to see how the entry  clearance  refusal
    could be said to be justified under Article 8(2).

10. The Secretary of State on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer made an
    application for permission to appeal  in  time  on  1  May  2015.   The
    grounds in support of the application asserted that family  life  would
    not  normally  exist  between  adult  signatures,  parents  and   adult
    children, absent dependency representing more than the normal emotional
    ties, and reliance was placed on the case of Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31.

11. The grounds further asserted that the judge erred in  failing  to  make
    any clear finding on whether or not there was  a  financial  dependency
    and even if there was this  does  not  amount  to  a  dependency  to  a
    sufficient degree to ground a finding that family life exists.   Absent
    dependency, family life arguably does not exist and there was therefore
    no need to address proportionality  and  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    proceeding to the proportionality assessment.

12. It was  further  submitted  that  the  proportionality  assessment  was
    inadequate as it does not explain why the refusal  of  the  visa  which
    allows  the  parties   to   be   together   only   temporarily   is   a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    16 June 2015 on the basis that both grounds were arguable.   The  judge
    noted that the Entry Clearance Officer did not  challenge  the  finding
    that she had failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that  false
    representations had  been  made  in  support  of  her  application,  so
    essentially the grounds were limited  to  the  manner  in  which  Judge
    Norton-Taylor dealt with Article 8.

14. At the hearing before  me  on  11  November  2015,  the  Sponsor  again
    appeared unrepresented and the Entry Clearance Officer was  represented
    by Ms Fijiwala.  I heard detailed submissions from Ms Fijiwala in  line
    with the grounds in  support  of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  She also very helpfully handed up two further decisions of the
    Upper Tribunal that postdate the decision in  Mostafa.   The  first  of
    these is the case of Adjei [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC), which was  heard  on
    21 April 2015 and promulgated on 6 May 2015.  The facts  in  Adjei  are
    distinct from the facts in this case.  In particular, the  claimant  in
    that case wished to visit her extended family in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst she had a 2 year old  daughter  she  did  not  apply  for  entry
    clearance on her behalf, so the application was  just  in  relation  to
    visiting her father, stepmother and stepsiblings.

15. Since the decision in  Adjei,  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  28  July  2015
    considered the case of Kaur [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) and in  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 August 2015  looked  at  the  previous  decisions  in
    Mostafa and Adjei, considered whether they were  consistent  with  each
    other and concluded  at  [29]  that  they  were.   In  particular  they
    considered whether compliance with paragraph 41 of the Rules  would  or
    would not carry weight in respect of an  assessment  of  this  kind  in
    respect of Article 8 and they held that, even if  a  person  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 41, this does not necessarily establish  that
    they win under Article 8 because it  may  not  be  engaged.  The  Upper
    Tribunal went on to find on the facts of  that  case  that  there  were
    family ties established between the Appellant, who was a widow and  her
    family in the United Kingdom. There was  also  evidence  that  she  had
    income and further relatives in India.

16. I find that there are strong similarities between  this  case  and  the
    case of Kaur in respect of the Article 8 aspect of that  case.  It  is,
    however, distinguishable on the basis that Mrs Kaur did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Rules. Bearing in mind all the case
    law, I uphold  Judge  Norton-Taylor's  finding  that  family  life  was
    engaged and that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  was  not
    proportionate.  Thus he did not materially err in law in  allowing  the
    appeal.  The basis of the refusal was  essentially  with  reference  to
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules and  the  judge  found  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had not discharged the burden of proving this, absent
    any evidence before  him.   He  was  clearly  entitled  to  reach  this
    finding, which has not been challenged by the Entry Clearance Officer.

17. The Judge correctly directed himself in  respect  of  the  decision  in
    Mostafa at [23] and [24] and I note in  particular  that  whilst  there
    reference is made to the types of family relationship  which  does  not
    necessarily include grandparents and grandchildren the case of Marckx v
    Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330 does establish that family life  can  subsist
    between grandparents and grandchildren.  He correctly directed  himself
    at [31] that, whilst the Respondent was not a spouse but the mother and
    grandmother of the Sponsor and her children,  given  his  finding  that
    family life was established and an interference with that  family  life
    was made out, a "weaker" form of family  life  tie  could  not  provide
    justification pursuant to Article 8(2), given that the  Respondent  met
    the requirements of the Rules.

18. Therefore, whilst Judge Norton-Taylor did not have the benefit  of  the
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal in Adjei and  Kaur  I  find  that  this
    would not have made any material difference to his decision and he  was
    entitled to rely on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mostafa.   In
    those  circumstances  the  judge  was  not  required  to  give  further
    deference to the Entry Clearance Officer's view  of  where  the  public
    interest lay and bearing in mind that the issue concerned  family  life
    the requirements of Section 117B are not necessarily material and would
    not have made a difference to his decision.

19. For these reasons I dismiss the appeal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and uphold the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor
    allowing the appeal by Mrs Pfende.

Notice of Decision

20.  The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

