
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03638/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M B
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Mustak Mahammed
                    Gulamrasul Basar


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of India, is a child  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance to visit the United Kingdom for two weeks.   His  application
    for entry clearance was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on  28th
    May 2014 and an appeal against that decision was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley in a determination dated 14th  May  2015.   The
    Secretary of State appeals with permission against that decision.

 3. The Appellant's application  for  entry  clearance  was  refused  under
    paragraph 46A of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the  Appellant
    had applied  for  a  visa  along  with  his  grandmother  but,  as  her
    application had been refused and she was no longer  travelling  to  the
    UK, the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) was not satisfied  that  suitable
    arrangements had been made for the Appellant's travel to and  reception
    and care in the UK and was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 and 46A of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  born  on  26th
    November 2011 in the United Kingdom.  His parents were  in  the  United
    Kingdom on a  temporary  basis.  After  the  birth  of  the  child  the
    Appellant's mother was diagnosed with advanced heart  failure  and  was
    seriously ill.  Due to his mother's  illness  the  Appellant's  parents
    decided to send the Appellant to India to  be  taken  care  of  by  his
    grandparents.  An application was made for entry clearance so that  the
    Appellant could come to the UK to visit his mother.

 5. In considering this appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant's mother and father.   The  judge  accepted
    the evidence put forward by both witnesses.  The  judge  accepted  that
    adequate maintenance and  accommodation  is  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the child and that there is a genuine reason for the visit.
     The judge accepted that the evidence from the Appellant's parents that
    they will ensure his return to India and accepted that he had  received
    credible evidence from the parties.  The judge accepted that there  was
    credible medical evidence in relation to the mother's  ongoing  medical
    condition and treatment [12].  The judge also accepted that  there  was
    credible medical evidence that the mother has been unable to travel  to
    India due to her medical coronary conditions and that  the  father  has
    equally been unable to do so  because  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK had been with the Home Office [12].

 6. The evidence before the judge was that when the Appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance the  mother's  application  for  leave  to  remain  was
    pending with the Home Office along with that of  her  spouse  but  that
    circumstances had now changed and they both had leave to remain in  the
    United  Kingdom  until  June  2017.   This  meant  that,  although  the
    Appellant's father had previously been unable to  travel  to  India  to
    bring their son to the UK and they  had  accordingly  made  alternative
    arrangements for the grandmother to  travel  with  him,  now  that  the
    Appellant's father had obtained leave to remain  he  could  travel  and
    intended to travel to India to bring the child back for a visit to  see
    his parents.  The judge accepted that  evidence.   The  judge  accepted
    that there was a genuine wish by the parents to see the Appellant,  who
    is now 3 years old, and that they had last seen him when he was only  3
    months old.

 7. The judge went on to allow the appeal under paragraphs 41 and 46 of the
    Immigration Rules.



Error of Law

 8. The Grounds of Appeal contend, and this was accepted by  Mr  Bazini  on
    behalf of the Appellant, that the judge made a material misdirection of
    law in that, since the commencement of Section  52  of  the  Crime  and
    Courts Act on 25th June 2013, the right of appeal for  visitors  coming
    to visit family members in the UK has been restricted  to  two  grounds
    which are that the decision is unlawful on race relation grounds or  is
    contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 9. It is clear from the judge's determination that  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate that the Grounds of Appeal were limited in this  case.   The
    judge did not refer at all to the human rights Grounds  of  Appeal  and
    made no decision in relation to  that  ground.   The  judge's  decision
    therefore contains a material error of law and I set it aside.

10. There has been no challenge to the  judge's  findings  of  fact  and  I
    therefore preserve all of those findings.   I  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence before me and  on  the  basis  of
    those findings of fact.

Remaking the Decision

11. In terms of remaking the decision Mr Bazini  relied  on  the  cases  of
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Kaur
    (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC).  He submitted  that
    Article 8 is engaged in this case in that on the findings of the  judge
    there is family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  his  parents.   He
    submitted that the Immigration Rules have been met and that this  is  a
    compelling case.  The judge accepted that the Appellant's mother cannot
    fly.  He accepted that the child would  go  back  to  India  after  the
    visit.

12. I have considered the guidance given by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 confirming  that  the  state  has  a  wider
    margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to be satisfied in
    entry clearance cases compared to applications for leave to remain  and
    that an appellant needs to show that there are individual interests  at
    stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as to
    give rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist  to
    justify the grant of leave to enter outside the rules [40] [56].

13. I have considered the findings of fact  made  by  the  judge.   I  have
    considered the five steps set out in the decision of R v SSHD ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  I accept  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his parents constitute family life.  I  accept  that  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance is an interference with that  family
    life.  I take into  account  the  circumstances  and  reasons  why  the
    Appellant  is  residing  in  India  apart  from  his  parents  and  the
    Appellant's mother's  medical  condition.  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
    Appellant has now demonstrated that he can meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules as his father can now accompany him to the UK.

14. I also consider the factors set out in Section 117B of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Appellant here is a  young  child
    and it is not necessarily appropriate to expect him  to  speak  English
    however his parents are financially independent. The  relationship  has
    not been developed whilst the appellant or his parents were in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

15. I am satisfied that it is proportionate in  all  the  circumstances  of
    this case to allow the appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained a material error  of
law and I set that decision aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the Appellant's circumstances have changed since  the  date  of  the
application.


Signed   Date:  4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
