
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/03054/2014
                                                               VA/03056/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SHAHID BASHIR
                                FAKHRA BASHIR
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal purporting to allow the  appeal  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.   The
    respondent below was the Visa Officer in Abu Dhabi.  The appellants are
    a husband and wife, citizens of Pakistan who seek to  visit  family  in
    the United Kingdom and the sponsor is the principal appellant's brother
    who is married and has children here.

 2. There is now no right of appeal against the refusal of the  visit  visa
    save on human rights grounds and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    therefore is ultra vires the Tribunal and cannot stand.  The reason for
    this is the change to the grounds of appeal  now  set  out  at  Section
    84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended.

 3. No human rights grounds appear to have been advanced and  there  is  no
    Rule 24 reply.  The claimant has not arranged representation before the
    Tribunal today, so if there is anything further that  they  could  have
    said we have not had the benefit of hearing it and no  explanation  has
    been provided.

 4. Accordingly we are left with the situation where the judge  allowed  an
    appeal on a basis on which it was not open to him to allow it and where
    there appears to be no material upon which he could have allowed it  on
    human rights grounds. That being so there is a plain error of  law  and
    the decision must be set aside and remade.

 5. I proceed to remake it and I dismiss both appeals.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I do not consider it necessary to make any anonymity order.


Signed   Date 15 September 2015

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
