
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03483/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9 April 2015                               |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - kuwait
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                rajaa baltaji
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms J Cunningham of The Taylor Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Syria born on 9 July 1959 and has been resident and working  in  Kuwait
    for some 30 years or more.  On 6 May 2014 she applied to the  Appellant
    (the ECO) for entry clearance as a visitor to visit  her  daughter  and
    son-in-law and their child, her granddaughter, born in early 2014.

The ECO's Decision

 2. On 8 June 2014 the ECO refused the application under reference  804051.
    He noted the Applicant had previously been refused entry clearance as a
    visitor on four occasions.  He acknowledged the  importance  of  family
    visits and accepted she was employed as a teacher.

 3. He noted that the Applicant's daughter and son-in-law had come  to  the
    United Kingdom as student dependant and student  and  had  subsequently
    applied  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  He concluded the Applicant did not intend to make a
    short visit and was therefore not genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor
    and refused entry clearance by way of reference to paragraphs 41(i) and
    41(ii) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 3 July 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal asserting she  had
    been living in Kuwait since 1982 since which time she had been with the
    same employer.  The grounds referred to the medical  condition  of  the
    Applicant's granddaughter to which the Applicant had referred  at  Q.87
    of her application and supplied a hospital letter to confirm it.

 5. Neither the ECO's decision nor the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review
    makes reference to the Applicant's granddaughter's medical condition.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. By a decision promulgated on 12 December 2014 on the papers and without
    a hearing First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell  made  findings  that  the
    Applicant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  proceeded
    to allow her appeal under the Rules, stating it was not  necessary  for
    him to consider her human rights claim.

 7. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the basis there was an error  of
    law in the Judge's determination because he had omitted to consider the
    appeal on the restricted grounds for appeal provided by Section  52  of
    the Crime and Courts Act 2013, which came into effect on 25 June  2013.
    These limit the appeal rights in respect  of  applications  for  family
    visit visas made on or after 25 June 2013.  The grounds of  appeal  are
    limited to human rights grounds.

 8. The ECO asserted the Judge had failed  to  consider  the  human  rights
    grounds and if he had it  was  submitted  he  would  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the decision did not interfere with the family life  of
    the Applicant  in  a  way  which  would  engage  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the European Convention.

 9. On 2 February 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin granted the
    ECO permission to appeal  because  the  Judge  had  arguably  erred  in
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules when grounds of  appeal
    had been limited to breaches of human rights.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. The Applicant's son-in-law attended the hearing. I supplied the parties
    with information I had obtained from the  internet  about  the  medical
    condition  of  the  Applicant's  granddaughter  which  Mr  Tarlow  said
    confirmed his limited understanding of the condition.  I mentioned  the
    response for the Applicant lodged by her representatives on 27 February
    under Procedure Rule 24.  This referred to the determination in Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC).   It
    made no reference to any subsequent jurisprudence and in  particular  R
    (MM Lebanon) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 or to the decision  in
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).

11. Ms Cunningham quite rightly accepted that there was a material error of
    law in the Judge's decision on account of  his  failure  to  understand
    that the grounds of appeal were restricted to human rights  grounds  by
    reason of Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 and the  decision
    had to be set aside for that reason.

12. I indicated I intended to re-make the decision and, in so doing,  would
    take into account the  report  of  2  April  2015  on  the  Applicant's
    granddaughter from Barts Health NHS Trust.   It  gave  details  of  the
    granddaughter's  present  condition  which  appears  to  be  not   very
    different from the symptoms referred to  in  the  Applicant's  original
    application.  The report goes on to detail the difficulties  of  travel
    for an individual with the condition of the Applicant's grandchild made
    travel outside some western European states virtually impossible.

13. Subsequent to  the  Judge's  decision  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  given
    guidance in the assessment of appeals against refusal of  family  visit
    visas having regard to the grounds of appeal restricted by  Section  52
    of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 in Mostafa.

14. The Judge addressed the issue of genuineness of the proposed visit  and
    the Applicant's intention to return at  para.17  of  his  decision  and
    noted there was before him evidence in the form of copies of  residence
    permits that the Sponsor and his wife had been issued residence permits
    as refugees until 14 May 2018.  The Applicant's son is employed by  the
    accountants, KPMG UK Limited, and works in Information Technology.

15. The Applicant has lived for many years in Kuwait but it is evident from
    a letter from the Applicant's  daughter-in-law  which  was  before  the
    Judge that she and her husband had come  to  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Syria. The evidence in the Tribunal file is sufficient on  the  balance
    of probabilities to show that the Applicant's son  and  daughter-in-law
    have been recognised as refugees and therefore their  position  in  the
    United Kingdom is certain and lawful.

16. The Judge found the Applicant met the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Upper Tribunal in Mostafa said:-

         24.  It is the  very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
             fundamental values that have to be considered in all  relevant
             cases. It would therefore be extremely foolish to  attempt  to
             be prescriptive, given the intensely  factual  and  contextual
             sensitivity of every case. Thus  we  refrain  from  suggesting
             that,  in  this  type  of  case,  any   particular   kind   of
             relationship would always attract the  protection  of  Article
             8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never  come
             within its scope. We are, however, prepared  to  say  that  it
             will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other
             than a close relative will be able to show that the refusal of
             entry clearance comes within the scope of  Article  8(1).   In
             practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where
             the relationship is that of husband and wife  or  other  close
             life partners or a parent and minor child  and  even  then  it
             will not necessarily be extended to cases where, for  example,
             the proposed visit  is  based  on  a  whim  or  will  not  add
             significantly to the  time  that  the  people  involved  spend
             together. In the limited class of cases where  Article  8  (1)
             ECHR is engaged the refusal of  entry  clearance  must  be  in
             accordance with the  law  and  proportionate.  If  a  person's
             circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and  they  have
             not acted in a way that undermines the system  of  immigration
             control, a refusal of entry clearance is  liable  to  infringe
             Article 8.

17. Although the Applicant is not the partner of her  grandchild's  parents
    nor is she the parent of her grandchild but it is a relationship  which
    is close and certainly the proposed visit is not one "based on  a  whim
    or will not add significantly to the  time  that  the  people  involved
    spend together". The Applicant has never seen her grandchild. Given the
    Applicant's grandchild  cannot  travel  to  Kuwait  and  indeed  travel
    anywhere outside the immediate  vicinity  of  the  hospital  where  she
    receives treatment will be difficult, if  not  impossible,  and  has  a
    short life expectancy, I find it is  disproportionate  to  any  of  the
    lawful objectives contained in Article 8(2) of the European  Convention
    and in particular the economic well-being of the country  and  need  to
    maintain proper immigration control for the  Applicant  to  be  refused
    entry clearance to visit her family in the United Kingdom.

Conclusion

18. For the reasons given that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contained
    a material error of law such that the decision  should  be  set  aside.
    There was no challenge to the  findings  of  fact  and  I  re-make  the
    decision allowing the appeal of the  Applicant  against  refusal  of  a
    family visit visa on the basis that the refusal is disproportionate  to
    the obligation to respect the family life  of  the  Applicant  and  her
    family.

Anonymity

19. There was no request  for  an  anonymity  order  and  I  find  none  is
    required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that the decision is set aside.   The  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved and the following decision is substituted:-

    The appeal of the Applicant against the ECO's decision  is  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 16. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  There was limited  information  about  the  extent  of  the  medical
condition of the Applicant's grandchild before the ECO and at  the  date  of
the decision there was no  guidance  from  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  how  to
construe the provisions of Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013.   In
these circumstances I decline to make a fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 16. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

