
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 21st July 2015                    |On 22nd July 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                ZAFAR MEHMOOD
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no attendance.
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Shergill, promulgated on the 17th February 2015, in  which  the
       appeal against the refusal of a grant  of  entry  as  a  visitor  was
       dismissed.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted as it was said to be  arguable  that
       the Judge made inconsistent findings.

Discussion


    3. There was no attendance on behalf of the Appellant.  I  am  satisfied
       notice of the hearing has been served upon the Appellant and  his  UK
       based sponsor by first class post and there is no  evidence  of  such
       notice being returned as not having been served. I am satisfied there
       has been valid service in accordance with the Rules and the  fact  no
       explanation has been provided for the  lack  of  attendance,  and  no
       application  made  for  an  adjournment,  means  no  basis  for   not
       proceeding in absence has been made out. I find to do so to be in the
       interests of justice and fairness.

    4. The grounds of appeal are limited by virtue of  section  84(1)(c)  of
       the 2002 Act but do  permit  a  human  rights  challenge.  The  Judge
       records in the determination at paragraph  7  that  no  human  rights
       grounds were advanced before the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. There is no arguable contradiction in the findings. It  is  true  the
       sponsor who attended was  found  to  be  credible  but  that  is  not
       determinative. The sponsor's mother is ill but the Judge specifically
       noted in paragraph 15 that the sponsor did not definitively say  that
       her mother could not fly.  It was noted the relationship between  the
       sponsor's mother in the UK and her brother, the Appellant,  had  been
       maintained at a distance and the purpose of the  visit  was  for  the
       brother to provide moral support to  the  sponsor's  mother  who  has
       medical issues.

    6. This may be so but it was  not  shown  such  support  is  crucial  or
       critical or that it could not be provided by other family in  the  UK
       or that the nature of the sibling relationship would change.

    7. The Judge noted the lack of evidence provided at the hearing and that
       in the visa application form nothing had been set out  regarding  the
       Appellant's sister's health which  it  was  said  would  need  to  be
       supported by documentary evidence which had not been provided to  the
       decision maker.

    8. The  Judge  specifically  notes  the  acceptance  of  credibility  in
       paragraph 19 but finds the Entry Clearance Officer  was  entitled  to
       refuse entry clearance.

    9. The Judge makes  two  arguably  incorrect  statements  which  are  to
       express surprise at overstaying being held against an  applicant  for
       entry clearance as a visitor when that person retuned within the  six
       month period of the earlier visa, which ignores the  specify  wording
       of paragraph 41(ii) [para 17] and that  the  human  rights  issue  is
       being considered at the date of the  hearing  [para  19]  when  human
       rights claims against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer  are
       to be considered at the date  of  decision,  although  neither  is  a
       material error in this case.

   10. In paragraph 21 the Judge concludes:

       "I am not satisfied that there are sufficiently strong  human  rights
       grounds in the evidence I had before me.   If  there  are  more  than
       normal emotional ties or some form of dependency I was not  satisfied
       that there was a disproportionate interference with such rights based
       upon the evidence before me."

   11. This accurately set out the only sustainable finding available to the
       Judge on the evidence. No arguable material error has been made  out.
       The determination shall stand.

Decision

   12. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st July 2015

