
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03731/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2013                               |On 21st June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                        muhammad abubakkar bin khalid
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rasheed (Sponsor in person)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  12th  September  1992.
    He made an application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as  a
    family visitor under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as
    amended).

 2.    In that application form he set out that  he  wished  to  visit  the
    United Kingdom and in particular, his sister and brother-in-law  for  a
    period of three weeks.  In the form he set out  his  financial,  social
    and family circumstances.  He stated that since he left  his  education
    and from 1st October 2010 he worked  with  his  father  in  a  business
    entitled "KMC Government Contractors".  This is a business owned by his
    father in which his client is  the  Government  who  provides  building
    contracts.  The Appellant in his documentation confirms that he is  not
    paid a salary but is paid from some money that his father obtains  from
    the Government contracts.  It is further stated in the  form  that  the
    expenses for the visit in the United Kingdom will  be  covered  by  the
    Sponsor, Mr Rasheed from his employment as a taxi driver and  that  his
    father has 200,000 rupees available for the  visit.   He  has  provided
    copies  of  his  father's  financial   documentation   including   bank
    statements and evidence relating  to  his  general  financial  position
    including tax documentation.

 3. In a notice of an immigration decision dated  21st  December  2011  the
    application was refused.  In that refusal, the Entry Clearance  Officer
    was satisfied that the Sponsor had demonstrated that he would  be  able
    to support the Appellant during his visit.  The issue  related  to  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances and his intentions to  return.   The
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  the  evidence  relating  to  his
    employment including the documentation provided but noted that  it  did
    not confirm that he was employed or that he had a  job  to  return  to.
    Furthermore, it was not clear where his father  was  therefore  it  was
    difficult to assess his  overall  financial  position  or  confirm  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances.  In addition, the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer stated that the Appellant appeared to have no income, assets or
    savings and had  no  one  reliant  on  him.   Thus  he  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he had family, financial, and social ties to  Pakistan
    to demonstrate that he would return to Pakistan at  the  conclusion  of
    the visit.  It was also noted that he had not shown any previous travel
    outside of Pakistan.  Thus the application was refused.

 4.  The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and filed lengthy  Grounds
    of Appeal explaining his financial, social and family circumstances  in
    answer to the refusal decision.

 5.    The  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson) on 18th June 2012.  In a determination promulgated on  25th
    June she dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal that decision  was
    made by the Appellant and initially permission was refused.

 6.   Upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  on
    15th November 2012 granted permission to appeal.  The  reasons  are  as
    follows:

         "1.  I believe that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchinson
             has erred in  here determination by  not  dealing  with  those
             parts of the  Immigration  Rules  which  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer believed the Appellant had not  met  (paragraph  41(i)
             and 41(ii)) and instead dealing with  parts  of  the  Rule  in
             respect of which the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  satisfied.
             The Entry Clearance Officer was  satisfied  that  the  Sponsor
             would be able to support the Appellant during his trip.

         2.   As a result I believe that the Appellant has been deprived  of
             a fair hearing of his appeal and subject  to  any  observation
             that either party, would  like  to  make  on  or  before  10th
             January 2013, I am minded  to  remit  this  appeal  under  the
             provisions of paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's practice
             statement of the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  by  a
             judge other than that  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
             Hutchinson."

    Thus permission to appeal was granted.

 7. In a determination (undated) Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley decided  the
    appeal without a hearing pursuant to Rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   In  that  determination  he  noted  that
    neither party had objected to  the  findings  and  proposed  course  of
    action that he has set out in the grant of permission of 15th  November
    2012.  The judge stated as follows:-

         "I am  satisfied  from  the  grounds  that  this  error  materially
         affected the presentation of the Appellant's  case,  including  the
         Sponsor's ability to deal properly with the evidence.  As a result,
         the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing and  I  have  decided,
         compatibly with the practice statements of February 2010, that  the
         determination to be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal."

    Thus it appears that the determination was to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal, in accordance with those  directions.  However,  from  a
    note on the file it appears that the direction was not sent out to  the
    parties.

    The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 13th  June  2013.   Rather
    than the appeal being remitted, it has been treated as  if  the  appeal
    has been set aside to be remade by the Upper  Tribunal   on  the  basis
    that none of the findings of fact of the previous determination were to
    stand.

 8. In those circumstances, I heard evidence from the Sponsor who  appeared
    in person.  The Respondent was represented by Ms Petterson (Home Office
    Presenting Officer).  At the outset of the proceedings I  ensured  that
    the court interpreter and  the  Sponsor  could  understand  each  other
    through the medium of questions.  Both confirmed they could  understand
    each other and that the language was Urdu.  The Sponsor confirmed  that
    he had no further documentation to provide and further  confirmed  that
    the Appellant had sent further documentation along with the Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal but was referred to in the  grounds.   The
    Sponsor was cross-examined and there is a record of  that  evidence  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  I shall deal  with  that  evidence  in  the
    course of my analysis of the appeal.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing I heard submissions from each  of  the
    parties.  Ms Petterson relied upon the refusal letter.   She  confirmed
    that maintenance and accommodation was accepted as  was  the  Sponsor's
    circumstances  but  that  the  issue   related   to   the   Appellant's
    circumstances.  She  submitted  the  case  turned  on  the  Appellant's
    intention to return and whether he had any reasonable prospects.    She
    referred the Tribunal to the bank account that had been produced noting
    that this is an account that fluctuated.  In respect of  the  Sponsor's
    evidence, she submitted  that  it  was  not  entirely  clear  from  his
    evidence whether the Appellant's father had one  account  for  business
    and family savings or whether there was one account that  included  all
    the monies.  She further submitted that before the First-tier Tribunal,
    the Sponsor had said that the business appeared to slump at the end  of
    2011.  In his evidence before this Tribunal, he did not say that either
    he misunderstood it or did not refer to it.  In any event, at the  date
    of decision the balance in the account does appear to be high but it is
    a fluctuating account.  The Appellant does not receive a wage from  the
    business and he has other children to support and therefore other calls
    on the family finance.  He has not been in  education  since  2009  and
    does not appear to be  recorded  as  an  employee.   Thus  he  has  not
    demonstrated his personal circumstances in Pakistan.   The  Sponsor  by
    way of reply stated that the Appellant's father used the  same  account
    for personal and business expenditure and that he would spend money  on
    projects and when it was reaching completion he would get  payments  in
    instalment which was why the balance in  the  account  fluctuated.   He
    said as to the Appellant's intentions, he would guarantee that he would
    return and he had his family and his job to return to.  He said that he
    was an important part of the business he is the eldest  in  the  family
    and takes responsibility for them.  He confirmed that the Appellant had
    no problems with any person within Pakistan, either from members of his
    family any other person from  the  authorities  and  that  this  was  a
    genuine family visitor.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. As set out in the submissions of Ms Petterson, the issue of maintenance
    and accommodation was not  a  live  issue  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    Sponsor   had   provided   documentation   concerning   his   financial
    circumstances and had demonstrated that he was  able  to  maintain  and
    accommodate the Appellant for the length of the visit which is said  to
    be a short family visit of three weeks.  The Appellant is to visit  his
    sister and his brother-in-law, the Sponsor.

12. The issue relates to the Appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  his
    intention to return.  I have considered with care the  evidence  before
    me concerning the Appellant's background and those  circumstances.   It
    is his case that he is self-employed but in effect works for, and  with
    his father, who has a business as a building  contractor  relying  upon
    Government contracts.  There are a number  of  documents  demonstrating
    that the Appellant's father,  Khalid  Mehmood  who  works  as  a  self-
    employed  business  contractor  and  specifically  in  the   field   of
    Government  contracting.   He  has  produced  a  national  tax  company
    certificate setting out his name and his type  of  employment,  he  has
    produced annual tax returns setting out the Government  contracts.   In
    addition there is a contract of renewal certificate issued by the chief
    engineer (B15 and B19 and 20).  I have  also  been  shown  a  statutory
    declaration from the Appellant's father confirming the Appellant's role
    in the business.  It sets out his own circumstances namely that  he  is
    living with his family in Pakistan  and  that  he  has  adequate  funds
    available.  There is a further  statement  at  B2  confirming  that  he
    supports his son but does so through the business and that  he  himself
    has been a Government  contractor  since  2005.   In  addition  he  has
    produced a copy of his  Allied  Bank  statement  and  at  the  date  of
    decision there was over 400,000 rupees in that account.

13. I have considered that documentation in the light of  the  matters  set
    out in the application form and the evidence of  the  Sponsor.   Having
    done so I am satisfied that the Sponsor  has  told  the  truth  to  the
    Tribunal and that his evidence is supportive of that of the  Appellant.
    In his evidence he confirmed the Appellant's circumstances and that  of
    the Appellant's father.  It appears that  there  is  telephone  contact
    between them and he was familiar with the type of Government  contracts
    that the Appellant works upon with his father.  He gave an  example  of
    developing dam sites and building small dams.  In his evidence he  said
    that their financial position was strong and that he would spend  money
    on projects and when they were completed he would get payment by way of
    instalments.  He explained that the bank account  was  a  joint  family
    account and business money came into that account in addition to  their
    personal money.  He confirmed that from that money  the  Appellant  had
    his expenses paid.  He said they worked on the basis of being  a  joint
    family as the Appellant had not been married yet and he was the eldest,
    all the money went into the family pot.

14. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the evidence  given
    by the Sponsor orally is consistent with the evidence of the  Appellant
    and that in the documentation.  Whilst the documentation  does  support
    the Appellant's father being in  business,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant himself works within that business.  The Sponsor  was  cross-
    examined about the Appellant's earlier life and  was  able  to  say  in
    cross-examination the history of when he gave up  his  education,  that
    is, the date that he did his matriculation which  was  consistent  with
    the age that the Appellant claimed to have finished his  education  and
    had gone straight to work with his father.  I do not find that there is
    anything that is incredible  about  a  son  working  with  his  father,
    particularly in the lucrative field of Government contracting in  which
    his father works.  Thus I am satisfied on the balance of  probabilities
    that he has demonstrated his personal circumstances  and  that  he  has
    employment with his father in Pakistan  which  appears  to  be  a  good
    business to be in.

15. The refusal letter noted that there was no evidence  as  to  where  the
    Appellant's father was.  It is clear from the  documentation  and  from
    the evidence that I have heard, that the Appellant's father resides  in
    Pakistan.  That evidence is supported by his own statutory  declaration
    and I am satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that  his  father
    lives in Pakistan, along with his wife and his  other  children.   They
    live by way of a joint family system and I accept the evidence  of  the
    Sponsor that that is how the  financial  circumstances  of  the  family
    work.

16.   I have further considered the financial circumstances of  the  family
    as a whole.  A number of documents were produced alongside the  grounds
    to the Upper Tribunal.  They included documents issued by  the  Federal
    Board of Revenue setting out business assets, including  value  of  the
    business, value of vehicles and total assets.  The business was said to
    be worth 30,00,000 rupees and the value of vehicles  to  be  1,232,000.
    He has also provided copies of his tax accounts.  The bank account that
    has been produced is in the name of  the  Appellant's  father.   Whilst
    there appear to be some uncertainty as to whether or  not  this  was  a
    business account or a personal account, it was clarified in my view  by
    the Sponsor's evidence that this was a business and  personal  account.
    I do not find that there is anything that  is  incredible  about  that.
    There are a number of deposits and withdrawals in the account.   It  is
    right as Ms Petterson has pointed out that this is  account  that  does
    fluctuate from large amounts to small amounts.  Again  I  do  not  find
    that that is indicative of this family living a  poor  existence.   The
    evidence from the Sponsor, which seems perfectly  reasonable,  is  that
    the fluctuations in the bank account  are  routine  practice.   As  the
    Appellant has stated in his  grounds,  at  the  end  of  the  year  the
    Government postponed contracts waiting approval for the next budget and
    once they start again his father receives the contracts.  That  is  the
    nature of self-employed.  The balance  at  the  date  of  decision  was
    409,994 rupees which demonstrates that he would be able to  comfortably
    afford the cost of travel for the Appellant.

17. Having considered the evidence as a whole,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has demonstrated that he has sufficiently  strong  financial,
    family and social ties to Pakistan.  The Sponsor  gave  clear  evidence
    which I accept, that this was a genuine family visit and  that  it  was
    intended to be only for three weeks.  He was required to return back to
    Pakistan so that he could work  with  his  father  in  the  contracting
    business.  The Sponsor also stated clearly that the  Appellant  had  no
    problems in Pakistan that would mean that he could  not  return  there.
    He was on good terms with his friends, family and neighbours and had no
    problems with the authorities.   In those circumstances, I am satisfied
    on the balance of probabilities that he has demonstrated those ties  to
    Pakistan and  has  demonstrated  that  he  intends  to  return  at  the
    conclusion of the visit.

18. For those reasons, I find that he has  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of HC 395.  The appeal is allowed.

Decision

The First Tier Tribunal made an error of law. The decision is set aside  and
re-made as follows:

The appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date:20/6/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
