

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03757/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 November  2013                          |On 13 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             MISS RUMANA KABEER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Sponsor, Mrs Afshan Pirooze
For the Respondent:     Mrs K Pal, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 7 September 1971.  The
    respondent has been granted permission to appeal the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davies allowing the appellant's appeal against the
    refusal to grant her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a
    visitor.

2.   The appellant, along with her three siblings, applied for entry
    clearance as a family visitor and was refused under paragraph
    41(i)(ii)(vi)(vii) of the Immigration Rules.  In addition, the
    appellant's application, and not her siblings', was refused under
    paragraph 320(7A).

3.   The judge allowed the appellant's appeal on the grounds that she met
    all the requirements of paragraph 41 and that she was a genuine visitor
    and would leave the UK at the conclusion of her three week stay.  He
    was also satisfied that the appellant would be maintained and
    accommodated during her visit and that she was able to pay for her
    return travel.  However, the judge did not specifically refer to the
    respondent's refusal under paragraph 320(7A).  It was for this reason
    that permission was granted to the respondent to appeal the judge's
    decision.

4.   The respondent's grounds of appeal stated that the refusal letter
    clearly stated in the first paragraph that the appellant had stated at
    question 63 of her application form that she had never been refused a
    visa before.  The refusal letter went on to state that UKBA records
    indicated that the appellant was refused a visa on 26 April 2004 under
    reference Islamabad 775075, and that it was considered her not
    declaring this information undermined her credibility as she had signed
    the application.  The appellant had also stated that she had not used
    the services of an agent.  The judge failed to address this point in
    the determination and the respondent had not conceded this point.

5.   The sponsor conceded that the appellant had indeed been refused a
    visit visa in April 2004 but this was something they had all forgotten
    about.  She said that the appellant's visit application form was
    completed on line by her brother-in-law, who had asked the appellant to
    sign it, which she did.  The appellant had not intended to deceive the
    ECO.

6.   The sponsor said that their mother is ill.  Their mother is 71 years
    old, according to the date of birth on her passport.  In reality her
    mother was born in 1938 (not 1942 as stated on her passport) and is now
    74 years old.  Their mother is not able to travel and wishes to see all
    her daughters, which was the reason for the visit applications by all
    four sisters.  The other three sisters, whose appeals were allowed,
    collected their visas last Friday.  This has been very upsetting for
    the appellant.

7.   I found the sponsor's evidence credible and accept that the appellant
    did not intend to deceive the ECO.  I also accept that there are
    compassionate reasons for her visit.  Nevertheless, I find that the
    appellant failed to disclose on her visa application form that she had
    been refused a visa in April 2004.  Paragraph 320(7A) is a mandatory
    refusal where, as in this case, false representations have been made,
    or material facts not disclosed in relation to the application.

8.   On the evidence before me, I find that the judge erred in law in
    failing to deal with the refusal of the appellant's application under
    paragraph 320(7A).  His decision cannot stand.

9.   I remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
