
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03267/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th November 2013                          |On 11th November 2013        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                ASIF HUSSAIN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Bilal - Legal Representative.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Sarsfield  promulgated  on  29th  August  2013  in  which  he
        dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  an  Entry
        Clearance Officer (ECO), made on 23rd December 2012, refused  entry
        clearance to the United Kingdom for the purposes of a family visit.


     2. The Appellant was born on 22nd January 1989 and is  a  national  of
        Pakistan.  He visited the United Kingdom previously  although,  for
        reasons explained in the documents, overstayed  beyond  the  period
        stated to the ECO that he was to remain in  this  country  on  that
        occasion.


     3. The refusal expresses concern that the Appellant had  not  provided
        sufficient evidence to prove he was employed as claimed or that his
        financial circumstances generally were as claimed.  This led  to  a
        refusal by reference to  41  (i)  and  (ii)  as  the  ECO  was  not
        satisfied that he was genuinely seeking entry for a family visit or
        that he intended to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the
        period of the visit as stated by him.


     4. Judge Sarsfield sets out his conclusions  in  paragraph  6  of  the
        determination.



Discussion



     5. The grounds on which permission to appeal was sought raise a number
        of issues. One of the reasons  advances  is  that  Judge  Sarsfield
        failed to make any findings with regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
        sponsor and failed to take into account a previous determination by
        a different judge promulgated on 13th September 2010 in  which  the
        Appellant was found to be credible and that appeal allowed.


     6. Judge Sarsfield was clearly aware of the fact an appeal was allowed
        in 2010 but this does not mean the appeal should automatically have
        been allowed in 2013. It is incumbent upon an  applicant  to  prove
        they  meet  the  requirements  of  the  relevant  immigration  rule
        whenever an application is made. Whilst the previous  determination
        was evidence of the fact the appeal was allowed and  the  appellant
        granted leave to enter as a visitor,  the  findings  made  in  2010
        cannot be of a determinative of the issues in this appeal  in  law.
        The reference to the Devaseelan principles in the skeleton argument
        are noted but the issue was whether the Appellant had  proved  that
        his circumstances had not changed, as he was put to proof of in the
        refusal.


     7. I find no material legal error proved in  relation  to  the  Judges
        failure to find as he was  invited,  based  upon  on  the  previous
        determination of Judge Caswell.


     8. In paragraph 6 (c) Judge Sarsfield refers to accounts held  by  the
        Appellant and his father. In relation to  the  Appellant's  account
        there  is  reference  to  a  letter  from  the  bank,  but  without
        supporting bank statements.  I accept there was before the Judge  a
        letter from HBL in the following terms:


   To whom it may concern


              It is to certify that Mr Asif Hussain S/O Fazal Hussain having
   NIC#                34203-74036580-3 is maintaining  his  account  #2222-
   71001060-03 with us              under the title of Asif Hussain and  his
   balance is PKR 306,832.50.


              It is certified the above named party  is  financially  sound.
   This certificate is              issued solely on the request  of  client
   without accepting  any  liabilities  on           bank  or  its  official
   whatsoever.


     9. The letter is purportedly signed by a manager of the  bank  but  is
        not dated.  Judge Sarsfield found that the statement  of  the  bank
        account produced did not accord with the  letter,  so  far  as  the
        balance was concerned, as that statement only showed a  balance  of
        249,867.50 rupees.  Although  the  Appellant  has  now  provided  a
        further statement  showing  the  balance  of  the  account  at  6th
        December 2012, the appeal was heard on  20th  August  2013  and  no
        satisfactory explanation has been provided for  why  such  evidence
        was not obtained earlier as it must have existed - Ladd v  Marshall
        [1954] 1WLR 1489 refers.


    10. Judge Sarsfield did not accept that he  could  put  weight  on  the
        documentary evidence relating to the availability of funds  in  the
        Appellant's bank account, especially as a key document  is  undated
        and it is accepted there is a discrepancy between this document and
        the bank statement relied upon in relation to the available  funds.
        Weight is, of course, a matter for the Judge provided he considered
        the evidence with  the  degree  of  care  required  and  has  given
        adequate reasons for his findings.  In relation to this element  of
        the evidence I find he did. No legal error is proved.


    11. I accept the Judge erred in paragraph  6  (f)  in  disregarding  an
        affidavit from Mr Mohammed Afzal.  Although the affidavit was  post
        decision it relates to the alleged repayment of a  sum  of  200,000
        rupees  which  appears  in  the  Appellant's  bank  statements  pre
        decision.  The Judge was  wrong  to  disregard  this  evidence  and
        should have considered it as part of his  overall  assessment.  The
        issue is whether this omission is material.


    12. The ECO was not satisfied the Appellant had proved he was  employed
        as claimed or that his circumstances are as he alleges.  The  Judge
        found in paragraph 6 (a) that he is employed but that there was  no
        supporting evidence of his income or taxes other than a letter  and
        in paragraph 6 (i) that the Appellant had not  answered  the  ECO's
        concerns.


    13. The grounds challenge the fact the  Judge  did  not  make  specific
        findings on the sponsor's evidence but there is no legal obligation
        upon him to do so.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set  aside)
        [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) Blake J) the Tribunal held that  (i)  Although
        there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by  the  judge;
        (ii) Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
        requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
        Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
        Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
        finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  Country
        Guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
        judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
        or her.


    14. In paragraph 6 (g) it was found that the claim  by  the  Appellants
        father that  he  will  pay  the  travel  costs  was  post  decision
        evidence.  This is  correct  and  therefore  inadmissible.   It  is
        alleged the Judge failed to make a finding  whether  the  Appellant
        had sufficient  funds  in  his  own  account  and  the  finding  in
        paragraph 6 (e) that  there  was  no  evidence  the  provenance  of
        PKR500,000 is also challenged.  In relation to this larger sum  the
        Judge notes the evidence that it came from the sale of property but
        that there was no supportive evidence to  corroborate  this  claim.
        The grounds seeking permission to appeal allege that as  they  were
        deposited in December 2011, a year before the date of refusal,  and
        Judge Caswell accepted that the family as a whole dealt  with  land
        Judge Sarsfield should have taken this into account.  I have  dealt
        with the situation in relation to the previous determination  above
        and the fact the funds may have been in an account for over a  year
        does not necessarily mean they belong to the account holder.


    15. The core finding of Judge Sarsfield is that on  the  evidence  made
        available, which was afforded the weight the  Judge  considered  it
        could be given, the Appellant had failed to discharge the burden of
        proof upon him to the required standard to prove he was  a  genuine
        visitor.  Although the grounds take issue in reality  they  are  in
        part mere disagreement with the findings made.  I accept, as stated
        above, the Judge made an error with regard to one  element  of  the
        appeal but having considered the appeal with  the  degree  of  care
        required, I do not find that it has been proved that this error  is
        material to the findings made  by  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant
        failed to prove that his circumstances are as he claimed. This is a
        finding within the range of those properly open to the Judge on the
        evidence.


Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th November 2013


