
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03338/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Maha Mesto Kourdi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik, instructed by Kadmos Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Maha Mesto Kourdi, was born on 25 November 1954 and is a
    female citizen of Syria.  She applied for entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom as a family visitor  and  her  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the ECO  Abu  Dhabi  dated  18  May  2014.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Nightingale)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 13 February 2015  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a retired woman.   Her  daughter  and  son-in-law  are
    British citizens and live in the United Kingdom.   The  Tribunal  heard
    evidence from the sponsor (daughter) and  her  husband.   Although  the
    appellant is a Syrian citizen, she has lived in Egypt since 2012.  [30]
    The judge found that the witnesses were  "wholly  credible"  and  found
    that she had "no doubt as to  the  genuine  invitation  issued  to  the
    appellant to come to the United Kingdom for a temporary  purpose;  that
    is to say to spend some  time  with  Mr  and  Mrs  Watti  [the  sponsor
    daughter and her husband] and their children".  The parties agreed that
    the appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  but  only  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The judge found that Article 8 was not engaged
    since there was no family life which required the protection of Article
    8.   The  appellant  now  challenges  that  finding  by  reference,  in
    particular, to the decision in Mostafa (Article 8 and entry  clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and also the decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    Quila [2012] 1 AC 621.  The Rule 24 notice dated 12  August  2015,  the
    respondent relies in turn upon Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 261 (IAC).  The respondent asserts that, in the present case,  the
    relationship did not fall  within  that  "narrow  range  of  claimants"
    referred to in Mostafa [24] being husband/wife, close life partners  or
    parents/minor children.

 3. It is fair to say there is some tension between the  decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and Mostafa and Adjei.  What is most  important  is  the
    facts of each and every case are considered  on  their  own  individual
    merits.  Moreover, it was not acceptable for Article 8 to  be  rejected
    as a ground of appeal without a proper and  detailed  analysis  of  the
    relevant facts by the First-tier Tribunal.  In the  present  case,  the
    judge appears to have rejected the Entry Clearance  Officer's  concerns
    as to the genuineness of the intended visit or  to  possible  suspicion
    cast over the visit by the "political  and  economic  situation"  which
    currently exists in both Syria and  Egypt.   The  judge's  findings  as
    regards the credibility of the witnesses was unequivocal.  At [37], the
    judge found that "on the evidence before me I am fully  satisfied  that
    this is a genuine family visit and, indeed, that  the  appellant  would
    return to Egypt after this visit..."  The judge found  that  Article  8
    ECHR was not engaged at all.  She accepted that a mother would wish  to
    spend time with her daughter  and  grandchildren  living  abroad.   She
    accepted that the appellant would wish to "forge a  closer  bond"  with
    her family in the United Kingdom;  the  judge  considered  that  to  be
    "entirely normal natural and credible." [33].  However, the  judge  did
    not find that family life existed.   She  reached  that  conclusion  by
    applying what she perceived to be the principles contained in the Court
    of Appeal judgment in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  The  judge  appears
    to have considered that it was necessary for there to be a relationship
    for dependency in order that Article 8 was  engaged  between  an  adult
    appellant and an adult sponsor.

 4. The relevance of Kugathas is, perhaps, somewhat  limited  in  an  entry
    clearance case; Kugathas was concerned with  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  In the present case, there had been visits by  the  appellant
    to her adult child and her husband and  also  the  grandchildren  whose
    best interests (since they are resident in the United  Kingdom)  should
    be a matter for consideration both in the ECO's decision and the appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Given that there was a relationship in
    this case between an adult (the appellant) and minor  children  (albeit
    at a distance) it is not clear to me that why  the  ratio  of  Kugathas
    should have figured so centrally in the judge's analysis.  Further, the
    judge found at [34] that there was "nothing on the evidence  before  me
    to indicate the welfare of the three grandchildren of the appellant  is
    suffering as a result of the decision appealed."  As Ms Naik,  for  the
    appellant, submitted, this appears to ignore  the  positive  obligation
    arising out of Article 8 (first articulated in United Kingdom case  law
    in  the  case  of  Shamin  Box  [2002]  UKIAT  02212)  for   government
    authorities and the courts to seek to promote family life as well as to
    protect it from interference.  In the present case, I am not  satisfied
    that the judge was right in law to reject the submission that Article 8
    was engaged.  For that reason, I have decided to set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal determination and to remake the decision.

 5. The respondent does not challenge the very positive  findings  made  by
    the  judge  regarding  the  credibility  of  the  witness   and,   more
    particularly, the genuineness of the proposed visit by  the  appellant.
    Stepping aside from the tension created between Adjei  and  Mostafa,  I
    find, on the very particular facts of this case, that there  is  family
    life between the appellant and her United Kingdom daughter,  son-in-law
    and grandchildren.  I acknowledge  that  visits  could  take  place  in
    Egypt, but I have taken account of the political and economic situation
    of that country and the difficulties involved in transporting an entire
    family on a visit to Egypt as opposed to arranging for the appellant to
    come to the  United  Kingdom.   Whether  or  not  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to meet all the requirements of paragraph 41 of  HC  395  (as
    amended) may or may not be of relevance to the outcome of the Article 8
    appeal, it is clear that the public interest concerned  with  excluding
    an individual who the respondent accepts will be a genuine visitor, who
    will return to her country of habitual residence  at  the  end  of  her
    visit, who will not need to rely upon public funds during her visit and
    who will use her visit to foster and develop relationships  with  minor
    children living permanently in the United  Kingdom  (thereby  promoting
    their best interests) is a relatively  minor  one.  On  the  particular
    facts of this appeal, I find that the decision to refuse the  appellant
    entry clearance for her visit will cause disproportionate  interference
    with the family life of the individuals involved. Accordingly, I remake
    the decision by allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  13
February 2015 is  set  aside.   The  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal are preserved.   I  have  remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's
appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 18 May  2014  is
allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
