

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/03051/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 March 2016                          |On 24 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MARIA FE RAMIREZ PERRIN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the sake of consistency with  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal I will hereafter refer to Miss Perrin as the Appellant  and
       to the Entry Clearance Officer as the Respondent.


    2. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       enter as a family visitor on 13 May 2014. Her  appeal  against  that
       decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan on Article
       8 of the ECHR grounds only following a hearing on 1  December  2014.
       This is an appeal against that decision.


    3. No one had attended for the Appellant  by  the  time  the  case  was
       called on to be heard at 2.20. I was satisfied I should  proceed  to
       hear the appeal in the  absence  of  anyone  for  the  Appellant  in
       accordance with Rule 38 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008. That is because the Appellant and her Sponsor  had  been
       given notice of  the  date  time  and  place  of  the  hearing,  her
       solicitor wrote on 18 February 2016 noting the date of  the  hearing
       and advising that they wished  to  "withdraw",  there  was  no  good
       reason not to proceed, and the appeal  could  be  justly  determined
       given the issues. It was not a matter for the Appellant to  withdraw
       the appeal as she had not lodged it.

The grant of permission


    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to  appeal  (16
       January 2016) on the grounds that;


          1) it is arguable that family life is not interfered with  by  the
             visa refusal,
          2) an application for entry clearance as a spouse can be  made  if
             the Appellant wants to live here with her partner, and
          3) there was an inadequate assessment of proportionality.


Appellant's position

    5. The Appellant did not engage with the appeal process  having  sought
       to "withdraw".


The Judges findings

    6. The Judge found as follows;


          [12] "...I am satisfied that there  is  family  life  between  the
          Appellant and the Sponsor. They are husband and wife. It was clear
          from  the  evidence  before  me  that  their  relationship  is   a
          subsisting one rather than merely a formal relationship..."


          [16] "I considered the reasons for  the  proposed  visit.  Of  the
          three  reasons  given,  two  related  to  family  occasions:   the
          Sponsor's daughter's wedding and the Sponsor's own  60th  birthday
          party...Turning to the third reason  for  the  proposed  visit,  I
          recognised the importance to the family life of the Appellant  and
          the Sponsor in deciding whether or not the Appellant  should  seek
          to come to this country on a more permanent basis..."


          [17] The Respondent was concerned  "that  the  Appellant  was  not
          sincere in her stated intent to return to the Philippines  at  the
          end of  the  proposed  visit...The  Appellant  had  lived  in  the
          Philippines her entire life...insufficient consideration was given
          to the natural pull for the Appellant to the country  and  society
          in which she had always lived, and...she did have  family  in  the
          Philippines...she is the wife of a British  national"  and  "could
          have made an application to enter the United Kingdom permanently."

Discussion

    7. The Judge has made 4 material errors of law.


    8. Firstly he has failed  to  identify  what  compelling  circumstances
       existed to support a claim for grant of leave to enter  outside  the
       immigration rules to even enable him  to  consider  Article  8.  The
       Judge failed to apply Kaur (visit appeals; Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
       00487 (IAC) which states that unless  an  Appellant  can  show  that
       there are individual interests at stake covered by Article 8  "of  a
       particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise to a "strong  claim
       that compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of  LTE
       [Leave to Enter] outside the rules": (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
       387 at [40] and [56]) he or she is exceedingly unlikely to  succeed.
       That proposition must also hold good in visitor appeals.


    9. Secondly he has failed to consider how the first question identified
       in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 is engaged,  namely  how  the  Respondent's
       decision interferes with the exercise of the  Appellant's  right  to
       respect  for  her  family  life,  when   the   Appellant   and   her
       Sponsor/husband  chose  to  marry  when  they  lived  in   different
       countries and all that the Respondent's decision  does  is  maintain
       that position.


   10. Thirdly he  has  failed  to  address  at  all  the  second  question
       identified in Razgar namely  how  any  such  interference  may  have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation
       of Article 8.


   11. Finally he has considered proportionality when it was plainly  not
       reached.

   12. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made  a  material  error  of
       law. I set the decision aside and preserve no findings.

   13. Mr Kotas submitted that I should rehear the matter. I agreed.

Rehearing

   14. This was to be a visit by an Appellant to see her husband and attend
       2 family events and see if she may wish to live here. She could  not
       appeal against the refusal of the visa under the rules.


   15. She has, as already explained, failed to establish  what  compelling
       circumstances existed to even enable me to consider  Article  8,  or
       how the Respondent's decision interferes with the  exercise  of  the
       Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  her  family  life,   or   what
       consequences of such gravity there were as potentially to engage the
       operation of Article 8.

   16. I dismiss the appeal as she cannot appeal against the decision under
       the immigration rules and Article 8 was not engaged.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I dismiss the appeal.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
8 March 2016
