
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/03007/2015
     VA/03008/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th September 2016                     |On 16th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 TARIQ AHMED
                                BUSHRA TARIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (the ECO) appeals  against  a  decision  of
    Judge Hawden-Beal of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)  promulgated  on
    10th May 2016.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are husband and wife, and are citizens of  Pakistan  born
    25th August 1963 and 4th April 1974  respectively.   They  applied  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom to visit family  members  and  to
    mourn  and  participate  in  prayers  following  the  death  of   their
    grandfather in the United Kingdom who passed away on 8th November 2014.

 4. The applications were refused on 11th December 2014 with  reference  to
    paragraph 41(i), (ii), and (vi) of the Immigration Rules, the  ECO  not
    being satisfied that the Claimants intended  a  genuine  visit  to  the
    United Kingdom, nor that they would leave  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    visit,  and  not  being  satisfied  that   adequate   maintenance   and
    accommodation would be available.

 5. The Claimants appealed to the FtT relying upon Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), although  it
    was  also  contended  that  they  satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. The FtT decided the appeals together, on the papers,  without  an  oral
    hearing, as requested by the Claimants.  The  ECO  did  not  object  to
    this.

 7. The FtT observed that the Claimants had a limited right of  appeal  and
    the task of the FtT was to decide whether refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was unlawful under section 6 of The Human Rights Act 1998.

 8. The FtT referred to the Upper Tribunal decisions  Mostafa  [2015]  UKUT
    00112 (IAC), Adjei [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC), and Abbasi [2015] UKUT 00463
    (IAC).  The FtT found the facts of these appeals, were similar to those
    in Abbasi and therefore found that Article 8 was engaged.  The FtT went
    on to find that the decisions of the ECO interfered with the Claimants'
    protected  rights  under  Article  8,  and  that  the  decisions   were
    disproportionate.  Therefore the appeals were allowed with reference to
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 9. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It was
    submitted that the FtT erred in law  in  finding  that  Article  8  was
    engaged.  It was contended that the  FtT  had  erred  by  finding  that
    refusal of entry clearance  as  a  visitor  was  an  interference  with
    Article 8 in a case where there is no family life.

10. The ECO submitted that there is no  right  to  enter  the  UK  for  the
    purposes of visiting extended family  members,  and  the  FtT  made  no
    finding that either family or private life was engaged.

11. The ECO referred to Abbasi contending that the cases  analysed  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in that decision concerned the  family/private  life  of
    those already in the contracting State  and  in  the  present  appeals,
    there was no finding of interference in the private life  of  those  in
    the contracting State.  The ECO referred to SS (Malaysia) [2004]  UKIAT
    00091 as authority for the proposition that private  as  distinct  from
    family life is not a basis upon which an ECHR right  of  entry  can  be
    based.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Murray  in  the
    following terms;

         3.   The judge refers to the case of Abbasi [2015]  UKUT  00463  in
             his decision.  This states that the refusal of  a  visa  to  a
             foreign national for  the  purpose  of  mourning  with  family
             members for the recent death of a close relative,  is  capable
             of  constituting  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
             rights of persons concerned under Article 8.  But it  goes  on
             to state that the question of whether Article 8 applies and if
             so is breached depends on the facts of the  case.   The  judge
             here makes no finding that there is family or private life  in
             this case.  With regard to private life SS (Malaysia)  has  to
             be followed.  The judge has not made it clear why the  refusal
             of a visit of a short period would  be  an  interference  with
             Article 8.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. There was no attendance by or  on  behalf  of  the  Claimants.   I  was
    satisfied that proper notice of the hearing had been given  and  having
    considered rule 38 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed
    with the hearing.  A written response to the grant  of  permission  had
    been submitted on behalf of the Claimants, and Mr  Duffy  was  provided
    with a copy.  This response contended that the FtT  had  not  erred  in
    law, had made reference to the appropriate case law, and made  findings
    which were open to it to make on the evidence.

15. In making oral submissions Mr Duffy relied upon the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.  I was asked to accept
    that Abbasi did not give an automatic right for  an  individual  to  be
    granted entry clearance to attend family prayers or visit the grave  of
    the deceased.  I was asked to find that the FtT  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for its conclusions, and the decision should be set  aside  and
    re-made at a further hearing.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. The ECO contends that the FtT materially erred in law by  finding  that
    Article 8 was engaged, and failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  that
    finding.

18. The starting point  when  considering  an  appeal  of  this  nature  is
    explained in Adjei and for ease of reference I set out below the  first
    paragraph of the head note;

         1.   The first question  to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether Article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all.  If it is not, which will not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  rules  and
             should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the Claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

19. I set out below Article 8;

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

20. The FtT did not explicitly state that it found that  Article  8(1)  was
    engaged and therefore was moving on to consider Article 8(2).   Had  it
    done so, there may have been no challenge to the decision.

21. However, I find that reading the decision as a whole, it is clear  that
    the FtT found that Article 8(1) was engaged and gave reasons  for  this
    finding.  The FtT made specific reference to Abbasi commenting upon the
    similarities between Abbasi, and the appeals under  consideration.   In
    Abbasi two grandsons applied for entry clearance for a period  of  four
    weeks to visit their grandfather's grave and mourn with family members.
     In this case the Claimants are husband and wife whose applications for
    entry clearance were for the same reasons as those in Abbasi.   It  has
    not been disputed that the deceased in these appeals is the grandfather
    of both Claimants.

22. The decisions to refuse entry  clearance  were  reviewed  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager who accepted that the Claimants "may  have  a  family
    life with the Sponsor".  The Sponsor is Nisar Ahmed who in his  witness
    statement dated 17th March 2016, which was before  the  FtT,  explained
    that the first Claimant is his wife's brother, and the second  Claimant
    is his sister.

23. The FtT stated at paragraph 11;

         "That case is almost on all fours with these  appeals.   In  Abbasi
         two grandsons applied for entry clearance for a short time to  join
         the family in prayers for the passing of  their  grandfather.   The
         judgment in Abbasi made it clear that  this  particular  aspect  of
         family and private life is capable of protection  under  Article  8
         and,  following  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance does interfere with their  right  to  respect  for  their
         family and private life."

24. I set out below the head note in Abassi;

         1.   The refusal of a visa to foreign nationals  seeking  to  enter
             the United Kingdom for a finite  period  for  the  purpose  of
             mourning with family members  the  recent  death  of  a  close
             relative and visiting the grave of the deceased is capable  of
             constituting a disproportionate interference with  the  rights
             of the persons concerned under Article 8 ECHR.

         2.   The question of whether Article  8  applies  and,  if  so,  is
             breached will depend upon the fact-sensitive  context  of  the
             particular case.

         3.   The Tribunal should adopt a structured and sequential approach
             to the Article 8 issues.

25. It is therefore clear that the submission by Mr Duffy that Abbasi  does
    not provide an  automatic  right  to  be  granted  entry  clearance  is
    correct, and that each application is fact-sensitive.

26. The FtT recorded the similarities between these appeals and Abbasi, and
    in my view made no material error of law by finding that  Article  8(1)
    was engaged, and then moving on to consider Article 8(2)  and  applying
    the five stage test advocated in Razgar.

27. The challenge by the ECO  does  not  relate  to  the  consideration  of
    Article 8(2) by the FtT.  However, for the sake of completeness, I find
    no error in the consideration of the FtT of Article 8(2).  The FtT  was
    clearly aware of the public interest  considerations,  and  found  that
    adequate maintenance and accommodation would be available and that  the
    Claimants were seeking entry clearance for a short period of  time  for
    the specific purpose claimed.

28. I conclude that the grounds submitted by the ECO display a disagreement
    with the conclusions reached by the FtT, but do not disclose a material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision and the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date: 9th September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands  so  does  the  decision  to  make  a
partial fee award.


Signed                              Date: 9th September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


