
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/03380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 WAQAS RAZA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, instructed by Talat Naveed Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought by the Entry Clearance Officer, against  the
    decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Walker dated  20  March  2015  in
    which he allowed the appeal brought by Mr Waqas Raza against the  ECO's
    decision 26 May 2014 refusing him entry clearance to the visit the  UK.
    In this decision I shall refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier, that is that Mr Raza is the Appellant, and the ECO  is  the
    Respondent.

2     The Appellant is a national of Pakistan and on 5 May 2014 had  applied
    online for entry clearance to visit the UK. The Appellant is married to
    Zobi Waqas, a dual Pakistani/British national. They live  in  Pakistan,
    although as a British national Mrs Waqas is entitled to come and go  to
    the UK as she pleases.

3     In his  application  form,  the  Appellant  stated  at  q.17  that  he
    intended to travel to the UK with his wife for 4 weeks from 30 May 2014
    and at q.81 he stated that he wanted to visit his parents-in-law for  a
    month to maintain stronger family ties, along with  his  British  wife.
    His parents-in-law gave a sponsorship  undertaking  (at  [A17]  of  the
    Respondent's  bundle)  stating  that  they  wished   to   sponsor   the
    Appellant's visit to the UK, and at [A16] there was an  affidavit  from
    the Appellant's wife, in which she  stated  that  she  along  with  her
    husband wished to proceed to the UK to her parents and other  relatives
    as well as sightseeing for a short period of time of four weeks.

4     The application was refused in the decision dated 26 May 2014  on  the
    grounds that whilst he was satisfied that the  sponsors  were  able  to
    maintain and accommodate the Appellant during the proposed stay,  there
    were anomalies in the Appellant's own  financial  documentation,  which
    suggested that the Appellant was not telling the truth  about  his  own
    financial position, and that the Appellant had not accurately presented
    his circumstances or his intentions in wishing the enter  the  UK.  The
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant intended to  leave  the
    UK at the end of the proposed visit.

5     As the decision post-dated relevant amendments occurring  on  23  June
    2013 to rights of appeal  in  family  visit  appeals,  the  Appellant's
    appeal to the FtT was on restricted grounds, the only  relevant  ground
    in the present case being that the  decision  was  unlawful  under  s.6
    Human  Rights  Act  1998,  on  the  ground  that  it  amounted   to   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's rights under Article
    8 ECHR. There was no power for the judge to allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance with immigration rules.

6     In lengthy grounds of appeal accompanying the notice of  appeal  IAFT-
    2, the Appellant's representatives made submissions  principally  about
    the  Appellant's  financial  circumstances.  It  was  argued  that  the
    Appellant proposed to 'proceed to the UK for the duration of 4 weeks to
    see his father-in-law ... and mother-in-law ... who are also sponsoring
    the Appellant's entry clearance  in  order  to  maintain  the  stronger
    family ties and sightseeing' (grounds, page 2).   It  was  also  argued
    that the decision breached "the Appellant's convention right of respect
    to his private and family life with his wife to see his  parents-in-law
    in the UK under Article 8 of the ECHR' (grounds, page 3).

7      Before  the  Judge,  the  Appellant's  wife  and  father-in-law  gave
    evidence. The case that was presented to the Judge (see his para  [14])
    was as follows:

         "14      In 2014 the Appellant's  wife  was  pregnant.  There  were
         complications requiring her to undergo a caesarean section. As  she
         had no female members of family to help her in Pakistan she decided
         to return to the UK. The Appellant's plan was to travel with her to
         stay for a couple of weeks and then return to his home and business
         in Pakistan. As he was refused then his wife returned to the UK and
         where she remained until  the  birth  of  her  child  by  caesarean
         section. She also had other health complications and which resulted
         in a gallbladder operation in February 2015. She has now  recovered
         and intends to return to Pakistan and her home there on there on 18
         March 2015." (i.e. 2 days after the  appeal  hearing  on  16  March
         2015)."

8     In his findings, the judge held that:

         "25       I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decision   has   caused
         interference with the various individuals' family lives  that  will
         be of such gravity as to engage Article 8.  The  Appellant  himself
         has been prevented from accompanying his wife a British Citizen  to
         visit  her  extended  family.  He  has  also  been  prevented  from
         accompanying his wife when she was experiencing  problems  and  has
         also been prevented attendance  and  the  birth  of  his  daughter.
         Because of the refusal he has been separated from his wife and  his
         daughter for some 9 months."

9     The Judge held, in light of the substantial bundle of documents  filed
    with the Tribunal relating to his financial and tax affairs,  that  the
    Appellant's income was as claimed in the original application, and that
    he was able to satisfy the requirements of the rules [26] which was, in
    the proportionality balancing exercise, a weighty factor  to  be  taken
    into account [29]. The decision was not  proportionate  [28],  and  the
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

10    The Respondent appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  grounds,  as  I
    understand them, that the Judge erred in law in:

    (i)    failing to observe that the Appellant's  family  life  with  his
         wife was enjoyed in Pakistan; the wife chose to travel to the UK to
         give birth, and the separation from the Appellant was not a  result
         of the Respondent's decision;

    (ii)   the reason for the Appellant's visit to the UK was to visit  his
         in-laws;  the  Judge   erred   in   finding   that   the   it   was
         disproportionate  to  refuse  a  visit  to  these  extended  family
         members; there was no finding that family life existed between  the
         Appellant and these extended family members.

11    In granting permission to appeal on 3 June 2015, Judge  of  the  First
    tier Nicholson pointed out that under s.85A NIAA  2002  the  Judge  was
    bound to consider only the circumstances appertaining at  the  time  of
    the decision, and thought it arguable that the Judge erred in accepting
    that the Appellant had an Article 8 connection with the UK through  his
    wife and daughter because, as at the date of decision, the  Appellant's
    wife was not in the United Kingdom and his daughter had not been  born.
    It was also arguable that the judge erred, if the  judge  had  accepted
    that the Appellant had an Article 8 family life with his wife's family,
    because there was little if any evidence  to  show  that  the  test  in
    Kugathas was met and in any event that point was not considered by  the
    Judge.

12    In submissions before me, Mr. Avery for the Respondent relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal. Mr Khan, for the Appellant, sought to argue that the
    judge's decision was sustainable; that the judge  had  not  found  that
    there was a family life between the  Appellant  and  his  in-laws,  the
    interference with which was disproportionate; indeed,  Mr  Khan  argued
    that the Appellant had not in fact applied for entry clearance to  join
    his wife's extended  family;  rather,  the  judge  had  held  that  the
    Appellant was being precluded from accompanying  his  wife  whilst  she
    visited her extend family. Mr Khan argued that the Judge was correct in
    his observation at [30] that the facts of the present case were similar
    to those in Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
    (IAC).

    Discussion

13    I find that the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  the  following
    respects.

14    I find, notwithstanding Mr Khan's submission  to  the  contrary,  that
    the Judge did find that there was an interference with the family  life
    between the Appellant and his in-laws. Contrary to Mr Khan's submission
    that the Appellant was applying for entry clearance merely to accompany
    his wife whilst she visited her parents and  other  family  members,  I
    find that the details of the  Appellant's  application  (which  I  have
    intentionally set out in some detail above) clearly indicated  that  he
    wished   to    visit    his    in-laws,    for    the    purposes    of
    maintaining/strengthening family ties  (and  sightseeing).   The  Judge
    held at [25] that the Respondent's  decision  has  caused  interference
    with  'the  various  individuals'  family  lives'.  I  find  that  this
    impliedly amounts to a finding that there has been an interference with
    the Appellant's right to family life with his in-laws.

15    I find that that is a material error of law because there was  clearly
    inadequate evidence before the Judge to establish that  there  was  any
    family life  between  the  Appellant  and  his  in-laws  in  the  first
    instance.

16    Further, I find, with reference to the issue raised at  paragraph  [6]
    of Judge Nicholson's grant of permission, that in making  reference  at
    [25] to the extended period of time that the Appellant's wife  remained
    in the UK for the purposes of receiving treatment for  a  gall  bladder
    condition, the Judge erred in law in taking into account a matter which
    the law prevented him from taking into account; the Appellant's  wife's
    need for gall bladder surgery was something which post-dated  the  date
    of decision and her arrival  in  the  UK,  and  was  not  part  of  the
    circumstances appertaining at the time for the decision.

17    I find that such errors are  a  sufficient  basis  to  set  aside  the
    Judge's decision, which I do.

18    In remaking the decision, I take into account the following:

    (i)    the Appellant has been found to satisfy  immigration  rule  para
         41;

    (ii)   applying Mostafa; where the rules are satisfied, then preventing
         a third country national from entering to  accompany  his   British
         wife for the purposes of a temporary visit would be something  more
         than a 'technical or inconsequential interference' with the  family
         life between such an appellant and his wife (Mostafa, [17]);

    (iii)  such an interference is of  sufficient  gravity  potentially  to
         engage the operation of Article 8 (Mostafa, [18]);

    (iv)   subject to two sets of considerations, there is likely to be  no
         justification for stopping  a  husband  joining  his  wife  when  a
         Tribunal  is  satisfied  that   the   circumstances   satisfy   the
         requirements of the Rules (Mostafa, [21]).

19    However, one of the sets of considerations set out in Mostafa at  [21]
    is the candour of the applicant and spouse:

         " ... For example, if they had contributed to the application being
         refused  by  presenting  inaccurate  information  or  by   omitting
         something material or committing some comparable  misdemeanour.  We
         can accept that it might be proportionate to refuse  someone  entry
         clearance whose application  suffered  from  deficiencies  such  as
         these because good administration  requires  applicants  to  engage
         with the system and, further, we consider that there are duties  of
         candour and co-operation on  all  applicants.  There  are  no  such
         failings here. The second set  of  considerations  relates  to  the
         impact of refusal on the relationships that have  to  be  promoted.
         Refusal   of   entry   clearance   will   not   always    interfere
         disproportionately with such a relationship."

20    I find  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  did  contribute  to  the
    application being refused, by presenting inaccurate information and  by
    omitting something material from the Appellant's application.  Although
    the Appellant's wife asserted to the Judge in her evidence  (see  [14])
    that she  knew  she  was  pregnant  at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's
    application for entry clearance, and indeed she appeared to  assert  to
    the Judge that the principal purpose of her visit to the UK was to give
    birth, and that the Appellant's visit was to be present  with  her  for
    that  purpose,  there  was  no  indication   within   the   Appellant's
    application indicating that this was the purpose of  their  visit.  The
    Respondent cannot be deemed to have disproportionately interfered  with
    the family life between the Appellant and his wife  by  preventing  him
    from supporting her through a difficult birth, when the Respondent  was
    not informed, in the application, that this  was  the  purpose  of  the
    Appellant's visit.  The Appellant repeatedly mentioned wishing to visit
    for 4 weeks to further family ties with his in-laws, and nothing  about
    a pregnancy was mentioned.

21    Further, I find that  the  Judge  was  only  able  to  find  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the immigration rules following the  submission  of
    significant quantities of financial information which were  not  before
    the ECO at the time of the decision. The Appellant may  be  treated  as
    having omitted something material from his application in  that  regard
    also.

22    In remaking this decision, even  if,  according  to  the  account  now
    relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  and  his  wife,   the   circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision  were  that  the  sponsor  was
    pregnant and she wished the Appellant to be present with her in the  UK
    at the time of  the  birth,  I  cannot  take  into  account  the  later
    complication in her health that she required gall bladder  surgery,  as
    that issue post dated her arrival in the UK and was  not  part  of  the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of decision.

23    I find that there is no family life between the Appellant and his  in-
    laws, there being no evidence  of  any  such  family  life  capable  of
    supporting such a finding.

24    In the circumstances, I find, notwithstanding that the  Appellant  met
    the immigration rules for visitors at the date of  decision,  and  that
    the Respondent's decision was capable of amounting to  an  interference
    with the Appellant's family life with his wife, of  sufficient  gravity
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8, this is an example of
    a case where the refusal of entry clearance was not disproportionate.

25    If I am wrong about the existence of a material error of  law  in  the
    present decision, and if instead the decision of the First  tier  judge
    should be upheld, I was informed that the Appellant's wife  had  indeed
    return to Pakistan on 18 Much 2015 and is therefore now living back  in
    Pakistan with the Appellant.

26    Upon receiving a decision of the Tribunal allowing an appeal, the  ECO
    is entitled to consider whether, since the original decision there  has
    been a change in circumstances. An ECO is not entitled to go on fishing
    expeditions in an attempt  to  subvert  the  outcome  of  a  successful
    appeal, but they are entitled to take into account whether at the  date
    they come to consider how to implement the Tribunal's decision, whether
    the applicant continues  to  satisfy  the  immigration  rules.  In  the
    present case, it can no longer be said that refusal of entry  clearance
    would amount to a disproportionate interference with  the  family  life
    between the Appellant and his wife by preventing him from being present
    in the UK whilst she gives birth, as she has already  given  birth  and
    has returned to Pakistan.

    Decision

27    (i)   The decision of the First tier Tribunal involved the  making  of
         a material error of law.

    (ii)   The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside.

    (iii)  I remake the decision,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
         human rights grounds.

28    The Tribunal regrets the time taken to produce the present decision.


Signed:     Date: 2.2.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

