


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
VA/03079/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|3rd of January 2018                    |         29th of January 2018       |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                        MRS OMOLARA THERESA OKUNSANYA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Mosaku, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 7th of  July  1947.  She
      appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated  2nd  of  December
      2015 to refuse her  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor
      pursuant  to  paragraph  320  (7A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
      Appellant's appeal was allowed by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Oliver  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  21st  of  February  2017.  The
      Respondent appealed against that decision and for the reasons which  I
      have set out in more detail below I have set that decision  aside  and
      re-made the decision in this case. I therefore refer to the parties as
      they were known at first instance for the sake of convenience.


   2. Paragraph 320 (7A) provides that an application for entry clearance is
      to be refused where false representations  have  been  made  or  false
      documents  have  been  submitted  whether  or  not  material  to   the
      application  or  to  the  applicant's   knowledge.   The   burden   of
      establishing this rests upon the Respondent and the standard of  proof
      is the usual civil standard of probabilities.


   3. The  Judge  set  out  the  background  to  the  case  at  [1]  of  the
      determination. The Appellant had first been  granted  a  single  visit
      visa to come to the United Kingdom in December 1990. She  subsequently
      enjoyed multi-visit  visas  making  full  use  of  them  visiting  her
      children and grandchildren in the United Kingdom on many occasions. On
      3rd of July 2013 she was stopped at the airport when seeking to  leave
      Nigeria for a further visit to the United Kingdom.  Her  daughter  had
      just given birth and her own birthday was due  four  days  later.  The
      immigration officer noted  that  a  previous  stamp  on  her  passport
      purporting to show her re-entry into Nigeria on 27th of April 2012 was
      a stamp which was not in circulation until 1st of August 2012.


   4.  The Appellant's existing  5-year  multi-visit  visa  which  had  been
      issued to her on 12th of May 2011 was cancelled. The Respondent's case
      was that  the  Appellant  had  been  twice  requested  to  attend  the
      Respondent's office at the High Commission with her passport  but  had
      failed to do so. By the time the Appellant did attend over  two  years
      had expired. On 2nd of December 2015 the Respondent found  that  false
      representations had been made with the Appellant's application  for  a
      further visa, in order to misrepresent the Appellant's travel history.
      The Respondent refused the application under paragraph 320 (7A).

The Appellant's Case

   5. The Appellant argued that she had travelled  in  and  out  of  Nigeria
      twice before on the same visa. She denied overstaying  in  the  United
      Kingdom, her visit having been from 30th of March 2012 until  27th  of
      April 2012 (the date on the stamp). She had been visiting  the  United
      Kingdom for over 20  years,  was  always  law-abiding  and  had  never
      overstayed. When she returned home to Nigeria on 3rd of  October  2013
      she sent a sworn affidavit to the Respondent but received no response.
      She wrote again on 3rd of November 2015 and subsequently  attended  at
      the High Commission with her  daughter  and  with  her  passport.  The
      decision of the Respondent impinged on her right to family and private
      life. She was a widow living alone in Nigeria while all  her  children
      and grandchildren were settled in the United Kingdom. She depended  on
      her children for emotional support. She had been forced to  spend  two
      Christmases and birthdays on her own  in  Nigeria.  Her  grandchildren
      could  not  understand  why  they  had  been  unable  to   see   their
      grandmother.

The Decision at First Instance

   6. At [10] the Judge gave his reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal.  After
      noting that the party alleging deception bears the burden  of  proving
      that, the Judge commented that a mere  assertion  that  deception  had
      been practised was no substitute for evidence.  Evidence  should  take
      the form at the  least  of  a  witness  statement  from  a  person  in
      knowledge of the facts concerning the date  of  use  of  each  of  the
      stamps, if indeed there were different stamps, with copy exhibits.  In
      the absence of such evidence the Respondent's reasons for refusal fell
      very far from valid evidence, let alone proof of the  assertions  made
      which had had far-reaching consequences for the  family  life  of  not
      only Appellant but also her family in the United Kingdom.


   7. The Judge considered the Appellant's unblemished  immigration  history
      and impressive achievements in character. He could think of no  reason
      why she would knowingly be involved in deception. Because of the  lack
      of evidence, he had no reason to doubt not only  that  the  stamp  was
      genuine but that the Appellant  had  also  travelled  on  the  day  in
      question. She had suffered a considerable hurt from the assertion made
      by the Respondent which had had serious  interference  with  a  strong
      family life she enjoyed  with  her  children  and  grandchildren.  The
      decision was disproportionate and the  appeal  was  allowed  on  human
      rights grounds.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing firstly that the
      Judge had wrongly refused the  Presenting  Officer's  request  for  an
      adjournment of the hearing.  This  was  a  reference  to  [4]  of  the
      determination in which the Judge stated that  at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing he had asked if there was any further evidence to support  the
      allegation that the questioned stamp in the Appellant's  passport  was
      not in genuine use  at  the  date  showed.  After  some  argument  the
      Presenting Officer had  sought  an  adjournment  (to  investigate  the
      existence of further evidence) which was opposed. The Judge noted that
      the Appellant had sought reasons for the cancellation of the  visa  as
      early as the day on which she had been stopped (3rd of July 2013).  At
      the date of the refusal decision well over 3 years  later  no  further
      evidence or explanation had been supplied to her. He decided that  the
      case should proceed.


   9. The Respondent's complaint in the onward grounds of  appeal  was  that
      there was no evidence of any letter from the Appellant written to  the
      Respondent and the Judge should  not  have  made  an  adverse  finding
      against the Respondent for not having replied to a letter that had not
      been received. In any event the Respondent had  twice  requested  that
      the Appellant attend the office with her passport but she  had  failed
      to do so for some two years without any explanation [this was referred
      to in the Judge's determination]. The  failure  to  attend  the  entry
      clearance  post  to  assist  with  the  Respondent's   enquiries   was
      inconsistent with the Judge's comments that the Appellant's visits  to
      the United Kingdom meant a great deal  to  the  Appellant.  Given  the
      serious nature of the allegation of deception the Presenting Officer's
      request was a reasonable one and  the  Judge  had  acted  unfairly  in
      refusing it.

  10. The 2nd ground of appeal was that the  Judge  had  failed  to  make  a
      reasoned finding that there  was  family  life  for  the  purposes  of
      Article 8 between the Appellant  and  Sponsor.  The  Sponsor  was  the
      Appellant's son who had attended the hearing at first instance. He had
      confirmed he had been resident in the United Kingdom  since  1996  and
      was one of the Appellant's 4 children living in  the  United  Kingdom.
      The Sponsor had had a son born in August 2016 and as a result  of  the
      refusal to grant entry clearance the Appellant had been unable to come
      to visit the child.


  11. The grounds complained that it was established case  law  that  family
      life would not normally exist between parents and adult  children.  If
      family life did not exist  then  generally  Article  8  would  not  be
      engaged. An application to come to the United Kingdom as a visitor was
      a temporary visit of limited duration.  There  needed  to  be  further
      elements of dependency involving more than normal emotional ties. None
      of the criteria to establish more than emotional ties were met in  the
      present case. There  was  no  finding  of  a  financial  or  emotional
      dependency. There were no reasons preventing the Sponsor from visiting
      the Appellant either in Nigeria or  elsewhere.  The  refusal  did  not
      cause  any  interference  to  family   visits.   The   proportionality
      assessment was inadequately reasoned.


  12. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on 8th of November  2017  who
      granted permission to appeal. He  summarised  the  grounds  of  onward
      appeal and wrote: "in an otherwise careful and focussed  decision  and
      reasons it is nonetheless  arguable  that  the  Judge,  whilst  having
      described  the  Appellant's  family  life  with   her   children   and
      grandchildren as "strong" failed to set out  precisely  the  qualities
      that led to that description of the Appellant as a senior adult. There
      is no explanation from the Judge as to how the Appellant's family life
      falls within the principles set out in Kugathas and Ghisling. To  that
      extent it is arguable that the Judge materially erred.  This  arguable
      material error of law having been identified, all the issues raised in
      the grounds are arguable."


  13. The Appellant responded to the grant of permission to appeal  pursuant
      to rule 24 by letter dated 8th of December 2017. Taking issue with the
      complaint about the refusal of the adjournment, the letter stated that
      the Respondent had only requested an adjournment after  it  was  clear
      that evidence had not been provided by the Respondent at  the  hearing
      in relation to the allegation  of  deception  against  the  Appellant.
      There had been various opportunities for the relevant evidence to have
      been presented. The Judge had taken full account of all  the  relevant
      evidence provided to support the appeal which met the requirements  of
      Kugathas and  Ghisling.  There  was  oral  evidence  relating  to  the
      Appellant's family ties in the United Kingdom. The Appellant had  four
      children all of whom were in the  United  Kingdom  and  were  settled.
      These children now had children of their  own.  The  Appellant  was  a
      widow with no family ties or support in Nigeria. There was evidence of
      regular contact between her children and her grandchildren. She relied
      on them for emotional support.


  14. At paragraph 5 of the letter however, the solicitors  stated  that  as
      the Judge had not explained  how  the  Appellant's  family  life  fell
      within the  principles  of  Kugathas  and  Ghisling  she  invited  the
      Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing.

The Hearing Before Me

  15. On behalf of the Respondent  the  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the
      grounds of  onward  appeal.  There  was  evidence  of  the  Respondent
      contacting the Appellant asking  for  further  information  which  she
      never replied to. In reply, the Appellant's solicitor  submitted  that
      the Appellant had been stopped on a particular occasion, her  passport
      had been examined and returned to her. She had asked why she had  been
      stopped  in  2013.  She  was  only  told  that  the  Respondent  would
      communicate with her. The Appellant had waited for a  period  of  time
      but  had  not  received  anything  from  the  Respondent  by  way   of
      explanation. She therefore prepared an affidavit to support her  case.
      The Respondent received the Appellant's request. The Appellant had not
      received the Respondent's letter (dated 5th of  November  2013  asking
      her to bring her passport to the  High  Commission).  There  had  been
      problems with her mailbox.


  16. The Judge at first instance had pointed out that  there  were  various
      opportunities for the  Respondent  to  provide  the  evidence  to  the
      Appellant to confirm the Respondent's assertion that the stamp in  the
      passport was false. When the Respondent requested an adjournment,  the
      Judge could not see how the case would be in any better shape  at  the
      end of a  period  of  adjournment  than  it  was  at  that  time.  The
      Respondent had not made out his case at  the  hearing.  There  was  no
      procedural irregularity or unfairness in the Judge proceeding with the
      hearing.


  17. In her witness statement the Appellant had  said  that  she  had  been
      asked why she had an irregular stamp in  her  passport  and  had  been
      informed  that  the  stamp  dated  27th  of  April  2012  was  not  in
      circulation at that date. The Appellant said  she  had  been  confused
      about this question thinking that the Respondent would be in a  better
      position to answer than she was. On entry or leaving Nigeria  she  was
      at the mercy of immigration officials placing the  relevant  stamp  in
      her passport and had no way of checking whether that stamp  was  right
      or wrong. She could only check the date. Although  the  Appellant  had
      received an answer from the respondent to  her  query  the  supporting
      evidence had not been provided to her. The Judge  had  considered  the
      seriousness of the issue of the stamp.


  18. In response, the Presenting Officer stated that the Judge  should  not
      have made a finding against the Respondent. He should  have  adjourned
      to enable clarification  of  a  core  issue.  In  conclusion  for  the
      Appellant it was submitted that the Appellant had  given  evidence  on
      how often she travelled to and from the  United  Kingdom.  She  had  a
      multiple entry visa and had had a business. It was important  for  her
      to come and go. The Appellant had had close contact  with  her  family
      over a period of 20 years which would indicate a closeness which  went
      beyond normal emotional ties. She was  a  widow.  She  relied  on  her
      relationship with her children. The facts of  the  case  were  not  in
      dispute it was to do with the evidence. Both parties were content  for
      me to make a decision on the case: either to uphold the  determination
      finding no material error of law or if there was a material  error  of
      law to remake the decision in this case.

Findings

  19. The Appellant was encountered at Lagos airport on  3rd  of  July  2013
      seeking  to  travel  to  London.  According  to  the  Entry  Clearance
      Manager's review an airline liaison officer  working  at  the  airport
      inspected the Appellant's passport and found a Nigerian re-entry stamp
      dated 27th of April 2012 (stamp number 36) which was of a format  that
      the officer knew was not in official usage on that date. The stamp was
      therefore identified as a false endorsement in the passport  and  with
      the authority of a visa manager the visit visa which had  been  issued
      to the Appellant on 12th of  May  2011  was  cancelled.  The  passport
      itself was returned to the Appellant with a request  that  she  attend
      the British High Commission  to  speak  with  the  visa  officer.  The
      Respondent complains that a period  of  two  years  went  by  and  the
      Appellant did not go to the High Commission with her passport for this
      matter to be further  investigated.  The  Appellant  argues  that  she
      demanded an explanation of why her visit visa had been cancelled.  The
      Respondent referred to letters written to the Appellant asking her  to
      come to the High Commission which received no reply.


  20. The Judge had before him a document verification  report  (DVR)  dated
      2nd of December 2015 prepared by S. Patel, an entry clearance  officer
      who had been working in Lagos since September  2013.  He  or  she  was
      currently working in the visa  section  of  the  British  Deputy  High
      Commission in Lagos and was a  member  of  the  document  verification
      team. Whilst in Lagos it was part of the officer's duties  to  examine
      travel and supporting documents submitted  in  connection  with  entry
      clearance applications. The  verification  report  under  the  section
      comments stated: "as a result of an examination on the above document,
      it is concluded that the above entry stamp dated 27th  of  April  2012
      has been improperly or fraudulently obtained to purport to  show  that
      the holder returned to Nigeria earlier than the actual date of  return
      and  had  therefore  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  longer   than
      indicated".


  21. The Judge's concern was  that  the  document  verification  report  by
      itself was insufficient to establish the Respondent's  assertion  that
      the Appellant had a false stamp in her passport. He said he would have
      expected a witness statement and copies of the relevant stamps. In  my
      view the Judge materially erred in these conclusions. The DVR  was  in
      effect a witness statement by the entry clearance officer.  Whilst  it
      is correct that the copy of the relevant stamp was not annexed to  the
      DVR, it has to be pointed out that  the  Appellant  had  retained  her
      passport with the stamp in question. The Appellant produced  a  bundle
      of documents running to some 70 pages for the purpose of  her  appeal.
      At page 67 of her bundle there was a photocopy of the  cancelled  visa
      marked "revoked". At the top of page 67 but very faintly was  a  stamp
      which appeared to be 27th of April 2012, the stamp  in  question.  The
      stamp is unclear and it is not perhaps surprising that that the  Judge
      did not refer to it in his determination.


  22. The issue is whether the Judge's rejection of the evidence in the form
      of the DVR was open to  him  in  all  the  circumstances.  As  I  have
      indicated the DVR was in effect a witness statement and the Judge does
      not fully quote the evidence at [3] of the determination. The maker of
      the DVR gave their  professional  qualifications  and  experience  and
      explained that the stamp was not in circulation until  1st  of  August
      2012 hence a stamp  placed  in  the  passport  dated  April  2012  was
      fraudulently  obtained.  Whilst  this  information  is  brief,  it  is
      difficult  to  see  what  further  information  the  Respondent  could
      reasonably have been expected to give.


  23. The Judge proceeded on the assumption that there was no valid evidence
      before him to show that the stamp was  fraudulent.  In  proceeding  in
      this way, the Judge materially erred  in  law.  There  was  sufficient
      evidence before him to explain to the Appellant why her visa had  been
      cancelled. There  was  no  evidence  from  the  Appellant  beyond  her
      assertion that the stamp was valid. There was  no  independent  expert
      evidence for example. The maker of the DVR was clearly an  experienced
      officer and his (or her) evidence needed to be treated with some  care
      as it was unanswered. Regrettably, this was not done in this case.


  24. It follows from  the  preceding  paragraph  that  I  do  not  need  to
      determine whether the Judge's refusal to adjourn  the  hearing  was  a
      material error of law since I  find  that  the  Judge  had  sufficient
      evidence before him to deal with the case and there was no purpose  in
      adjourning the hearing as there  was  nothing  further  of  particular
      relevance that needed to be supplied.


  25. Since I find a material error of law I set the decision of the  First-
      tier Judge aside and proceed to remake the decision. I first deal with
      the issue of the visa stamp. The Appellant's complaint  was  that  she
      had asked for evidence to explain why her visa had been cancelled  but
      this had not been given  to  her.  There  are  two  problems  for  the
      Appellant with this claim. The first is that  she  was  asked  by  the
      Respondent to go to the entry clearance  post  with  her  passport  to
      clear the matter up. She did not respond to those requests  and  a  2-
      year period went by with her ignoring  the  request.  The  Appellant's
      explanation to me was that she had had difficulties with  her  mailbox
      and therefore did not receive  the  Respondent's  letters.  I  do  not
      consider that that is a good explanation for the  Appellant's  failure
      to respond to the entry clearance officer's request for a meeting.  It
      was not raised in her witness statement and is inconsistent  with  her
      explanation  that  she  was  waiting  for  an  explanation  from   the
      Respondent.  She  could  and  should  have  been  more  proactive   in
      contacting the Respondent if she was as concerned as she claimed.  The
      inference must be that the Appellant did not take up the  Respondent's
      invitation to a meeting because she knew that the passport  stamp  was
      false and there would have been  a  little  point  in  clarifying  the
      matter further.


  26. The 2nd difficulty is that the Appellant was given a full  explanation
      of what the problem was with  her  visa  at  the  very  least  in  the
      Respondent's letter to her dated 2nd of December 2015. She had a wrong
      stamp placed in the passport which had an impossible date on it.  This
      is clear and understandable.


  27. The Respondent's  case  was  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      Appellant had travelled on 27th of April 2012 the inference being that
      the Appellant must have travelled at a later date and  had  the  stamp
      backdated to show that she had complied with the terms  of  her  visa.
      Unfortunately for the  Appellant  by  the  time  the  visa  stamp  was
      backdated the type of stamp had been changed by the  authorities.  The
      Appellant was given an adequate explanation but she was  not  prepared
      to accept the explanation she was given. The Respondent's decision  to
      cancel  the  Appellant's  multiple  entry  visa  was  justified  under
      paragraph 320 (7A) of the Rules since the stamp was false.


  28. The Appellant's only appeal against refusal of entry  clearance  as  a
      visitor is outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8. In assessing
      Article 8 the appeal has to be looked at  through  the  prism  of  the
      rules. The Appellant states she has a family life  with  her  children
      and grandchildren in this country  and  that  there  is  an  emotional
      dependency upon them. No adequate reasons appear to have been given to
      the Judge at first instance why her children could not  visit  her  in
      Nigeria.  The  Appellant  herself  referred  to  attending  the   High
      Commission with her daughter (see [5] above) who must  therefore  have
      travelled out to see the Appellant.


  29. This was an application by an adult to visit other adults  (and  their
      children). In the Court of Appeal decision of Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
      1511 approving  earlier  case  law  it  was  stated:  "Generally,  the
      protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8  involves   cohabiting
      dependents, such as  parents  and  their  dependent,  minor  children.
      Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the circumstances
      of the particular case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her
      33 year old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
      protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence of  further
      elements of dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal  emotional
      ties... there is not an  absolute  requirement  of  dependency  in  an
      economic sense for 'family life' to exist, but  it  is  necessary  for
      there to be  real,  committed  or  effective  support  between  family
      members in order to show that 'family  life'  exists  ([17]);  neither
      blood ties nor the concern and affection that ordinarily go with  them
      are, by themselves or together, sufficient ([19])."


  30. The Judge was impressed  by  what  he  described  as  the  Appellant's
      unblemished immigration history. That was based on  his  finding  that
      there was not an unlawful stamp in the Appellant's passport which as I
      have indicated above was a wrong conclusion. Even  if  the  Judge  was
      right that the Appellant had an unblemished history, it  is  difficult
      to see how that would have carried significant weight in the balancing
      act. Given that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the  rules
      because she fell foul of paragraph 320 (7A), there is even less weight
      to be attached to the Appellant's immigration history. It is difficult
      to see that family life was engaged in this appeal  as  the  basis  of
      emotional dependency was not made out. The  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and her adult children did not go  beyond  normal  emotional
      ties.


  31. Even if  I  am  wrong  on  that  and  family  life  was  engaged,  the
      interference caused by  cancelling  the  Appellant's  visit  visa  was
      pursuant to the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  because  a
      fraudulent stamp had been placed in  the  Appellant's  passport.  That
      interference (assuming that it  could  be  made  out  that  there  was
      interference) was proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued  because
      of the seriousness of the false stamp. The result of the decision  was
      to confirm the status quo whereby the Appellant continued to  live  in
      Nigeria and could be visited by her children if they so wished.  As  I
      have indicated there appears to be little evidence that they did  wish
      to visit her. The only explanation given by the Appellant's son as  to
      why he did not visit her in Nigeria was that it was  not  possible  to
      have all the family go to see her at once.  I  do  not  find  this  an
      adequate reason. The Appellant's daughter visited  the  Appellant  and
      there is no good reason why the Appellant could not have  visits  from
      her children one at a time if necessary. Family life can reasonably be
      expected to continue in such a way. I find that the  Appellant  cannot
      succeed under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and  her  appeal
      against the cancellation of her entry visa is dismissed.

  32. I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason  for  so
      doing.





Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I have set it aside. I remake  the  decision  in  this
    case by dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

Signed this 22nd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside and  therefore  set
aside the fee award. As I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal  I  make  no
fee award.

Signed this 22nd of January 2018
.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






