
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27th September 2016               |On 29th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR PARVAIZ IQBAL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Iqbal (Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties  in  this  matter  as  "the  Secretary  of
    State", who is the appellant, and to Mr P Iqbal as "the Claimant".

2.   The Secretary of State appeals against a decision and  reasons  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid) ("FTT")  promulgated  on  12th  April
    2016 in which the  Claimant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Family
    visitor Immigration Rules paragraph 41.

FTT decision

3.   In the decision and reasons the FTT  found  that  the  Claimant  was  a
    genuine visitor who wished to come to stay with his brother  and  other
    family members and that he intended to return to Pakistan at the end of
    the visit.  The FTT further found that there was evidence to show  that
    the Claimant could afford the visit and was self financing in Pakistan.
     The Secretary of State does not now seek to challenge those findings.

Grounds of application for permission

4.   In grounds of application for permission the Secretary of State  argued
    that the FTT erred in law by allowing the  appeal  outright  under  the
    Rules where there was no statutory  right  of  appeal.   The  right  of
    appeal in family visit matters was restricted by  section  84(1)(c)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002. There were  no  grounds
    of  appeal  arguing  for  consideration   of   Article   8   nor   race
    discrimination and the FTT did not consider the issue.  The FTT had  no
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal on the basis that it did.

Permission

5.   Permission on all grounds was granted by FTTJ Davidge  on  25th  August
    2016.

Error of law hearing

6.   At the error of law hearing the  sponsor  attended  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant.  As he was not legally represented I  explained  to  him  the
    reasons for the hearing before this Tribunal and the grounds argued  by
    the Secretary of State.  He confirmed that he understood the  procedure
    and what was to be considered.  He stated that his brother had  visited
    previously and always returned at  the  end  of  the  visit.   I  heard
    submissions from Mr Norton.  He provided the sponsor  with  a  copy  of
    Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC) and  the  grounds
    of appeal and in oral submissions expanded on the same.

Discussion and decision

7.   I find that there was a material error of law in the FTT  decision  and
    reasons.  The FTT failed to have regard to the statutory restriction to
    grounds of appeal under section 84 (as cited above).  The  FTT  treated
    the appeal as a fact finding exercise with reference to only the Family
    visit rules under paragraph 41  and  allowed  the  appeal  under  those
    rules. There was no consideration given to the scope of the  rights  of
    appeal under section 84(1)(c) which  limits  the  right  of  appeal  to
    matters  engaging  Article  8  ECHR  and/or  unlawful  by   reason   of
    discrimination. As there were no grounds put  on  this  basis  the  FTT
    should have gone on to dismiss the appeal  for  lack  of  jurisdiction.
    Accordingly I allow the appeal, I set aside the  decision  and  reasons
    but I preserve the findings of fact made as  set  out  in  paragraph  3
    above.

Remaking the decision

8.   Following the approach in Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT
    487 (IAC) I rely on the findings of fact made by the FTT.   I  consider
    if there is a right of appeal under section 84 (1)(c), namely  a  claim
    under human rights or unlawful discrimination.  On  the  evidence  that
    was before the FTT I am satisfied that the Claimant has failed to  show
    that there are individual interests at stake covered by Article  8  (SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387).  The  Claimant  is  the  brother  of  the
    Sponsor and there was no evidence before the FTT (and none  before  me)
    to show that there was any dependency above or beyond the ordinary ties
    as between adult  relations.   Therefore  Article  8  is  not  engaged.
    Similarly  there  was  no  ground  argued  that  there  had  been   any
    discrimination in reaching the decision.

9.   I dismiss the appeal as the Claimant  has  no  right  of  appeal  under
    section 84.  However, I am  satisfied  that  the  FTT  found  that  the
    Claimant met the relevant rules under paragraph 41.  This was  accepted
    by Mr Norton, who confirmed, that in the event that the Claimant  makes
    a fresh application, and provided that there are no  material  changes,
    there is no reason why it should be refused.  I agreed and confirmed to
    the sponsor that a  copy  of  this  decision  could  be  added  to  the
    Claimant's application if he so wished, making it clear  that  the  FTT
    found the rules to be met.

Decision

10.  There is a material error of law.  The decision is set aside  save  for
    the findings          preserved in paragraph 3  above.   I  remake  the
    decision and dismiss the appeal.




                               Signed                     Date 27.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD AS I HAVE DISMISSED THE APPEAL.


                               Signed                     Date 27.9.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


