
..[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03805/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2013                               |On 28th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                         zelekash gebre woldetsadik
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - addis ababa
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Mesfin (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Martin (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia  born  in  1940.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer,  Addis  Ababa  on  7
    January 2013 to refuse to grant entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The decision was refused on two grounds.  First the Appellant  had  not
    provided evidence that the Sponsor is her daughter.  As  such  the  ECO
    was not satisfied that the  intention  was  to  visit  a  close  family
    relative (paragraph 41 (i)).  Second, the ECO was  not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant's financial circumstances were as claimed.  In particular
    her claimed income was not apparent on her bank  statement.   Also  the
    balance was much lower until two cash deposits were lodged just  before
    the application, the origins of which were unclear.  As  a  consequence
    of not being satisfied about the Appellant's economic circumstances the
    ECO considered that the Appellant would not leave the UK at the end  of
    the proposed visit (paragraph 41 (ii)).

 3. Mrs Woldetsadik appealed.  In the grounds of appeal in respect  of  the
    relationship she stated that there was no  birth  certificate  for  the
    Sponsor as one was not issued and there was  no  legal  requirement  to
    apply for one; there was a statutory declaration in  lieu  of  a  birth
    certificate; also family photographs were enclosed.  In  addition,  she
    and the Sponsor were willing to  provide  DNA  evidence  to  prove  the
    relationship.

 4. As for the financial circumstances, the Appellant runs a taxi  business
    for which a title certificate had been provided and owns property  from
    which she gets rental income; documentation in respect of both had been
    submitted including tax documentation.

 5. As for the origins of the cash deposits, as a self-employed person with
    interests in a taxi business and  rental  property  and  with  "regular
    income from these sources ... she deposits and withdraws large  amounts
    of money whenever required".  She has sufficient  income  and  leads  a
    comfortable and settled life with her family and  extended  family  and
    family friends in Ethiopia.

 6. The appeal was heard at Hatton Cross on 29 May 2013.  It was  dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth.  In respect of the  claimed
    relationship the judge concluded that the Appellant had not established
    such.  She had not commissioned a DNA report.  Also, although there was
    no enforcement of registration of births such did not mean that  births
    cannot be registered.  Photographs did not advance the case.

 7. As for her financial circumstances,  the  judge  did  not  believe  her
    explanation, when asked at the hearing about  the  deposits,  that  the
    banking industry in Ethiopia is such that making  regular  deposits  or
    withdrawals is difficult and that account holders are in the  hands  of
    the bank in that regard.

 8. The judge also did not believe the Appellant who, when questioned about
    tax calculations, said that that was for the government to decide.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 17 July 2013 who stated:

         "2.  The grounds assert that at paragraph 17 of  the  determination
             notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  Sponsor  had  signed  a
             statutory declaration indicating that the  Appellant  was  her
             biological mother, the Sponsor having accepted  that  she  had
             been aware that the claimed relationship  with  the  Appellant
             was in issue had, knowing of this fact, had not commissioned a
             DNA report.  It is asserted that the Appellant discharged  the
             burden of proof in showing the relationship with her  Sponsor.
             They had agreed to take a DNA test as indicated  in  the  Visa
             Application Form.  It  is  argued  therefore  that  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer could have  arranged  a  DNA  test  for  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor, something which the Appellant could
             not have undertaken because it would not have been  acceptable
             by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The Appellant relies  on  IDI
             Chapter 8 Section 5A  in  support  of  that  contention.   The
             Appellant also relies  on  the  UKBA  Guidance  for  Staff  on
             General   Visitors'   Version   8.0   which   gives   specific
             instructions to UKBA staff on assessing evidence as to claimed
             relationships.

         3.   It is asserted that the Respondent  did  not  follow  its  own
             guidance,  something  which  was   not   considered   by   the
             Immigration Judge.

         4.   It is further asserted that the judge failed  to  give  proper
             and full consideration to the evidence as to  the  Appellant's
             claimed income.

         5.   It is clear that the determination has been prepared  in  some
             detail.  However reading the refusal of entry clearance  there
             does not  appear  to  be  any  reference  to  the  Immigration
             Directorate  Instruction  or  the  VAF  2.2  Entry   Clearance
             Guidance in respect of Family Visitors.   The  Respondent  has
             not indicated  that  such  matters  were  considered  and  the
             appropriate steps taken to comply with the requirements of the
             guidance.  This is a matter that was not picked up on  by  the
             judge at the hearing of the appeal.  This  is  a  matter  that
             does warrant further consideration.

         6.   As arguable errors of law have been identified  permission  to
             appeal is granted.  This however  by  no  means  guarantees  a
             different outcome to the final decision."

10. At the error of law hearing before me the Sponsor had nothing to add to
    the grounds.  She agreed that the issues raised therein  about  failure
    by the ECO to refer to the entry clearance guidance in respect  of  the
    relationship had not been a matter raised before the First-tier Judge.

11. In reply Ms Martin said that the judge could not be faulted for failing
    to deal with issues which were not put before him.  It was  also  wrong
    to assert that had the Appellant commissioned a DNA report  by  herself
    the ECO would not have accepted the report.  The requirement  was  that
    it had to be Cellmark who were commissioned.

12. As for the issues raised about the judge's conclusions on  maintenance,
    these merely amounted to a disagreement with the judge's findings.

13. In considering this matter paragraph 3 of the grounds  claims  that  it
    was up to the ECO to arrange a DNA test.  The Appellant  was  happy  to
    comply.  However, had she done so of her own accord it would  not  have
    been accepted by the ECO.   The  Appellant  mentioned  IDI  Chapter  8,
    Section 5A.  It was not produced before me nor, as indicated,  was  the
    First-tier Judge referred to it.  Mrs Mesfin, the Sponsor, accepted  Ms
    Martin's submission that as long as a DNA report is  commissioned  from
    Cellmark such a report will be accepted by an ECO from an applicant.  I
    see no reason in the circumstances to doubt that.

14. In any event I find merit in Ms Martin's submission that it  is  unfair
    to criticise a judge for failing to deal with an issue  which  was  not
    put before him.  I do not consider such to be a Robinson obvious (per R
    v SSHD ex. p. Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1161) point  with  the  result  the
    judge did not err in not dealing with it.

15. The same applies to paragraph 5 of the grounds which refers  to  VAT2.2
    of the Entry Clearance Guidance VAT02  Visiting  Family,  which  states
    that "where sponsorship documents have been submitted and the  ECO  has
    reason and or grounds to doubt the relationship, a phone call should be
    made to the Sponsor in the UK and clarification sought".  It  is  said,
    no doubt accurately, that no such call was made.  Again however,  I  do
    not consider that such was a  Robinson  obvious  point  such  that  the
    judge, having not been referred to it, erred in failing  to  deal  with
    it.

16. Paragraph 4 of the grounds refers to yet different  guidance  viz  UKBA
    Guidance for UKBA Staff on General Visitors Version 8.0 ext pages 26  &
    27 which states "You must not seek documentary evidence  of  a  claimed
    relationship unless there are strong grounds to doubt it, for  example,
    a disparity in age that makes the relationship biologically  unlikely".



17. This extract was before the judge (at P23) of the appeal bundle  lodged
    on 20 May 2013.  The problem is that it is stated to be  valid  from  6
    April 2013.  The date of decision in the Appellant's case was 7 January
    2013.  I do not see it to be an error of law for the judge not to  have
    taken heed of guidance which was not in  effect  at  the  date  of  the
    application and decision.

18. The judge noted that the relationship was in issue.  He  found  that  a
    statutory declaration asserting that the relationship  was  as  claimed
    and that photographs showing both the Sponsor  and  Appellant  did  not
    satisfy the burden of establishing the family  relationship.   Further,
    that while an article  produced  by  the  Appellant  stated  that  "...
    Ethiopia has no system that enforces registration of  births  ..."  the
    extract did not  state  that  births  cannot  be  registered  with  the
    appropriate authorities.

19. The judge was entitled on the evidence before  him  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had not established the claimed relationship.

20. It  is  appropriate  to  point  out  that  having  concluded  that  the
    relationship was not one within the permitted class or description  set
    out in the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations  2012,  the
    ECO would have been entitled  to  restrict  the  Appellant's  right  of
    appeal (per s88A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002).
    However he went on to  consider  the  application  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's intentions under paragraph 41. Even if the judge was  wrong
    to find that the family relationship  had  not  been  established,  the
    Appellant still had to satisfy 41 (i) and (ii).

21.  In  that  regard  turning  to  consider   the   Appellant's   economic
    circumstances the grounds (at paragraphs 8 to 10)  state,  in  summary,
    that as she said in her witness statement  she  was  self-employed  and
    deposited and withdrew large amounts of money as  and  when  necessary.
    Also, she has provided documentary evidence in support of her claim  to
    have a business and to have rental income.  Further, she has  a  family
    and relatives in Ethiopia.  The judge, she claimed, had failed to  take
    account of all the relevant evidence.

22. The judge in his determination considered the claim by the ECO that the
    Appellant did not provide evidence to explain the origin  of  two  bank
    deposits made just before the application.  He noted that  the  claimed
    income  to  the  deposits  did  not  correlate.  He  also   noted   the
    explanation, repeated in the grounds, that she  worked  in  a  business
    which dealt in cash and it was normal  to  deposit  or  withdraw  large
    amounts when convenient.

23. The judge noted, however, a conflict between that evidence and her oral
    evidence.  At the hearing she said banks "decide whether or not to take
    deposits or to allow withdrawals" [12].  She "... does not  deposit  or
    withdraw regularly because it depends upon how obliging  the  bank  is"
    [13].  The judge was entitled to take account of the contradiction  and
    to find the explanation given at the hearing that "the banking industry
    in Ethiopia is such that making regular deposits or even withdrawals is
    difficult and that account holders are in the hands of their bank  with
    respect to such transactions" [21] to be not credible.

24. The judge also considered answers to questions at the hearing about tax
    calculations.  He noted that the tax certificate did not state what the
    Appellant's income was.

25.  The  Sponsor  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Kainth  said  that  the
    "government decides how  much  tax  is  to  be  paid  and  one  has  no
    alternative but to pay the amount that they ask for" [14].

26. The judge did not find the explanation credible, stating  (at[22])  "In
    order for tax to be calculated, there must be  evidence  in  connection
    with derived income.  It is not plausible for a tax  office  to  simply
    pull out of thin air what they expect  an  individual  to  pay  by  tax
    without knowing information concerning their income".

27. On the evidence before him the judge was entitled to find the  contents
    of the tax document unreliable.  He was entitled on the evidence not to
    be satisfied that  the  economic  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  in
    Ethiopia were as claimed and that such cast doubt on her  intention  in
    seeking to come to the UK and whether she would leave (paragraph 41 (i)
    and (ii)).

28. The comments in the grounds simply amount to a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.

29. In  conclusion,  I  see  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision dismissing  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules shows no material error of law  and  that  decision  shall
stand.




Signed                              Date 28th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
