
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03058/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 April 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              MISS SHEZA HAMID
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his human rights (Article 8 ECHR) appeal
    against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer dated  28  September
    2015 to refuse to grant her entry clearance as a  family  visitor.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that such a direction is required for these proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 20 February 2017 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald gave
    his reasons for granting the appellant permission to  appeal  from  the
    decision of Designated Judge McClure,  who  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 17 January 2017:

       "The grounds of application are lengthy but essentially say that the
       Judge's decision was based on speculation as opposed to  the  actual
       evidence.

       The Judge noted the family unit had a number of problems in  seeking
       to cope with the needs of all  the  family  members  which  presents
       certain difficulties (paragraph 28).  Looking at  all  the  evidence
       the Judge found that if the appellant were allowed to  come  to  the
       United Kingdom she would remain here when it was  planned  that  the
       appellant would come here to help the sponsor and his family to cope
       in a very difficult situation.

       While the Judge did  note  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances
       (paragraph 40) it is arguable that the reasons given are based  very
       much on suspicion of what might occur and that further reasoning  is
       required to justify the conclusion reached.  The Judge appears to be
       accepting that the appellant does wish to visit her  father's  grave
       (paragraphs 44-45)."

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 23 February 2017 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  The Judge had performed the task
    required of him, which was to weigh the evidence available to  him  and
    reach a decision on the appellant's Article 8 appeal on the balance  of
    probabilities.   The  Judge's  conclusions  are  not  based   on   mere
    speculation but are the result of careful consideration of  the  facts.
    The findings are adequately reasoned and justified.  The grounds amount
    to a disagreement with the Judge's findings, which were open to him.

Discussion

 4. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth is  5  May
    1995.  On 28 September 2015 an Entry Clearance Officer (post  reference
    ABDH/1317743) refused her application for a visit visa to  undertake  a
    two week visit as he was not satisfied that she met the requirements of
    sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Rules.   In
    particular, he was not satisfied that she had accurately  set  out  her
    circumstances in Pakistan, including the financial resources  available
    to her and her mother.  She had declared herself to be single, with  no
    one dependent upon her. She had no verified income  or  assets  of  her
    own. So he considered that she  had  little  in  the  way  of  ties  to
    Pakistan to  give  her  an  incentive  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    Conversely, she stated that her family members  in  the  UK  could  not
    visit  her  in  Pakistan  because  of  ill  health  and  her  brother's
    employment in Tesco. Thus, he was not satisfied that only a short visit
    was intended, or that she would leave the UK at the end of  the  period
    stated by her.

 5. The hearing of the appeal took place in Manchester on 11 November 2016.
     The appellant's brother, who was her sponsor, gave oral evidence.   He
    said that he and his wife had last gone to Pakistan in 2010/11.  At the
    time, they had just one child.  Since that visit, he and his  wife  had
    had further children.  Of the four children,  two  had  special  needs.
    They attended a special needs nursery which was 45  minutes  away  from
    where the family lived.  He had to drop the  children  off  at  nursery
    before going on to his work.  His wife suffered from problems with  her
    back.  She  also  suffered  from  ulcerative  colitis  and  gestational
    diabetes.

 6. In his conclusions, the Judge observed that the  current  situation  in
    which the sponsor  and  his  wife  found  themselves  must  be  putting
    significant pressure on them.  He further observed that  the  needs  of
    the family unit were not going to reduce.  As for  the  appellant,  she
    indicated that she was  undertaking  studies  at  university,  but  she
    appeared to have failed the last series of exams.  She did not have any
    personal commitments in Pakistan, other than to her mother.  The  Judge
    concluded in paragraph [43] that the appellant was intending to  remain
    in the UK to help look after the sponsor's family.   He  was  satisfied
    that the appellant was not intending to come for a  limited  period  of
    six months or less, but was intending to come to stay for  as  long  as
    possible.

 7. I consider that the Judge's conclusion is adequately reasoned.  Neither
    the sponsor nor the appellant declared that the real plan was  for  the
    appellant to stay as long as possible to help look after the  sponsor's
    family.  However, this was an inference that it was reasonably open  to
    the Judge to draw, having regard to the evidence which he had received.
     The forensic difficulty for the appellant was that  the  evidence  put
    forward to demonstrate the compassionate circumstances surrounding  her
    proposed visit was very unhelpful to her case in allaying  the  concern
    raised by the Entry Clearance Officer as  to  the  reliability  of  her
    declared intention only to make a short visit.   It  was  open  to  the
    Judge to find, as he did, that the appellant, who had far less pressing
    commitments in Pakistan, was likely to give priority  to  remaining  in
    the UK to help to look after  the  sponsor's  family  in  what  was  in
    essence a long-term family crisis, taking on essential chores and tasks
    that the sponsor's wife would  normally  do  herself  if  she  was  not
    incapacitated by ill-health. As this was a highly  foreseeable  outcome
    from the appellant's perspective, given the compassionate circumstances
    of her UK sponsor's family outlined in the evidence  and  the  relative
    weakness of her ties to Pakistan -  especially  in  terms  of  familial
    dependency (her mother in Pakistan was not dependent on her) -  it  was
    open to the Judge to infer that it was an outcome which  the  appellant
    intended, so that she was not a genuine visitor.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 9 May 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

