
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/03043/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           nadia mohamed abdilahi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Harbi, the sponsor


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

 1. The respondent, a  citizen  of  Somalia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  of  9
    May 2014 to refuse her application for  entry  clearance  as  a  family
    visitor to visit and support her elderly ill father.  The  ECO  refused
    the application under paragraph 41 (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights. The ECO was granted permission to appeal to
    this Tribunal.

 2. When the appeal came before me Mrs Willocks-Briscoe applied to withdraw
    the appeal on the basis that she accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge conducted a proper balancing exercise in considering  the  public
    interest under Article 8.

 3. In the circumstances I consent to the withdrawal of the ECO's appeal.

 4. I hereby record that the appeal of the ECO against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been withdrawn under Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. There  is  therefore  no  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


Signed      Date: 8 October 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


