
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03192/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIRUT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mohammad Safwan Hakim
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Siriwardena, Counsel instructed by RSB
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent, to whom we shall refer hereinafter as the claimant,  is
    a national of Syria who appealed against a decision of  the  respondent
    on 20 May2014 refusing to grant entry clearance for the  purpose  of  a
    family visit.  The judge allowed the appeal under paragraph  41  of  HC
    395.

2.   The respondent  subsequently  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that the judge lacked  jurisdiction  to  make  this
    decision, since family visitors only had rights of appeal in respect of
    section 29 of the Equality Act 2010 and section 6 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 as a consequence of the coming into force of section 52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act on  25  June  2013.   That  clearly  predates  the
    decision in this case.

3.   Accordingly the only matters before the  judge,  it  was  argued,  were
    human rights or equality matters.  He had  not  made  any  findings  in
    relation to such grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal on 12 May 2015.

4.   At the hearing before us Mr J Siriwardena appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant and Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer appeared
    on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

5.   We indicated  our  provisional  view,  which  was  agreed  to  by  both
    representatives, that the judge had materially erred in law in assuming
    a jurisdiction which he did not have.  He had not considered Article  8
    which would be the relevant ground of appeal other  than  the  Equality
    Act matter (which was not raised in the grounds,  though  human  rights
    were), but had simply allowed the appeal under paragraph  41  which  he
    was not entitled to do.  Accordingly  the  decision  was  in  effect  a
    nullity, the matter will have to be reheard at Hatton  Cross  before  a
    different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   In light of the sponsor's  mental  health  difficulties  which  were  a
    central reason for the proposed visit, we express  the  hope  that  the
    appeal can be heard at as early a date as possible.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
