
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03987/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 24 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MIRZA NASEER AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M F Baig, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in this matter is the Entry Clearance Officer, Abu  Dhabi
    (hereinafter referred to as "the ECO").  The respondent,  Mr  Ahmed  is
    hereinafter referred as "the applicant".

 2. The appeal was against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 22
    January 2015.

Background

 3. The applicant is a national of Pakistan,  who  was  born  there  on  25
    October 1956.   The  applicant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the ECO dated 23 June  2014  which  refused  to
    grant him entry clearance as a general visitor.

 4. The  applicant's  application  was  made  under  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He declared  his  intention  to  visit  the  United
    Kingdom for two or three weeks for the purpose of seeing  his  children
    who are British citizens and who live with their mother, also a British
    citizen.

 5. The right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was a limited one but in
    the instant case the only live issue at the appeal was Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The ECO's grounds of refusal were: the applicant had  failed  to  prove
    his personal and financial circumstances in  Pakistan.   Moreover,  the
    applicant's sister, wife and children lived in the United Kingdom.  The
    ECO was not satisfied that the applicant was genuinely seeking entry to
    the United Kingdom as a visitor nor  that  he  intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of his visit nor that he could be  maintained
    and accommodated without recourse to public funds.

The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 7. The only evidence heard by the First-tier Tribunal came from  Mr  Baig,
    the applicant's sponsor and eldest son who was in his 20s.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal accepted his evidence.

 8. On the basis of his evidence the First-tier Tribunal held that:

       . The applicant had three sons in this country and  the  two  younger
         children were aged 7 and 4.

       . The applicant kept in daily touch with his  children  by  means  of
         Skype and regularly visited them in the UK.  This was confirmed  by
         reference to his last UK visa which was a multiple entry visa valid
         for five years which expired on 19 February 2014.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal also made this finding at paragraph 13:

         "13. Because the Appellant has previously  held  a  multiple  entry
             visa, and has used that visa to visit the United Kingdom,  and
             is evidently a well educated man, the tribunal infers that the
             relevant and necessary documents had been submitted  with  the
             visa application.  It is difficult to believe otherwise, since
             the Appellant had nothing to hide, was in a position to submit
             a strong application and  had  pervious  [sic]  experience  of
             doing so.  It is  also  the  tribunal's  experience  that  the
             quality  of  decision  making  and  of  compliance  with   the
             tribunal's directions at the Abu  Dhabi  post  is  regrettably
             variable.  It was a  relevant  consideration  although  by  no
             means a decisive one that the  Appellant  had  a  satisfactory
             history of past travel to the United Kingdom and of compliance
             with his visa conditions.  Taking all material matters  in  to
             account, had there been a right of appeal against the decision
             under the Immigration Rules, paragraph 41, the tribunal  would
             have had no hesitation in allowing it."

10. The First-tier Tribunal found that  family  life  existed  between  the
    applicant and his children and this finding was not  challenged  before
    us.

11. At paragraph 16 the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  Article  8
    issue found as follows:

         "... the  tribunal  finds  that  the  decision  [of  the  ECO]  was
         incorrect and that the Appellant's  application  should  have  been
         allowed.  That must have a major  bearing  on  proportionality,  in
         that the tribunal finds that the Appellant would have complied  and
         will comply with his visa conditions. The  best  interests  of  the
         Appellant's minor sons, aged 4 and 7, must be taken  into  account:
         section 55, Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.   The
         tribunal finds that it is obviously  in  their  best  interests  to
         maintain such  contact  as  they  have  with  their  father,  which
         includes a pattern of personal visits on his part.   They  are  too
         young to travel to Pakistan on  their  own.   The  public  interest
         under Article 8.2 ECHR is satisfied because there was  no  evidence
         to show that the Appellant is likely to breach his visa  conditions
         or otherwise infringe United Kingdom law  if  he  is  permitted  to
         visit the United Kingdom for two or three weeks as he  declared  he
         intended".

12. The above finding was made in the context of a submission on behalf  of
    the ECO that given the form of family life chosen by the appellant  the
    ECO's decision was not an interference with  family  life  in  that  it
    could be maintained by  visits  of  the  family  to  the  applicant  in
    Pakistan.

Submissions of behalf of the ECO

13. Mr Avery maintained the position advanced in the grounds of appeal.  He
    submitted that:

       . First, the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that  the  two  younger
         children were  too  young  to  travel  was  not  supported  by  any
         evidence.

       . Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal had failed to have regard to  the
         evidence that Mr Baig was  old  enough  to  accompany  his  younger
         brothers to Pakistan.  An  alternative  to  that  would  be  taking
         advantage of the assistance offered by  airlines  to  unaccompanied
         children who were travelling with them.

       . Thirdly, it followed from the above that the First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision was inadequately reasoned.

       . Fourthly, it was his position that family life could be  maintained
         by visits to Pakistan and by way of electronic communication.



Reply on behalf of the Applicant

14. The applicant was not legally represented, however, Mr Baig did  appear
    on behalf of the applicant.  He opposed the appeal  on  behalf  of  the
    applicant.  It was his position that the First-tier Tribunal had  given
    an adequately reasoned decision.

Discussion

15. Family life in this case amounted to periodic visits when the applicant
    met  his  children  and  daily  electronic  communication  between  the
    applicant and his children.

16. The submission made on behalf of the ECO  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with reference to Article 8 was this:  the  ECO's  decision  given  the
    above form of family life did not interfere with family life,  in  that
    the applicant's family could visit him in Pakistan.

17. Accordingly, given the foregoing, the first question which  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had to consider was this: against that factual matrix did
    the decision of the ECO interfere with family life?

18. The First-tier Tribunal does engage with this question and  answers  it
    in a single sentence at paragraph 16 of its determination as follows:

         "They are too young to travel to Pakistan on their own"  (referring
         to the minor sons who are aged 4 and 7).

    We are persuaded that the reasoning on this core issue is inadequate.

19. These children are not babies who require their mother to be with  them
    constantly and it is therefore insufficient simply to assert  that  the
    children are too young to travel to Pakistan on  their  own.   Such  an
    assertion is not  an  adequate  reason.   Children  of  this  age,  not
    uncommonly fly unaccompanied, with the assistance of airlines and their
    staff.

20. The First-tier Tribunal does not take  this  into  account.   In  these
    circumstances the finding that the children are too  young  to  fly  on
    their own, is not adequately reasoned.  It has left out  of  account  a
    material matter.

21. Moreover, the First-tier Tribunal, which was aware of  the  age  of  Mr
    Baig, and accordingly on the face of it was also  aware  that  Mr  Baig
    could accompany his younger brothers to Pakistan in order to visit  the
    applicant does not consider this option.  This was  clearly  a  further
    means of maintaining the visits between the applicant and his  children
    and in our view had to be considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    was a material matter which was before it.   Its  failure  to  consider
    this matter evidences the lack of adequate reasoning in relation to its
    core finding.

22. Beyond the above we believe that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  allowed
    itself to be influenced in its decision on Article 8 by  its  views  as
    regards the ECO's substantive decision, with respect to which the First-
    tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction.   Certain  elements  in  the  ECO's
    decision  require  to  be  considered  in  the  overall  assessment  of
    proportionality, however, the observations of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    go beyond  that  (see:  in  particular  paragraph  13  and  16  of  its
    determination).  In our view these  observations  stray  into  an  area
    which was not within its jurisdiction and infect its  decision  on  the
    Article 8 issue.

23. For the foregoing reasons we allow the appeal on behalf of the ECO.

24. We have considered whether we should re-hear the matter and re-make the
    decision.  However, we believe we should not.  We are  clearly  of  the
    view  that  the  matter  requires  to  be  remitted  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal.  We are persuaded that the  nature  of
    the errors of law make it not appropriate for this matter to be re-made
    by this Tribunal.

25. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 23 April 2015

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
