
IAC-PW-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/03836/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2015                               |On 18th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              MR DANIAL DANIAL
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1946 is a citizen of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Karnik of Counsel.  The Respondent  was
    represented by Miss Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application to visit the United Kingdom  to  see
    his son, the Sponsor.  That application had been refused on  10th  June
    2014.  The basis of refusal was that the Respondent was  not  satisfied
    the Appellant was genuinely seeking entry  as  a  visitor  or  that  he
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of that visit.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin sitting at Manchester  on  2nd  January
    2015.  The appeal was statutorily restricted on  the  basis  of  either
    being unlawful on race relations grounds or in breach of Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  Race relations was not  raised  at  any  stage.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. Application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett on 17th March 2015.  That was on  the  basis  that  the
    judge may have erred in giving weight to the fact the Appellant  was  a
    Christian an issue which had not been raised either by  the  Respondent
    nor the Sponsor having an opportunity to deal with at the hearing.

 5. Directions have been issued for the Upper Tribunal  to  firstly  decide
    whether or not an error of law was made in this  case  and  the  matter
    comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 6. Mr Karnik submitted in line with the Grounds of Appeal that  the  judge
    had relied on the country guidance case of AK [2014]  UKUT  00569.   It
    was submitted that firstly the judge should not have taken  account  of
    potential difficulties with the Appellant  being  a  Christian  because
    that was not a matter ever raised either by the Respondent  or  at  the
    hearing and in any event it did not properly reflect circumstances  for
    Christians in Pakistan as related in the case of AK.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 7. It was submitted the judge had  given  a  number  of  reasons  for  his
    finding on credibility in terms of the Appellant returning to  Pakistan
    or not and no error of law was made.

 8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and  documents.   I  now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The Respondent had refused the Appellant's application to come  to  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa on the basis that the Respondent did not
    find the Appellant was a genuine visitor or that  he  would  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of any alleged visit.  The  right  of  appeal
    against that decision is restricted by statute so that  an  appeal  may
    only be brought if it is said that the  decision  breaches  either  the
    Race Relations Act or the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
    judge had correctly noted that at no stage was it  suggested  that  the
    decision breached or was unlawful under the Race Relations Act and  the
    appeal was brought on the sole ground that a refusal to grant the  visa
    would be a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's right  to  family
    and private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. The judge had set out in detail the facts of this case and had assessed
    as part of his findings whether or not, on balance this was  a  genuine
    application to come to the United Kingdom for a visit and the Appellant
    would leave at the conclusion of that visit.

11. The judge had found on balance for a number of reasons  that  this  was
    not a genuine visitor.  Firstly the judge had  noted  at  paragraph  27
    discrepancies in the period of time and reason for the proposed  visit.
    The judge had also found that the Appellant was a widower, was 69 years
    of age, and was financially dependent upon the Sponsor in the UK.   The
    judge had also noted and  accepted  the  Sponsor's  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was a Christian.  In that respect the judge had looked at the
    country guidance case of AK and had  concluded  at  paragraph  29  that
    Christians  in  Pakistan  suffer   some   discrimination,   Evangelical
    Christians risk becoming a victim of a blasphemy allegation and that as
    the Appellant was a  member  of  a  minority  religion  that  did  face
    discrimination that was an additional factor the  judge  found  against
    the Appellant being likely to return to Pakistan.

12. The Appellant's own evidence as supported by the Sponsor  was  that  he
    was a Christian and was involved socially in the  church  in  Pakistan.
    There was no evidence provided to suggest the Appellant  was  suffering
    discrimination or difficulties in Pakistan because of his membership of
    the Christian community.  That factor was not explored at  the  hearing
    in cross-examination of the Sponsor.  To that extent it was speculative
    and potentially an error for the judge to have  assumed  the  Appellant
    may be less likely to return  to  Pakistan  because  of  discrimination
    generally against minority religions including  Christianity.   However
    that was simply one feature of the reasons provided by  the  judge  for
    his finding that on balance this was not a genuine visitor nor that the
    Appellant would return at the conclusion of any visit.  Central to  his
    finding on that matter was the fact that the Appellant was  a  69  year
    old widower  with  little  family  ties  in  Pakistan  and  financially
    dependent upon the Sponsor in the UK.  The judge was  entirely  correct
    to look at those features and to find on balance and  for  the  reasons
    that he gave that this was not a genuine visit nor  did  the  Appellant
    intend  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  that  visit.
    Accordingly whilst there may well have been an error or speculation  in
    the judge's approach to the Appellant's religion that would have had no
    different effect to the outcome of the judge's decision on  whether  or
    not this was a genuine visit and accordingly  it  was  not  a  material
    error.

13. In any event the issue in this case was not whether the Respondent  was
    right or wrong on the question of the genuineness of the visit but  the
    single issue of whether the Respondent's refusal  of  this  application
    was a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's rights under Article 8
    of the ECHR.

14. The Grounds of Appeal and permission granting  appeal  appear  to  have
    missed that factor.  Further it is frankly extremely difficult  to  see
    how the refusal of a visit visa could be a disproportionate  breach  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  In  particular  in  this  case  the  judge  had
    correctly identified that the Sponsor, namely  the  adult  son  of  the
    Appellant had voluntarily separated himself from his father in Pakistan
    several years ago to work in Kuwait and thereafter to live and work  in
    the UK.  The judge had also identified the fact that  the  Sponsor  and
    his family had in the past and were able  to  visit  the  Appellant  in
    Pakistan.  It is also not clear  but  entirely  likely  that  both  the
    Sponsor and his wife who came  to  the  UK  as  a  work  permit  holder
    retained Pakistani nationality even if he has British nationality.

15. The judge correctly identified the fact that in all  the  circumstances
    of this case the refusal of the  visit  visa  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not a disproportionate breach  of  the  Appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

16. There was therefore no error of law made by the judge in this case  and
    the point of the appeal is misconceived.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

