
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/03962/2014
                                                               VA/04584/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2015                     |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                MR NACHHATAR RANDHAWA SINGH (FIRST CLAIMANT)
                  MRS SUKHDEV KAUR GREWAL (SECOND CLAIMANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by Bernard Chill
Axtell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Y  J
    Jones sitting at Columbus House, Newport on 9 April 2015)  allowing  on
    Article 8 grounds the claimants' appeals against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse them leave to enter  as  family  visitors.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the claimants require anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Granting Permission

 2. On 19  June  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juliet  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law  (a)  by  making  a
         material misdirection of the law in finding that the stated  length
         of the Appellants' visits were not part of  the  Immigration  Rules
         when the Appellants made their previous applications  in  2008  and
         2011 which the Judge states came into force in 6  April,  2013  and
         not the correct date of 23 May, 1994 which the  Judge  then  places
         weight on in her proportionality exercise in terms  of  Article  8;
         (b) by placing weight on the case of Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry
         clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 without considering other  cases  such
         as Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising and Others [2013]
         UKUT 00567 (IAC); (c) by not considering Part 5 of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Section 117B) and (d) for  failing
         to give adequate reasons for her decision."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimants are husband and wife respectively, and both of  them  are
    nationals of India.  They were born in 1946 and they have two children:
    a son and a daughter.  The first claimant worked  in  New  Delhi  as  a
    government employee until 31 March 2006.  He then retired, and  he  and
    his wife relocated to Anadpur Sahib, a holy city in Punjab Province.

 4. In May 2014  the  claimants  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  family
    visitors.  They planned to arrive in the United Kingdom on 23 June 2014
    and stay for  three  months.   Their  sponsor  was  their  son  Amarjot
    Randhawa.  They planned to be present for the birth of their grandchild
    and to take part in traditional religious Sikh ceremonies.

 5. On 16 June 2014 an Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  New  Delhi  gave  his
    reasons  for  refusing  their  applications.    He   acknowledged   the
    importance of family ties, especially on an occasion such as this,  but
    he was required to look at their previous travel and  circumstances  in
    India when reviewing their application.  They had previously  issued  a
    six month family visit visa on 17 July  2008.   They  stated  in  their
    application they had remained in the UK for only 25  days.   But  their
    passports and application forms indicated they had travelled to the  UK
    on 28 July 2008 and returned on 7 January 2009, a period of  over  five
    months.  They were then issued with a two year visit visa on 5 February
    2010 in response to an application where they said they were  going  to
    travel to the  UK  for  three  months  and  fifteen  days.   But  their
    passports and application forms indicated that they travelled to the UK
    on 17 January 2010 and had returned on 3 August 2010 - a period of over
    five months.  They then travelled to the UK on  9  September  2010  and
    returned on 3 February 2011 - a  period  of  over  five  months.   They
    travelled to the UK again on 27 April 2011 and returned on  13  October
    2011 - a period of over five months.  In none of these cases  had  they
    indicated why they travelled for so much  longer  than  was  stated  in
    their applications.  In approximately  the  twenty  months  between  17
    January 2010 and 13 October 2011 they had spent over fifteen months  in
    the UK.

 6. Paragraph 41(ii) of the UK  Immigration  Rules  stated  that  a  person
    seeking entry clearance as a visitor should show they intended to leave
    the United Kingdom at the end of the period of the visit as  stated  by
    him; and did not intend to live for  extended  periods  in  the  United
    Kingdom through frequent or successive visits.  Based on their previous
    travel history, he was not satisfied they genuinely intended  to  leave
    the United Kingdom at the end of the three month  visit  as  stated  by
    them, and they did not intend to live in the UK  for  extended  periods
    through frequent and successive visits.

 7. They were also refused an adult dependent settlement  visa  in  January
    2013.  This caused him to further doubt their intentions in wishing  to
    travel to the UK at this time as a  visitor,  and  their  intention  to
    leave at the end of the period stated by them.

 8. The Entry Clearance Officer proceeded to  refuse  the  applications  by
    reference to sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph 41 of the Rules.

 9. The claimants' representatives settled  extensive  grounds  of  appeal.
    The claimants had stayed longer  than  anticipated  due  to  unforeseen
    family circumstances.  Their daughter-in-law  experienced  difficulties
    during her first pregnancy and  the  birth  of  her  daughter  Jasmine.
    Another  reason  for  staying  longer  than  first  indicated  was  the
    sponsor's need for parental support and guidance when  setting  up  his
    Sanja Restaurant business.  In hindsight, the claimants  accepted  they
    should have informed the UK Home Office  of  their  intention  to  stay
    longer than first indicated on their  applications.   This  requirement
    was  not  communicated  to  them  on  any  subsequent  visits  or  visa
    applications.  In any event each time the  claimants  had  returned  to
    India without overstaying or breaching the Rules.

10. While the claimants were refused an adult settlement  visa  in  January
    2013, they would still have intended to leave the  United  Kingdom  and
    return to India.   Refusing  them  a  family  visit  visa  now  was  an
    infringement on Mr Randhawa's Article 8 rights.  It was  a  direct  and
    unjust interference with his right to  have  direct  contact  with  his
    parents.   The  interference  was  preventing   him   from   conducting
    traditional Sikh and religious ceremonies which required  the  presence
    of his parents.  While it might be suggested that Mr Randhawa  was  not
    prevented  from  visiting  his  parents  in  India,  this  was   wholly
    inappropriate given his present circumstances and  commitments:  namely
    his wife, their newborn son, their  daughter  Jasmine,  and  his  Sanja
    Restaurant business.

11. On 18 November 2014 an Entry Clearance Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decisions in an Entry Clearance Manager's review:



         "These cases are  particularly  difficult  to  assess  against  the
         limited  appeal  rights  that  they  have  been  afforded,  however
         considering that the appellants previously wanted  to  settle  with
         their UK sponsor in the UK I, like the  ECO,  cannot  be  satisfied
         that they will leave the UK at the end of their proposed  visit  or
         that they have sufficient ties to return to.

         I must admit that the appellants are  in  a  tough  position  being
         unable to meet the requirements of  the  adult  dependent  relative
         Rules and now unable to meet the requirements of the visitor  Rules
         because of their intention to settle in  the  UK,  however  I  note
         there are no insurmountable obstacles preventing the  sponsor  from
         visiting the appellants or from relocating to be  with  them  in  a
         more permanent way if necessary.

         Given that there are no insurmountable obstacles and no exceptional
         circumstances which constitute considering issuing leave to  remain
         outside  of  the  Rules,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  is
         proportionate and appropriate.  Whilst the  appellants'  Article  8
         rights can clearly be engaged I am satisfied from the  above,  that
         the decision does not breach these."

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

12. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Jones.   Both
    representatives relied for different reasons on the  previous  decision
    of Judge Prior promulgated on 10 November 2013 giving his  reasons  for
    dismissing the claimants' appeals against the decision to  refuse  them
    entry clearance for the purposes of  settlement  as  elderly  dependent
    relatives.

13. Judge Jones set out her findings at paragraphs [28] onwards.   She  was
    satisfied that the sponsor was a  credible  witness,  and  was  further
    satisfied that the application for a family visit was genuine and  that
    the claimants would return to India after their visit to their son  and
    family.  At paragraph 31 she set out the five questions  identified  by
    Lord Bingham in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  judge
    continued:

         "32. It has not been argued that family life does not exist between
             the sponsor  and  his  parents,  the  appellants.   They  have
             previously been granted visas on the  basis  of  being  family
             members.  The obligation imposed by Article 8  is  to  promote
             the family life of those affected by the  decision.   In  this
             case the family life between the sponsor and  his  family  and
             his parents, the appellants.  The refusal decision has  had  a
             material impact on their right to enjoy family life.  It means
             that the appellants may not visit the sponsor and  his  family
             in the UK.  This is something they have done four times before
             between 2008 and 2011.  The  issue  is  whether  refusing  the
             appellants  entry  clearance  for  the  specific  and  limited
             purpose sought interferes disproportionately with  the  family
             life of those concerned.

         33.  It is for the respondent to satisfy me that  the  interference
             is proportionate.  The respondent has argued that between 2008
             and 2011 the appellants visited  the  UK  and  overstayed  the
             stated length of their visits.  However the law at  that  time
             did not include a requirement that they must  not  exceed  the
             stated length of their visit.

         34.  On 6 April 2013 the  law  changed  and  paragraph  41(ii)  was
             amended to include:

                  '(ii)    intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of
                      the period of the visit as stated by him;  and  [does
                      not intend to live for extended  periods  in  the  UK
                      through frequent or successive visits;]'

         35.  That requirement was not in place between 2008 and 2011 and  I
             find that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  wrong  to  place
             reliance on (ii) now, in respect of those  applications.   The
             previous  history  of  the  appellants  indicates   compliance
             although they stayed longer than the time stated on their visa
             applications.  It is also pertinent to  note  that  the  Entry
             Clearance Officers issued visas to the  appellants  over  that
             period despite knowing that the had  stayed  longer  than  the
             periods stated on their applications.

         36.  I must also consider the findings of Immigration  Judge  Prior
             in November 2011.  Although he did  not  specifically  make  a
             finding of family life existing between the appellants and the
             sponsor when he refused their appeal  against  the  settlement
             decision by the respondent, he said this:  'I  take  the  view
             that family life can be continued as  before  by  the  regular
             exchange of visits  and,  again  as  before,  extended  family
             visits by the appellants to the United Kingdom'.

         37.  The implication is that the parties did  have  a  family  life
             maintained by visits and I find that there is  a  family  life
             between the sponsor and the appellants on  that  basis.   This
             decision  interferes  with  that  family  life   and   it   is
             disproportionate despite the fact that  the  sponsor  and  his
             family can visit the appellants in India.

         38.  Various difficulties were brought to my attention  in  respect
             of the sponsor and his family visiting India.  He did visit in
             January 2015 with his daughter but his wife was unable  to  go
             because of ill-health before and after the birth of  her  son.
             In particular she suffered from postnatal depression.  I  have
             no  doubt  that  the  appellants,  now  they  know  about  the
             contained in paragraph 41(ii), will abide by the terms  stated
             in their visa applications as now required by law."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me, Mr Duffy referred me to Mostafa (Article 8 in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and to Adjei  (visit  visas  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC).  On  behalf  of  the  claimants,  Mr
    Claire  submitted  that  the  judge  had  followed  the  correct  legal
    approach,  and  had  given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that   the
    claimants' Article 8 rights were engaged, and that the refusal of entry
    clearance  was  thereby  not   in   accordance   with   the   law   and
    disproportionate.  He relied on the following passage at paragraph [24]
    of Mostafa:

         "In the limited class of cases where Article 8(1) ECHR  is  engaged
         the refusal of entry clearance must be in accordance with  the  law
         and proportionate.  If a  person's  circumstances  do  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules and they have not acted in a way that  undermines
         the system of immigration control, a refusal of entry clearance  is
         liable to infringe Article 8."

15. I ruled that an error of law was made out, and gave my reasons  for  so
    finding in short form.  My extended reasons are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

16. In MS (Article 8 - family life - dependency -  proportionality)  Uganda
    [2004] UKIAT 0064 at paragraph [8] the Tribunal said  it  was  accepted
    law that in circumstances where family life is put forward as  existing
    between an adult child and his  parents,  "there  need  to  be  further
    elements of dependency  involving  more  than  emotional  ties".   This
    mirrors what was said by the Court  of  Appeal  at  paragraph  [25]  of
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  The following passage at paragraph
    [20] of Kugathas is also pertinent:

         "...  Neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
         ordinarily go with them  are,  by  themselves  or  together  in  my
         judgment, enough to constitute family life.  Most of us have  close
         relations of whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit,  or  who
         visit us, from time to time; but none of  us  would  say  on  those
         grounds alone that we share a family life with them in  any  sense
         capable of coming within the meaning and purpose of Article 8."

17. At paragraph [17] of Adjei, which was promulgated on 6 May 2015,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern said:

         "It is a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,  of  course,  whether
         relationships between adult relatives disclose sufficiently  strong
         ties such as to fall within the scope of Article 8.   Ties  between
         young adults who have  yet  to  establish  their  own  family  life
         separate from their parents may constitute family life: see Nasri v
         France 21 EHRR 458.  But this  claimant  has  established  her  own
         family life in Ghana with her partner and their daughter and  while
         her adult siblings in the United Kingdom have not yet done  so,  it
         is established by Advic v United Kingdom (1995) 20 EHRR CD125  that
         the protection of Article 8 does not extend to links between  adult
         siblings living apart  for  a  long  period  where  they  were  not
         dependent upon each other.  There is no evidence of such dependence
         between these  siblings  or  step-siblings.   Finally  it  is  well
         established that there must be more than the normal emotional  ties
         between adult relatives for family life to exist for  the  purposes
         of Article 8 of the ECHR: Kugathas v IAT [2003] EWCA Civ 31"

18. At the beginning of paragraph [24] of Mostafa  the  Presidential  panel
    said:

         "It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope.  We are, however, prepared to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope of  Article  8(1).   In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together."

19. The relationship between the UK sponsor and his parents in  India  does
    not come within the scope of what the Presidential panel  envisaged  as
    being "in practical terms" a relationship that  was  likely  to  engage
    Article 8(1) in the context of a family visit.  This does not mean that
    refusal of entry clearance to the parents cannot come within the  scope
    of Article 8(1), but in order to do there has to exist more than normal
    emotional ties between the UK sponsor and his parents.

20. The judge failed to identify in her reasoning any further  elements  of
    dependency involving more than normal emotional family ties between  an
    adult child and his parents.  Instead,  the  judge  made  an  erroneous
    extrapolation from a finding made by Judge Prior  when  dismissing  the
    claimants' previous appeal against a refusal of entry clearance for the
    purposes of settlement as adult dependent relatives.

21. At paragraph [13] of his decision, Judge Prior said:

         "I was further not satisfied that the  birth  of  a  child  to  the
         sponsor and  his  wife  would  significantly  inhibit  the  couple,
         whether individually or otherwise, continuing  the  regular  visits
         that are made to  the  appellants  in  India.   I  noted  that  the
         appellants have made no visit to the United Kingdom for  two  years
         and that the applications under appeal were made  on  19  September
         2012.  I take the view  that  family  life  can  be  continued,  as
         before, by the regular exchange of visits  and,  again  as  before,
         extended family visits by the appellants to the United Kingdom.   I
         am not satisfied that Article 8 has been engaged by the refusal  of
         the appellants' applications."

22. When dismissing the claimants' applications for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge  Prior,  Judge  Astill
    observed as follows at paragraph [5] of his decision:

         "Whilst the judge did not make a clear  finding  that  family  life
         existed between the parties he did  find  that  family  life  could
         continue as before and  in  consequence  that  Article  8  was  not
         engaged (my emphasis).  The grounds amount to nothing more  than  a
         disagreement with the findings of the  judge,  findings  that  were
         properly open to him on the evidence before him.  They disclose  no
         arguable error of law."

23. The upshot of the unsuccessful attempt to appeal against  the  decision
    of Judge Prior is that, on Devaseelan principles,  the  starting  point
    for Judge Jones' assessment was that, as of 2013, the exclusion of  the
    claimants from the UK for the purposes of family reunion did  not  have
    consequences of such gravity as to engage the operation  of  Article  8
    ECHR.

24. Judge Prior's observation that family life could continue as before  by
    the regular exchange of visits is not incompatible  with  the  parallel
    finding that Article 8 was  not  engaged.   It  is  apparent  from  the
    context that what Judge Prior is referring to is  the  continuation  of
    family life which does not engage Article 8 as opposed to  family  life
    which does.  So the judge was wrong to infer that because  the  parties
    had a family life maintained by visits, this constituted a family  life
    between the sponsor and his parents such  as  to  engage  Article  8(1)
    ECHR.  This conclusion  runs  contrary  to  Judge  Prior's  overarching
    findings, and is also not supported by the  evidence  that  was  placed
    before Judge Jones.  It was not part of the  case  presented  to  Judge
    Jones that there  were  elements  of  dependency  going  beyond  normal
    emotional ties between an adult child and his parents, and she made  no
    finding to this effect.

25. Accordingly, following Adjei, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is vitiated by a material error of law as the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    not given adequate reasons for finding that Article  8  is  engaged  at
    all.



The Remaking of the Decision

26. I gave Mr Claire the  option  of  calling  further  evidence  from  the
    sponsor for the purposes of the remaking of the decision, and  he  took
    up this invitation.  The sponsor adopted as his  evidence-in-chief  his
    witness statement in the claimants' bundle.  He wished his  parents  to
    come to the United Kingdom to meet their grandchild,  Jasjot,  who  had
    been born on 3 July 2014.  It was traditional in Sikh culture  that  on
    the birth of a child, the family, and in particular  the  grandparents,
    bless the birth through several religious ceremonies, specifically  the
    Godh Bharai, the  Bidh  and  Akndh  Paath.   To  date  these  religious
    celebrations had not been celebrated as a result of the Entry Clearance
    Officer's refusal decision.  He was self-employed, and ran a successful
    Indian restaurant and events management company in Southampton.  He had
    approximately �40,000 in  savings.   Since  relocating  to  the  United
    Kingdom, he had not had the opportunity to see his parents as  much  as
    he had hoped as a result of his work and family commitments here.

27. In answer to  supplementary  questions  from  Mr  Claire,  the  sponsor
    confirmed that he had travelled to India  with  his  daughter  Jasmine,
    aged 51/2, in January 2015.  He had gone there to see his parents,  and
    he had stayed for two and a half weeks.  He had not been accompanied by
    his wife, as she was not in the best of  health,  or  by  his  son,  on
    account of his age.  He had had to take Jasmine out of school in  order
    for her to accompany him on the trip, and the school had  given  him  a
    warning that he could not do this in the future.  It was  not  possible
    for the whole family to  go  out  together  as  his  events  management
    company specialised in Indian  weddings,  and  he  was  busiest  during
    holiday seasons.

28. The sponsor was cross-examined by Mr Duffy, and he  answered  questions
    for clarification purposes from me.  The sponsor said he had  lived  in
    the UK since August 2001.  He used to go back every  year  to  see  his
    parents up to 2007, up to which point his father  was  working  in  New
    Delhi in a government post.   Following  his  retirement,  his  parents
    moved to the holy city of Anandpura Sahib in Punjab Province, and  this
    was a long car journey from New Delhi.  It took eight and a half  hours
    to travel by car from the airport to his parents.

29. His wife had suffered from post natal depression following the birth of
    their son, as she had done following the birth of their daughter.   His
    mother had helped his wife with it last time, referring to  the  period
    following the birth of Jasmine.  His wife is a bit better now.  She  is
    not 100% there, but she was getting there.  She had not been prescribed
    with any  antidepressant  medication.   Ladies  from  the  temple  were
    helping her.

30. He had started his business in 2007.  He  is  now  starting  to  employ
    managers to assist him in running his businesses.  He could not  go  to
    India for long periods of time.  When he was in India, he took and made
    calls on his mobile telephone relating to his businesses here.  He  was
    aged 21 when he first came to the UK.   Prior  to  that,  he  had  been
    living with his parents apart from spending three years between the age
    of 16 and 19 studying at a college which was four hours away.

31. In his closing submissions on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr
    Duffy submitted that family life did not exist between the sponsor  and
    his parents for the purposes of Article 8.  He  had  been  living  away
    from his parents for the  past  fifteen  years.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had reasonably refused the applications in  the  light  of  the
    claimants' previous immigration histories.  It was not a case where the
    Rules were manifestly satisfied.

32. In reply, Mr Claire referred to a passage at paragraph [16] of Mostafa,
    where the Presidential panel held  that  the  decision  in  Shamin  Box
    [2002] UKIAT 02212 is to be followed  and  the  obligation  imposed  by
    Article 8 is to promote the  family  life  of  those  affected  by  the
    decision.  He submitted that the closeness of the  family  members  was
    demonstrated by the frequency and length of  the  visits  made  by  the
    parents to the sponsor in the UK from 2010 onwards.  One of the reasons
    why the settlement appeal was dismissed was that the sponsor  had  told
    Judge Prior they did not actually want to settle in the United Kingdom,
    but just wanted to have the freedom to come and  go  (unconstrained  by
    visit visa requirements).

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

33. As is alluded to in the Entry Clearance Manager's review, there  is  an
    inevitable tension between the position taken by the claimants in their
    application for settlement as dependent adult relatives  and  in  their
    subsequent application for entry clearance as family visitors.   It  is
    apparent from the determination  of  Judge  Prior  that  the  case  put
    forward to him was that the claimants had  reached  a  point  in  their
    lives when they had become dependent on their son in the  UK  to  be  a
    carer for them on a day-to-day basis,  on  account  of  their  age  and
    infirmities.  They could not look to their daughter in India to  fulfil
    this role, as she lived four hours away in Jalanbhar, and in any  event
    she had her own responsibilities to her husband, two children  and  her
    in-laws.

34. The claimants did not qualify  for  entry  clearance  under  the  Rules
    because they could not show  that  they  were  unable,  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the sponsor,  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in India on account of it  not  being  available  and  on
    account of there being no person in that country who  could  reasonably
    provide it.  The fact that the claimants failed under  the  Rules,  and
    also in an alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR, does not change  the
    fact that their stated position as of November 2013 was that they were,
    "particularly dependent upon the sponsor and his wife for the necessary
    level of care  that  only  those  individuals  could  ensure  that  the
    [claimants] were provided with".

35. In their application for a visit visa, the claimants  did  not  declare
    that there had been a  change  of  circumstances  since  November  2013
    whereby they  no  longer  regarded  themselves  as  being  particularly
    dependent upon the sponsor and his wife.  So it was reasonable for  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and Entry Clearance Manager  on  the  available
    information not to accept that the  claimants  were  genuine  visitors.
    Given that the claimants had spent more time in the UK  than  in  India
    during the currency of their multiple two year visit visas,  and  their
    subsequent assertion that  they  needed  to  reside  in  the  UK  on  a
    permanent basis with the sponsor and his wife to achieve the  necessary
    level of care that they required, their incentive to return to India on
    completion of a three month visit was objectively very weak.

36. In remaking the decision, I am not confined to the  evidence  that  was
    before the Entry Clearance Officer and Entry Clearance Manager.  I  can
    take account of the evidence received by the First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    also the evidence received by me, insofar as it casts  light  upon  the
    circumstances which truly  appertained  at  the  date  of  the  refusal
    decision.  I am prepared to accept, as Mr Claire and the sponsor invite
    me to do, that there was not  a  dependency  relationship  between  the
    sponsor's parents and the sponsor as of November 2013,  or  as  of  the
    date of the decision to refuse  them  visit  visas.  I  find  that  the
    claimants have at all material times  been  able  to  lead  independent
    lives in their home city, and that they have not  reached  a  stage  in
    their lives where they are dependent on their son in  the  UK  and  his
    wife such that they can be said to enjoy family life with  the  sponsor
    and his wife for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.

37. That is not the end of the matter,  as  the  impact  on  the  sponsor's
    private  life  rights  must  also  be  considered.   It  is  much  more
    convenient for the claimants to visit the sponsor and his family in the
    United Kingdom for two reasons.  Firstly, they have no  commitments  in
    India which place any limit upon the amount of time that they can spend
    with the sponsor and his family in the UK.  Conversely, the sponsor has
    a number of businesses to run in the  UK,  and  so  the  frequency  and
    duration of his visits to India are correspondingly highly  restricted.
    Secondly, he prefers not to undertake visits to India during the school
    holidays, as this is when his events management business  tends  to  be
    most active.

38. But there are not insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor visiting  his
    parents in India from time to time, either on his  own  or  with  other
    members of his family.  Both before and after the refusal  decision  it
    was open to the sponsor to arrange his affairs so  as  to  be  able  to
    undertake family visits to his parents in India.  It was also  open  to
    the sponsor to make arrangements  for  the  Sikh  ceremonies  which  he
    wishes to be performed for his son to be conducted in a city where  his
    parents live, or in the city where his sister lives.

39. Accordingly, I answer questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test in favour of
    the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.    I   find   that   the   interference
    consequential  upon  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  did  not  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

40. In Adjei, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern held  that  if  Article  8  was
    engaged, the Tribunal might need to look at the  extent  to  which  the
    claimant was said to have failed to meet the requirements of the  Rules
    because that might inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that
    followed.  As I have found that Article 8 is  not  engaged,  I  do  not
    propose to conduct a proportionality balancing exercise.   However,  by
    way of assistance to the claimants in any future visit visa application
    which they may choose to make, I draw attention to  the  fact  that  my
    finding that Article 8 is not engaged is consistent  with,  and  indeed
    supported  by,  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the
    requirements of paragraph (i) and (ii) of Rule 41 were in fact  met  at
    the date of decision.  It is precisely because the  claimants  are  not
    dependent on their UK sponsor, emotionally or otherwise, and that  they
    do not want to settle in the UK (contrary to the position taken by  way
    of  appeal  before  Judge  Prior),  that  Judge  Jones  could  make   a
    sustainable finding that  the  claimants  were  genuine  visitors,  who
    genuinely intended to return to India after completion of a three month
    visit to the United Kingdom for the purposes of meeting their  grandson
    for the first time and attending various Sikh ceremonies  to  celebrate
    his birth.

41. Paragraph 2 of the head note in Adjei states as follows:

         "As compliance with paragraph 41 of HC  395  is  not  a  ground  of
         appeal to be decided by a Tribunal, any  findings  concerning  that
         will carry  little  weight,  especially  if  based  upon  arguments
         advanced only by the appellant.  If the appellant were  to  make  a
         fresh application for entry clearance the ECO will, if requested to
         do so, have regard to the assessment carried out by the  judge  but
         will not be bound by those findings to treat  the  appellant  as  a
         person who, at least at the date of the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 41."

42. While the Entry Clearance Officer will not be bound by  the  favourable
    findings of Judge Jones on compliance with the rules, he can  be  asked
    to take them into account.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimants'  appeals
against the refusal of entry  clearance  as  family  visitors  contained  an
error of law, and accordingly the decision is set aside  and  the  following
decision is substituted: these appeals on Article 8 grounds  are  dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

