
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/04799/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                            muhammad riaz hussain
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Sponsor in person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Pakistani national and was born on 3 February  1972.
    He applied for entry clearance as a visitor  and  his  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 4 June  2014.  His  right  of  appeal  was
    limited to the grounds referred  to  in  section  84  (1)  (c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He appealed against  the
    Respondent's decision  and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan in a decision promulgated on 2 March 2015.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McDade refused permission.  The  Appellant  renewed
    his application to the Upper Tribunal  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  on  12  August  2015.
    Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made no reference in its decision to the  Appellant's  sister,
    Zahra Saqib, despite the  fact  that  there  was  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal that she had invited him to stay. Her passport details showing
    she was a British Citizen and evidence that she  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been provided. However, the First-tier Tribunal  considered
    only the proposed visit to the Appellant's sponsor who was not a member
    of his family.

Submissions

 3. The Appellant's sister, Zahra Saqib attended the  hearing  as  did  the
    sponsor Mr Gulzar Khan. She relied on the grounds of appeal drafted  by
    Habib Law Associates. She said that she  did  not  attend  the  hearing
    before the First-tier  Tribunal.  She  had  not  been  in  a  financial
    position to sponsor the Appellant and hence Mr Khan had sponsored  him.
    The Appellant was financially  independent  and  not  dependent  on  UK
    relatives.

 4. Mr Richards submitted that there was no evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal of family life between adults given that it was only  Mr  Khan
    who appeared at the hearing. It was not reasonable to expect the First-
    tier Tribunal to go into matters that were not before him. There was no
    error or any error of law was not material  given  that  there  was  no
    evidence that would engage the Convention.

 5. I reserved my decision in relation to  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Grounds for permission

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal from the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to the Upper Tribunal are dated 3 March 2015. They attempt  to  reargue
    the Appellant's case under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    relation to paragraph 41 the grounds are inarguable  as  the  Appellant
    has a limited right of appeal on human rights  grounds  only.  They  do
    however assert that the Appellant intended to visit his sister and that
    the First-tier Tribunal ignored the fact that she  was  living  in  the
    United Kingdom. It is said  at  paragraph  5  that  she  cannot  go  to
    Pakistan due  to  her  children  being  in  school  and  due  to  other
    commitments. The renewed grounds  again  assert  that  the  Appellant's
    sister is living in the United Kingdom and that  the  Appellant  has  a
    right to visit her.

Rule 24 Notice

 7. The Respondent asserts that the evidence in respect of family life  was
    very limited and appears to be simply the assertion that the  Appellant
    intends to visit his sister who is living in  the  UK.  The  Respondent
    considered that there was insufficient evidence  before  the  Judge  to
    establish that there was a protected Article 8 family  life.  The  fact
    that the Appellant may have a sibling in the United Kingdom is said  to
    be clearly insufficient to establish that there is a protected  Article
    8 family life.

Findings and conclusions

 8. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal under  Article
    8 ECHR because, as set out in paragraph 10 of the  decision,  he  found
    that  the  sponsor's  relationship  with  the  Appellant  was  one   of
    friendship only. In considering  whether  Article  8  was  engaged,  he
    considered only the Appellant's relationship with the sponsor. There is
    no mention in the decision of the  Appellant's  sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He heard evidence from the sponsor who it does not appear from
    the summary of his evidence at paragraph 4 mentioned the  existence  of
    the Appellant's sister. However, the Appellant submitted evidence  with
    his application of his intention to visit  his  sister.  In  answer  to
    question 78 of his application form he stated that he had a  sister  in
    the UK.  He submitted a document entitled "Declaration by International
    Visitor" in which he stated his intention to visit his sister  and  her
    children. He also submitted a letter of invitation from  her  dated  21
    April 2014 and her passport details and those of her children.

 9. In view of the fact that the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    showed that the Appellant had a sister in the United Kingdom the First-
    tier Tribunal should have considered whether Article 8 (1) was  engaged
    with regard to this relationship. However,  I  do  not  find  that  the
    failure to do so amounted to a material error of law for the  following
    reasons. In order for Article 8 (1) to be engaged in relation to  adult
    siblings there must be evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency,
    involving more than the normal emotional ties. The further  element  of
    dependency does not have to be economic.  However, it is  necessary  to
    show that ties  of  support,  either  emotional  or  economic,  are  in
    existence and go beyond the ordinary and natural ties of affection that
    would accompany a relationship of that kind  (Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31).   Article 8  (1)  does  not  cover  links  between  adult
    siblings who have been apart for a long period  of  time  and  are  not
    dependent on each other (Senthuran v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 950).

10. The Appellant's sister did not attend the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal and there was no  evidence  before  it  to  suggest  that  the
    relationship was  anything  other  than  a  normal  one  between  adult
    siblings. It is clear from both the application form and the  financial
    evidence submitted with the application that  it  was  the  Appellant's
    contention that he was financially independent. There was  no  evidence
    of close ties. Further, the grounds of appeal do not  assert  that  the
    relationship is one of the kind that could engage Article 8. The First-
    tier Tribunal's failure to consider this relationship  could  therefore
    have  made  no  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  In  the
    circumstances no material error of law has been demonstrated.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:     Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray

