
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd February 2016                |On 3rd March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                               SHAGUFTA RAZZAQ
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms. A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M. Dogra, of counsel, instructed by Worldwise
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  History of Appeal

    1. The Respondent, who was born on  4  April  1947,  is  a  national  of
       Pakistan. On 3 June 2014 she applied for entry clearance to visit her
       son, who is a British national, in the United Kingdom. In particular,
       she asserted that she wanted to be present here when his third  child
       was born.

    2. Her application was refused under paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
       Rules on 23 June 2014. The Entry Clearance Officer accepted that  she
       would be accommodated and maintained without recourse to public funds
       but asserted that  she  had  not  submitted  sufficient  evidence  to
       establish that she was a genuine visitor, who intended to  return  to
       Pakistan at the end of her proposed visit.

    3. The Respondent appealed against this decision on 16 July 2014  It was
       noted that, as she had applied for  entry  clearance  after  25  June
       2013, she could only appeal on the basis that the refusal  gave  rise
       to a breach of the Human Rights Act 1994 or the  Race  Relations  Act
       1976.  In particular, she submitted that the  refusal  to  grant  her
       entry clearance gave rise to a breach of her  right  to  continue  to
       enjoy a family life  provided  for  in  Article  8  of  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights.

    4. The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed her  grounds  of  appeal  on  19
       October 2014. He relied  on  Sun  Myung  Moon  (Human  rights,  entry
       clearance, proportionality) USA [2005] UKIAT 00112 and submitted that
       the only part of the European Convention on Human  Rights  which  she
       could rely upon was Article 8 and that this was only in  relation  to
       family life.

    5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross allowed her appeal on 18 August  2015.
       The Appellant appealed against his decision on  26  August  2015  and
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted her permission to  appeal
       on 28 December 2015 on the  basis  that  private,  as  distinct  from
       family life, is not a basis upon which an ECHR right of entry can  be
       based.

  Error of Law Hearing

    6. The Home Office Presenting Officer stated  that  she  relied  on  the
       Appellant's grounds of appeal. She  noted  that  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Ross had found that the Respondent had not established that she
       enjoyed a family life with her son and his family as  there  was  not
       the necessary degree of  dependence.  She  then  submitted  that  the
       Respondent was enjoying a private life in Pakistan, which was a  non-
       contracting state for the purposes  of  Article  1  of  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights. She also relied on  paragraph  46  of  SS
       (EC)-Article 8) Malaysia*  [2004]  UKIAT  00091  and  VW  (Uganda)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5.  In
       addition, she submitted that there was no authority  to  support  the
       proposition that entry clearance should be granted when an  applicant
       was relying on private life rights.

    7. Counsel for the Respondent then responded. She submitted  that  there
       was now case law, which confirmed that the Respondent could  rely  on
       her private life rights and referred to Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry
       clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC). She also argued that there was no
       limitation on the Respondent's son and  family's  right  to  enjoy  a
       private life as they were resident in the United Kingdom.

  Error of Law

    8. As the Respondent applied for entry clearance  after  25  June  2013,
       section 88A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       requires the Respondent  to  show  that  the  refusal  of  her  entry
       clearance was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

    9. In paragraph 14 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross found
       that "notwithstanding the closeness of the relationship  between  the
       appellant and her UK son, given that the appellant is established  in
       Pakistan and lives in a family unit with her other  sons,  I  do  not
       consider that there is family life between her and  the  sponsor  and
       his family". The Respondent has not cross-appealed this part  of  the
       decision. Therefore, the appeal was not concerned  with  whether  the
       refusal of entry clearance breached her and  her  family's  right  to
       continue a family life together.

   10. Instead, it concerns the question of whether the refusal to grant the
       Respondent entry clearance amounts to a breach of  the  private  life
       aspect of Article 8. In  paragraph  15  of  his  decision  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Ross found that  "the  concept  of  private  life  can
       include the maintenance of relationships between those who are  other
       than co-habiting dependents involving normal emotional ties" and went
       on to find "that the development of the [Respondent's]  private  life
       and that of the sponsor and  his  family  includes  the  [Respondent]
       being able to visit her son and her grandchildren".

   11. The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on paragraph 46 of SS (ECO-
       Article 8), which is a starred decision, in which the Tribunal  found
       that  "the  ECHR  rights  do  not  extend  to   those   outside   the
       jurisdiction. It is by an extension of the Convention that the  right
       to a family life has become a basis for a right of entry, but it  has
       only become so where the family life relied on is with someone who is
       established within the jurisdiction. We have had no  authority  cited
       to us, domestic or ECtHR, which holds that any provisions of the ECHR
       other than the right to family life within Article 8 affords a  basis
       for a right of entry. We do not regard any further extension as  well
       founded. Private as distinct from family life is  not  a  basis  upon
       which an ECHR right of entry can be based".

   12. The application of  the  ECHR  in  entry  clearance  cases  was  also
       considered by the Tribunal in Sun Myung  Moon  (Human  rights,  entry
       clearance, proportionality) USA [2005] UKIAT 00112. In  paragraph  40
       of this case, the Tribunal found that "the mere fact that someone  is
       a legal person, albeit outside  the  territory  of  a  member  state,
       obviously  cannot  mean  that  he  enjoys  the  rights  conferred  or
       obligations enforceable against a state by the  ECHR".  Subsequently,
       the Tribunal also found at paragraph 45 that "the Article 8 cases, as
       the IAT had itself recognised, permitted someone not in the territory
       to assert that his Convention rights were breached by  a  refusal  of
       entry clearance, where he wished to enter  to  enjoy  an  established
       family life with someone already settled in the United Kingdom".

   13. At paragraph 68 the Tribunal also found  that  "the  essence  of  the
       family life, which makes it possible that the ECHR  extends  to  some
       non-nationals  outside  of  the  territorial  jurisdiction  who  seek
       respect for their family life with someone settled here, is the  need
       for physical proximity between these persons.  This would  cover  the
       normal relationships between husband and wife, parent and  child  and
       closely allied relationships. We did not conclude that Article  8  in
       this extended form covered all aspects of personal and private  life,
       or necessarily all those relationships which could  come  within  the
       notion of family life within the Convention".

   14. Counsel for the Respondent argued that Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry
       clearance)  [2015]  00112  (IAC)  supported  the  right  for  foreign
       nationals to rely  on  their  Article  8  private  life  rights  when
       applying for entry clearance.  It is correct that in paragraph  9  of
       this decision the Upper Tribunal said that "if, as we find to be  the
       case here, the claimant has shown that refusing him  entry  clearance
       does interfere with his, and his wife's,  private  and  family  lives
       then it will be necessary to  assess  the  evidence  to  see  if  the
       claimant meets the substance of the  rules".  In  paragraph  17,  the
       Upper Tribunal also found  that  "on  the  facts  of  this  case  the
       decision to refuse the claimant entry clearance interferes  with  his
       and his wife's private and family lives".

   15. Counsel for the Respondent also relied on the fact that in  paragraph
       24 the Upper Tribunal also found that it would be "extremely  foolish
       to attempt to  be  prescriptive,  given  the  intensely  factual  and
       contextual sensitivity of every case".  However, when doing so it  is
       necessary to note that the Upper Tribunal qualified its extension  to
       private life cases. In particular, it found that "it will only be  in
       very unusual circumstances that a person other than a close  relative
       will be able to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within
       the scope of Article 8(1) [in private life cases]. In practical terms
       this is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is  that
       of husband and wife or other close life  partners  or  a  parent  and
       minor child and even then it will  not  necessarily  be  extended  to
       cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based on  a  whim  or
       will not add significantly to the time that the people involved spend
       together".

   16. I accept that in Mostafa the Upper Tribunal did  find  that  in  some
       cases private life rights  could  also  provide  a  basis  for  entry
       clearance. However, in the current case, the Respondent is relying on
       a relationship with an adult son. Therefore, she needs to  show  very
       unusual circumstances to succeed on the  basis  of  the  decision  in
       Mostafa.

   17. Counsel for the Respondent argued that each case had to be considered
       on its  own  merits  and  there  is  no  dispute  with  this  general
       principle.  However,  I  find  that  the  Respondent  has  failed  to
       establish there are any very unusual circumstances in her  case.  The
       Respondent had not seen her sponsor or  his  wife  and  oldest  child
       since 2008 and this was only because they paid a short visit  to  her
       in Pakistan. She has never visited the United Kingdom and, therefore,
       she has never developed a private life here in the past. In contrast,
       it was not disputed that the Respondent was living in Pakistan in the
       family home with two other sons, their wives and seven grandchildren.
       At most, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross found that it would be hugely
       expensive, uncomfortable and not without  risk  for  the  sponsor  to
       visit the Respondent in Pakistan.

   18. However, there was no evidence to show that the family home in Lahore
       was in a dangerous  area  due  to  terrorism,  kidnap  and  sectarian
       violence. There was also no evidence to show  that  any  visit  would
       have to be in summer  time  in  Pakistan  and,  therefore,  when  the
       weather was very hot. Nor was there any evidence  to  show  that  the
       sponsor could not afford to visit the Respondent, either on  his  own
       or with his wife and children.

   19. In addition, it was not asserted that the sponsor or any  members  of
       his family were suffering from any illness or disability which  would
       prevent them from travelling to  Pakistan  and,  to  date,  they  had
       maintained a private life with the Respondent by the use of Skype and
       Facetime. In addition, the Respondent was only proposing to visit the
       United Kingdom for six weeks and in Mostafa the Upper Tribunal  found
       that, even if the proposed visit involved  a  husband  and  wife  and
       parent and minor child, it may be necessary to show  that  the  visit
       added significantly to the time they could spend together.

   20. Counsel for the Respondent also submitted that, even if the  approach
       to the Respondent's Article 8 private  life  rights  amounted  to  an
       error of law, it was not a  material  error  of  law,  as  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Ross did not take into account the private life rights
       of the sponsor and his wife and children. However, in paragraph 15 of
       his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  refer  to   the
       development of the Respondent's private life and that of her  sponsor
       and his family. I also that similar issues arise in relation to their
       rights. The Respondent has never before sought  entry  clearance  and
       private life has been maintained by Skype and Facetime.

   21. I also note that in paragraph 14 of Adjei (visit visa  -  Article  8)
       [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Mostafa was dealing with a very narrow range of cases. In
       Adjei the Upper Tribunal also took into account that the adult family
       members in that case had decided to live in different  countries  and
       there was no aspect of dependence. The same  could  be  said  in  the
       current case.

  Decision

    1.   The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross  included  material
         errors of law and I set it aside.

      2. The Respondent's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
         a de novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross.




    Nadine Finch


    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch Date: 22 February 2016
