
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04476/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                         Olasunkanmi Adewole Ashaye
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                    ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr O Ashaye, sponsor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Barcello dismissing the Appellant's appeal against a refusal  of  entry
    clearance as a family visitor, following a hearing at Newport IAC on 23
    February 2015.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  13  February  1986.   He
    made an  application  for  entry  clearance  primarily  to  attend  his
    brother's doctorate degree ceremony in  the  United  Kingdom  but  also
    necessarily to visit his brother and other family  members  present  in
    the UK.  The application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  by
    way of a  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  dated  8  July  2014  with
    reference to paragraph 41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules for reasons set out in the Notice of Immigration Decision.

3.   The Appellant lodged an appeal against the Respondent's  decision  with
    the IAC.  That right of appeal was restricted in the way, and  for  the
    reasons, set out at paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Essentially the Appellant was limited to  pursuing  his
    appeal on race discrimination grounds or on human rights grounds.

4.   Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  brother  Dr  Ashaye
    attended to give evidence in support of the appeal, and it is Dr Ashaye
    who has  also  attended  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  advance  the
    Appellant's case.  It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found
    the sponsor, the Appellant's brother, to be an impressive  witness  and
    seems to have  accepted  his  evidence  as  to  primary  facts  in  its
    totality.  The Judge sets out at paragraph  13  a  number  of  findings
    based upon the evidence before him.  Those findings  are  a  matter  of
    record and I do not propose to set them out again here.

5.   Having made those primary  findings  of  fact  the  Judge  went  on  at
    paragraphs 15 and 16 of his decision to refer to the Immigration Rules.
     The Judge observes at paragraph 15:  "It  is  clear  that  I  have  no
    jurisdiction to hear an appeal against the substantive  decision",  but
    nonetheless goes on to state this at paragraph 16: "It  will  be  clear
    however from my findings above that had I done so I would have  allowed
    such an appeal.  In light of the evidence I have heard and  observed  I
    would not have considered the reasons for refusal sustainable."

6.   Nonetheless because the Judge had no jurisdiction to allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules he appropriately went on  to  consider  the
    available grounds under the  heading  'Race  discrimination  and  Human
    Rights'.  At paragraph 17 in respect of race discrimination he  states:
    "No  grounds  of  appeal  have  been  raised   in   respect   of   race
    discrimination.  There is nothing apparent within the facts of the case
    that lead me to conclude such a challenge is arguable."

7.   Thereafter  the  Judge  sets  out  at  paragraph  18  the  five  Razgar
    questions and at paragraph 19 identifies that the case  of  Razgar  was
    concerned with removal but  that  nonetheless  the  questions  and  the
    principles from which they derive are essentially the same  in  respect
    of an entry clearance application where human rights are in issue.

8.   The Judge then goes  on  at  paragraphs  20  and  21  to  consider  the
    particular circumstances of the Appellant with reference in  particular
    to his relationship with his brother.  Paragraphs 20 and 21 are the key
    paragraphs in the determination and accordingly I now set them  out  in
    their entirety:

         "20. Considering the first question, in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31
             the Court of Appeal  adopted  a  fact-based  approach  to  the
             existence of family life with attention on whether there  were
             additional ties of dependency beyond the normal emotional ties
             between adults.  I consider that in this case the relationship
             between the Appellant and Sponsor is such that it  constitutes
             'family life' within the meaning and purpose of Article 8.   I
             am satisfied that there is a sufficient element  of  emotional
             dependency  by  the  Appellant  upon  the  Sponsor  in   that,
             particularly following  the  death  of  their  last  surviving
             parent  the  Appellant  derives  emotional  support  from  his
             brother that probably extends beyond normal ties between adult
             siblings.

         21.  Moving on to the second question raised in Razgar  however,  I
             do not find that the refusal of a visit visa has  consequences
             of such gravity so as to potentially engage  Article  8.   The
             family life shared between the Appellant and Sponsor is one in
             which they have chosen to live on separate continents  and  is
             therefore not primarily shared on a direct basis and  has  not
             been for over 12 years."

    I interject to note that the reference to "12 years" would appear to be
    a typographical error, Dr Ashaye confirming today that it is more  like
    20 or 21 years  that  he  and  his  brother  have  lived  in  different
    countries.  Continuing with the quotation:

             "The applicant's primary family and private life is  exercised
             within Nigeria with  those  friends  and  family  that  reside
             there.  The Sponsor's  primary  family  and  private  life  is
             exercised in the United Kingdom.  The brothers  have  retained
             their family life by the  use  of  modern  technology  and  by
             visits to Nigeria by  the  Sponsor.   That  situation  is  not
             affected by the Respondent's decision to reject an application
             for the Appellant to visit the Sponsor for two weeks.   Whilst
             it would be an instructive and enjoyable  experience  for  the
             Appellant, that is not reason enough to engage Article 8.  The
             Sponsor  asserts  that  such  a  visit  would  be  emotionally
             beneficial to the Appellant in light of him  coming  to  terms
             with the loss of their father.  I agree  that  it  might,  but
             only in the sense that the Appellant  benefits  from  spending
             time with his brother, which could be exercised  as  has  been
             done previously in Nigeria."

9.   On that basis the Judge did not go on to consider the third and  fourth
    Razgar questions, or the fifth Razgar question of proportionality,  but
    dismissed the appeal under the ECHR and thereby dismissed the appeal in
    its entirety.

10.  The Appellant  seeks  to  challenge  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge by way of grounds drafted by Dr Ashaye.  Those  grounds,
    with respect, to a very large  extent  focus  on  factual  dispute  and
    primarily constitute a disagreement with the outcome in the appeal.  In
    that context it is perhaps not surprising that in  the  first  instance
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler refused permission  to  appeal  on  24
    April 2015.  However, on 6 July  2015  on  a  renewed  application  for
    permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  granted  permission  to
    appeal identifying an arguable issue in relation to the approach  taken
    by the Judge to the Immigration Rules and their potential relevance  to
    the issue of proportionality.  Judge Pitt makes the following  comments
    in granting permission to appeal:

         "The FTTJ making it entirely clear at [13]-[16] that had an  appeal
         on the basis of the substantive Immigration Rules been  before  him
         he would have allowed the appeal.  Family life having been found to
         been established for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR,  the  fact  of
         the Immigration Rules being met is a relevant and 'weighty' factor;
         see Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).
          The FTTJ did not weigh the fact of the Immigration Rules being met
         at all in the proportionality assessment at [21].  It  is  arguable
         that had it been taken into account the decision  might  have  been
         different, there being other factors here such as the recent  death
         of the father of the appellant and sponsor albeit the  guidance  in
         Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 will also have  to
         be considered when assessing if a material error of law arises."

11.  Having had the opportunity to give further consideration  to  the  case
    law cited in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  and  perhaps  more
    detailed consideration than the circumstances of  consideration  of  an
    application for permission to appeal might afford, I note the following
    in respect of the two decisions cited.  The headnote in Mostafa  is  in
    the following terms:

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control."

12.  In Adjei the headnote reads as follows:

         "1.  The first question  to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether Article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all.  If it is not, which will not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  Rules  and
             should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the Rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

         2.   As compliance with paragraph 41 of HC 395 is not a  ground  of
             appeal to be decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning
             that will  carry  little  weight,  especially  if  based  upon
             arguments advanced only by the Appellant.   If  the  Appellant
             were to make a fresh application for entry clearance  the  ECO
             will, if requested to do so, have  regard  to  the  assessment
             carried out by the Judge  but  will  not  be  bound  by  those
             findings to treat the Appellant as a person who, at  least  at
             the date of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 41."

13.  It seems to me clear from a reading of both  of  those  headnotes,  and
    having had regard to the body of  the  respective  decisions,  that  in
    circumstances where - as here - the First-tier Tribunal Judge has found
    that  the  second  Razgar  question  could  not  be  answered  in   the
    Appellant's favour the Tribunal  does  not  reach  the  proportionality
    exercise under the fifth Razgar question, and so any evaluation or,  as
    here, favourable conclusion, in respect of the Immigration Rules cannot
    assist the Appellant in his Article 8 appeal because it is only in  the
    context of proportionality that such matters might became germane.   On
    that basis I conclude that the  grounds  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal as requiring further  consideration  do  not  upon
    that further consideration identify any error of law on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14.  Nonetheless Dr Ashaye urged upon me a  reconsideration  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  second  Razgar
    question.  However, in my judgment that was essentially an  attempt  to
    seek to retry the factual issues and  the  Judge's  evaluation  of  the
    inferences to be drawn from the primary  facts  found  (in  respect  of
    which there is  no  dispute)  and  in  respect  of  which,  as  already
    observed, the Judge appears to have accepted at face value the evidence
    of the sponsor. It is no part of my jurisdiction at the 'error of  law'
    stage to reconsider the factual findings or the evaluation of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge of those facts and accordingly I decline to  permit
    this hearing to be used as a device essentially to rehear the appeal.

15.  For the avoidance of any doubt I consider the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 20 and 21  to  be  both  clearly  and
    cogently expressed and reasoned.  Whilst it might be said - and  indeed
    Ms Everett makes the submission - that the finding at paragraph  20  in
    respect of family life could  be  characterised  as  being  a  generous
    finding, it is clear that the Judge has considered that finding through
    the perspective of the geographical distance between the Appellant  and
    his sponsor brother.  This is made clear at paragraph 21.

16.  Accordingly I find no error of law in respect of the approach taken  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the Appellant's appeal on human rights
    grounds.

17.  The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal drafted by Dr  Ashaye  make
    some reference to issues of discrimination.  However, I note  that  the
    issue of discrimination was not raised as a ground of appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, see paragraph 17.  Nor was  this  the  basis
    upon which Judge Pitt granted permission  to  appeal.  Moreover,  there
    seems to me nothing of substance in the references made in the grounds,
    and accordingly in all of the circumstances I do not  seek  to  explore
    that matter any further.

18.  Finally I should observe that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  indeed
    make positive findings in respect of the Immigration Rules albeit these
    were not matters upon which he was seized of jurisdiction - and  indeed
    further to the observations in Adjei are matters that perhaps he should
    not have addressed prior to his consideration of the Article 8  issues.
    Nonetheless, having  addressed  them,  it  may  well  be  that  if  the
    Appellant were to represent himself for entry clearance in the  future,
    and with the caveat expressed in the second paragraph of  the  headnote
    to Adjei, the favourable impression made upon the Immigration Judge  by
    the sponsor and the Immigration Judge's conclusions in that regard  may
    be accorded some considerable weight in any future  application  as  to
    the ability of the Appellant to be supported in the United Kingdom,  as
    well as the very obvious and  clear  faith  expressed  in  him  by  his
    brother as to the likelihood of him returning home after a short  visit
    to the United Kingdom.  However, ultimately any further  decision  will
    be a matter for the decision-maker at the  relevant  time  taking  into
    account all of the available evidence at that time.



Notice of Decision

19.   For  the  reasons  given  I  find  no  error  of  law  and  in   those
    circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands. The
    appeal remains dismissed.

20.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

