
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Va/04109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SIKIRU OLADIPUPO SALAU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Freer) allowing the respondent's appeal against a decision taken
    on 16 June 2014 to refuse entry clearance as a visitor.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a retired civil servant and widower born in 1940.  He
    applied on 24 February 2014 to visit his adult daughter ("the sponsor")
    in the UK.

 4. The appellant accepted that the sponsor was financing the trip and that
    the respondent had previously spent 25 months in previous visits to the
    UK. He had not explained why he stayed longer than planned  or  how  he
    met his commitments in Nigeria while he was away. He had not  submitted
    any personal documentation to show his circumstances  in  Nigeria.  The
    appellant was not satisfied that the respondent was a  genuine  visitor
    who intended to leave the UK on completion of his proposed visit.

 5. The decision was reviewed by an entry clearance manager on 23 September
    2014 who considered that the refusal did not appear to  breach  Article
    8. There appeared to  be  no  barrier  to  the  respondent's  relatives
    visiting him in Nigeria or elsewhere.

The Appeal

 6. The respondent appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  sponsor
    attended an oral hearing at Taylor House on 10 April 2015. He  was  not
    represented. The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the  sponsor  was  a
    credible witness. The respondent was  a  retired  civil  servant  whose
    evidence should be treated in the same way as that of the sponsor.  The
    respondent was widowed 18 years ago and had not remarried. In  numerous
    visits since 1997 he had never sought to overstay or settle in the  UK.
    The respondent  and  sponsor  had  adequate  financial  resources.  The
    respondent had repeatedly helped with looking after  his  grandchildren
    in the UK.

 7. It was not readily possible for the sponsor and  her  family  to  visit
    Nigeria together due to schooling, work and cost. The sponsor works  in
    a busy acute care NHS trust and is contracted to work  unsocial  hours.
    The respondent was fully retired and financially independent -  he  had
    no need to hire a locum or  ask  family  or  a  friend  to  manage  his
    business affairs. The decision was disproportionate  and  irrational  -
    preventing meeting with children and grandchildren, limiting chances of
    visits to other countries  and  ignoring  the  rights  of  the  British
    citizen relatives.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent had family life with his adult children  in
    the UK; there was no dependency or daily contact. The judge found  that
    the respondent will have limited opportunities to travel in the  future
    due to health issues and the sponsors  will  therefore  have  to  visit
    Nigeria in the future. The proportionality findings were inadequate.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coates on
    25 June 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the proportionality
    assessment was inadequate and did not explain why refusal  of  a  visit
    visa which only allows the parties to be  together  temporarily  was  a
    disproportionate interference with human rights.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Mr Nath submitted that the judge produced very  short  conclusions  and
    findings. There were no reasons to find  dependency  and  family  life.
    Paragraph 56 of the decision is just  factors  but  with  no  analysis.
    There is nothing in the findings about the public interest or Dube  (ss
    117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC). The appellant says that  there  was
    no evidence of personal or financial circumstances. The decision should
    be remade and the appeal should be dismissed.

12. I find that the thrust of the judge's findings was that the  respondent
    is a reliable man of good character with a  sound  immigration  history
    and a loving family in the UK. There was  no  intention  to  settle  or
    overstay in the UK. I find that the judge's analysis of the evidence is
    sound and the conclusions of fact reached were properly open.

13. I have considered SSHD v SS (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  At
    paragraph 44, the proper approach is to see if an  applicant  satisfies
    the conditions laid down in the Immigration Rules  and  to  assess  the
    force of the public interest which will be relevant  to  the  balancing
    exercise. Unknown to Mr Nath, there is correspondence in the file  from
    the respondent's solicitors confirming that  the  respondent  has  been
    granted entry clearance to the UK. In those circumstances there can  be
    no public interest in maintaining affective immigration control in this
    case. The issue has been conceded by the appellant.

14. I do not find it necessary to further analyse the precise reasons given
    by the judge. I find that the conclusion that the appellant's  decision
    amounted to disproportionate interference with the  Article  rights  of
    the respondent and UK family members was properly open  to  the  judge.
    Any errors of law along the way are clearly not material to the outcome
    of the appeal. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal cannot succeed.

Decision

15. Consequently, I dismiss the appellant's appeal and the decision of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal stands. There is no material error of law.


Signed   [pic]    Date 14 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
