
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
VA/04543/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 29th September 2015                |           On 29th February 2016     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MR SAMUEL KYERE

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kyere,   Sponsor

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal (FtT) did not make an anonymity  direction.  I
      have not been asked to make one and see no public  policy  reason  for
      doing so and none is made.

Background

2.    This is an appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereafter  "the
    respondent") against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtTT)
    (Judge J H H Cooper). On 29th April 2015 the FtTT allowed the appeal of
    Mr Kyere (hereafter "the claimant"), a citizen of  Ghana,  against  the
    decision  of  the  respondent  dated  10th  July  2014   refusing   his
    application for entry clearance as a family visitor.

3.    The issue raised in this appeal relates to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Tribunal in visitor appeals. The position of the respondent is set  out
    in the grounds of appeal against the Judge's decision. In summary,  the
    respondent submits that all  applications  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor made on or after 25th June 2013 only attract a right of  appeal
    on human rights and race relations grounds pursuant to  section  52  of
    the Crime and Courts Act 2013 ('the 2013 Act').

Error of Law

4.     Judge  Cooper  considered  the  evidence  and  found  the  claimant's
    intentions as a visitor were entirely  genuine.  He  found  that  entry
    clearance should have been granted under the Immigration Rules  and  he
    allowed the appeal. In the circumstances, the judge stated that it  was
    unnecessary to consider the appeal on human rights grounds  [at  20  to
    26]. In allowing the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules [27]
    I find the judge erred in law. It is clear that with effect  from  25th
    June 2013 section 52 of  the  2013  Act  amended  section  88A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so that there is no  right
    of appeal against refusal of entry clearance in a family  visitor  case
    save on race discrimination or  human  rights  grounds  -  see  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) at  [6,  11  and
    13].

5.    Thus, in allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules, I  find  the
    judge was in error in considering the matters in relation to  which  he
    had no jurisdiction and in failing to deal with the human rights  claim
    which had been raised in the grounds of appeal.  The  errors  are  such
    that the decision must be set aside and should be re-made.

Re-making the Decision

6.    At the hearing  the  Sponsor  confirmed  that  there  was  no  further
    evidence upon which reliance was placed and the parties agreed  that  I
    could remake the decision on the evidence before the FtTT.

7.    The Sponsor submitted that the claimant  was  a  genuine  visitor.  He
    stated that he could not understand why his brother was not allowed  to
    visit the UK where he would be supported by family members.

8.    Mr Avery submitted that the Rules should be  regarded  as  a  complete
    code and there were no provisions within  them  which  would  meet  the
    claimant's circumstances.  There were no  compelling  circumstances  to
    permit consideration on human rights  grounds  outside  the  Rules.  In
    particular, he argued that it had not been shown that there was  family
    life between the claimant and his brother  on  the  basis  set  out  in
    Kugathas [2003] INLR 170 which required there  to  be  more  than  mere
    emotional ties between kinships of this kind. He  also  stated  that  a
    fresh application could be made  in  order  to  overcome  the  problems
    raised in the refusal.

 9.   It has been identified in the decision of Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 that the appropriate course of  action  is
    to answer the five questions set out in Razgar.  The considerations  of
    the Immigration Rules would only arise if I were to go on  to  consider
    questions (4) and (5) as set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL,  it  of  course
    being necessary for the first three questions to  be  answered  in  the
    affirmative before the analysis could properly continue to that  stage.
    I have borne in mind that the burden is on  the  claimant  to  show  on
    balance Article 8 is engaged, and that it  is  for  the  respondent  to
    justify the proportionality of her decision.

10.   The Appellant wished to visit his family  and  friends  and  attend  a
    family christening ceremony in the UK. Neither the evidence  before  me
    nor information already put before the FtTT leads me to  conclude  that
    the claimant and his sponsor have  a  relationship  which  goes  beyond
    emotional  ties.  There  is  nothing  to  suggest  a  relationship   of
    dependency. The claimant is a student pursuing studies in  the  Ukraine
    with the assistance of government scholarships. There is no basis  upon
    which I could conclude that the relationship between the  claimant  and
    his sponsor, or, any other sibling in the UK, is anymore than  that  of
    adult siblings with emotional ties. Thus, I conclude there is no family
    life between the claimant and sponsor or any other sibling in  the  UK.
    It follows that the human rights claim can advance no further than  the
    first stage of the five-stage test set out in Razgar (supra).

11.   As I have found that question 1 within the Razgar framework  falls  to
    be answered in the negative, it is unnecessary to continue to  consider
    the remaining questions and thus I do not need  to  make  any  findings
    with respect to the Immigration Rules.

12.   In conclusion, therefore, I find that the decision  of  the  FtTT  did
    involve the making of an error of law. I set it aside and I remake  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal on the only  ground  available,  that
    is, human rights pursuant to Section 84(1) (c) of the 2002 Act.

DECISION

The FtTT made an error on a point of law such that the  decision  should  be
re-made. I re-make the decision by dismissing the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.

FEE DECISION

The FtTT made a fee award and I set this aside also. The appeal is
dismissed. There is no fee award.

Signed                                       Date
      [pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


