
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/04174/2013
     VA/04177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th August 2014                             |On 3rd September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              RAHMAT ULLAH KHAN
                                waqarun nisa
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellants' appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 15th April 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife, citizens of Pakistan, born on  5th
    May 1962 and 3rd March 1968 respectively.

 3. They applied to come to the UK as visitors but  were  refused  on  22nd
    January 2013.

 4.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the   first
    Appellant's circumstances were as claimed.  He had provided  affidavits
    dated  1998  and  2000  which  could  not   demonstrate   his   current
    circumstances.  The valuation reports were dated 2006 and the  copy  of
    his pension book indicated a sum being paid different from  the  amount
    claimed.  The bank statement  showed  deposits  inconsistent  with  his
    claimed income. In particular sums recently deposited equate to over 49
    months' declared income from all sources before any living deductions.

 5. Additionally, the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor, the first Appellant's brother, was in a position  to  maintain
    and accommodate him.

 6. The judge was handed evidence at the hearing in relation to  a  college
    where the first Appellant had studied in 2009.  She took  into  account
    that evidence in reaching her decision that the  Appellants  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Rules.

 7. The Appellant challenged her decision; inter alia, on  the  basis  that
    the judge had taken into account evidence in relation to the college.

 8. First-tier Judge Gillespie observed, in granting permission,  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had not taken any  point  in  relation  to  the
    college and the Appellants were given no notice  of  the  evidence  and
    were not in a position to respond.

The Hearing

 9. There was no appearance by the Sponsor.

10. Mrs Pettersen acknowledged that the judge may have acted in  an  unfair
    manner in taking into account evidence not available to the  Appellant.
    It is clear  from  the  determination  that  the  Sponsor's  wife,  who
    attended the hearing, was not in a  position  to  answer  any  detailed
    questions about his circumstances.   However  she  submitted  that  the
    error  was  immaterial  because   the   remaining   findings   in   the
    determination were sustainable.

11. I accept that submission. The Appellant did not have an opportunity  to
    comment on the evidence produced  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing.  It had not been relied upon by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and his Sponsor was not in a position to make any submissions on it.

12. However, the judge also dismissed the appeal on the  grounds  that  the
    Appellant had failed to  answer  the  questions  raised  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in relation to his circumstances  in  Pakistan.   She
    also noted that the Sponsor and his family live in modest circumstances
    and had not provided evidence to show  that  they  could  maintain  and
    accommodate the first Appellant and his family.

13. Those were findings plainly open to the judge to make and are untainted
    by any error.

Decision

14. The judge's decision stands.  The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
