
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04450/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 September 2015                   |On 18 November 2015                 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                            MrS OLGA STREPETILOVA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Andriy Strepetilova, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the Decision and Reasons promulgated on  13
       March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aziz.   The  decision  under
       appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the  refusal  by  the
       respondent of an application to enter the UK as a family visitor.


    2. The respondent's reasons for refusing the application were set out in
       the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  dated  21st  of  July  2014.  The
       respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant's  social,  economic
       and financial circumstances were such that she was  likely  to  leave
       the UK at the end of her visit. The respondent was not satisfied that
       the appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a  limited
       period and that she intended to leave the UK thereafter.  It followed
       that the respondent was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
       requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the immigration rules.


    3. The decision to refuse the  application  was  reviewed  by  an  Entry
       Clearance Manager who acknowledged that  the  sponsor  was  able  and
       willing to support the appellant, but again noted that the  appellant
       had failed to provide any supporting documents with  regards  to  her
       own personal and/or economic ties to Ukraine.


    4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  required  by  s86(2)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to determine any  matter
       raised as a ground of appeal.  The Grounds of Appeal advanced by  the
       Appellant expressly referred to the ECHR and  the  appellant  claimed
       that there was no other way that the appellant would be able  to  see
       her son, to whom she is close, other than by her travelling to the UK
       for a short visit.


    5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz dismissed the appeal  brought  by  the
       appellant under Article 8  ECHR  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  his
       decision promulgated on 2nd March 2015.  He noted that there is  only
       a limited right of appeal on human rights grounds.


    6. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Nicholson who made reference  to  the  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
       (IAC).  In that case, the Upper Tribunal  held  that  the  claimant's
       ability to satisfy the immigration rules is not the  question  to  be
       determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a weighty, though
       not determinative, factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal  is
       proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.


    7. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the decision of
       the Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law,  and  if
       the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


The hearing before me


    8. Mr Andriy Strepetilova, the  appellant's  son  and  Sponsor  appeared
       before me.  He relied upon written submissions set out in  a  'Speech
       of the appellant' dated 25th September  2015,  a  copy  of  which  he
       handed to both Mr Walker and me.


    9. Before me, Mr  Strepetilova  submitted  that  he  has  a  very  close
       relationship with both of his parents who remain in the Ukraine.   He
       had lived with his parents before he  came  to  the  UK  and  he  has
       remained in regular contact with  his  parents,  frequently  visiting
       them in the Ukraine.  He submitted that both of his parents had  been
       invited by him to come to the United Kingdom for a  visit,  and  they
       had each made a separate  application.  Both  applications  had  been
       refused and the family had decided that they would appeal against the
       decision made in respect of  the  appellant,  but  in  light  of  the
       concerns raised by the respondent, his father  would  remain  in  the
       Ukraine and perhaps visit at some other  point  in  the  future.   Mr
       Andriy Strepetilova  stated  that  his  mother  has  previously  been
       granted entry clearance in 2005.  She had visited the UK for 11  days
       or so, and she returned to the Ukraine within the terms of the  visit
       visa granted to her. To the best of his recollection, she arrived  in
       United Kingdom on 22 October 2005 and returned to the  Ukraine  on  5
       November  2005.   He  stated  that  this  appeal  is  of   particular
       importance to him because of his mother's age. He submitted that  any
       future application that she makes,  is  probably  doomed  to  failure
       because the appellant is a pensioner and it would be  very  difficult
       for her to provide evidence of her social and economic  situation  in
       the Ukraine.


   10. Mr Andriy Strepetilova, stated that he arrived in  the  UK  in   2004
       under the highly skilled migrant programme and since his  arrival  he
       has travelled back to the Ukraine about three times each year. He did
       that every year  until  2014,  when  the  situation  in  the  Ukraine
       deteriorated and it was unsafe for him to travel  there.   He  stated
       that he keeps in touch with his parents regularly  by  telephone  but
       that telephone calls are expensive and they are no substitute for the
       face to face contact that he has previously enjoyed with his parents.
          The appellant is a pensioner and is not familiar with modern means
       of  communication,  and  meeting  in  a  third  country  would  prove
       impossible because  of  language  barriers  and  the  fact  that  the
       appellant would have to seek entry clearance to meet  her  son  in  a
       third country.  If she cannot secure entry clearance to the UK  where
       her son lives, and has accommodation readily available, the appellant
       is unlikely to be able to secure entry  clearance  to  another  third
       country.  Mr Strepetilova submitted that the effect of  the  decision
       is to prevent him having a relationship with his mother, with whom he
       remains very close. He confirmed that the appellant has no  intention
       of staying in the UK and, just as she had in 2005, she will return to
       the Ukraine after a short visit. The appellant's husband will  remain
       in the Ukraine and she has a daughter, Elena Shumak (aged 50) who  is
       married and lives in Ukraine. Her daughter has two children  and  the
       appellant assists in looking after  her  grandchildren.   He  submits
       that the appellant has every reason to return to Ukraine.


   11. In reply, Mr Walker submitted that at paragraph [13] of the decision,
       the judge notes  that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  as  to  the
       appellant's ties to the Ukraine.  He accepted that at paragraph  [21]
       of the decision, the judge accepted that this is a genuine visit  and
       that the appellant would leave the UK at the end of the  visit.    He
       submitted that the submissions made  by  Mr  Strepetilova  about  his
       relationship with his parents, his frequent  visits  to  the  Ukraine
       previously, and the appellant's previous visit to the UK in 2005, had
       not been before the ECO and  was  not  considered  by  the  Judge  in
       assessing whether there was a disproportionate interference with  the
       right to family life.


Error of Law


   12. The grounds of appeal advanced by the  appellant  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal following the refusal of Entry Clearance stated:


         "According to European Convention on Human Rights everyone has  the
         right to respect for his family life, I  have  applied  for  family
         visitor visa to visit my son who is a British citizen to be able to
         see my son during these 2 weeks. Current situation  in  Ukraine  is
         dangerous as it is in the  state  of  war  with  east  areas  where
         separatists are. My son can not travel to Ukraine to see me because
         of work reasons and current  dangerous  situation  in  the  country
         which is in state of war with separatists.  I do not want my son to
         travel to see me because  my  country  Ukraine  is  too  dangerous.
         Instead I decided to apply for visa and travel to see him.  My  son
         is willing to sponsor my trip and all expenses  associated  and  he
         provided payslips, letter from work,  bank  statements  and  saving
         statements to support this in addition to the invitation letter. He
         also provided  necessary  documentation  to  support  him  able  to
         accommodate me during my trip.  There was no indication in guidance
         documents that sponsor declaration with his supporting documents is
         not sufficient  to  support  issuing  the  visa.   Entry  clearance
         officer decided that without my own financial documents visa can be
         denied. Regardless that my son's salary is sufficient to support my
         trip and return to Ukraine. Having refused a visitor visa  ,  entry
         clearance officer installed the barrier between me and my son which
         I believe violates basic human right to be able to  physically  see
         your close family. My son's birthday is 27 of  October  and  I  was
         hoping that will be pleasant surprise for him  that  I  can  travel
         (with valid visa) and see him on his birthday.  We  have  no  other
         ways of seeing each other than me traveling to UK. Refusal to issue
         the visa caused significant amount of pain to me  and  my  son  and
         visa is refused second time to  me  in  the  row.  My  son  and  me
         believes that refusal to issue the visa is violation of human right
         to see family members by short visits. I have no plans to  stay  in
         UK, I like my country Ukraine and will stay there  but  I  did  not
         think that I can not simply visit my son. I was issued visitor visa
         ones and visited UK ones in the past (2005) to see my  son  and  my
         visit did not cause anyone any  problems  because  I  followed  all
         rules. I do not understand why as a person I was treated not by  my
         previous actions (previous visit to UK) but rather by guess of what
         can happen in future not taking into account my previous visit.  My
         son's and my rights for family visit were violated by refusal issue
         the visa."


   13. At paragraphs [20] and [23] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  correctly
       notes that there is only a limited right of appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.  At paragraph [25], the Judge states:


         "In conclusion, the appellant's application  cannot  succeed  under
         the Rules. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)
         [20131 UKUT 640  OAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  the  correct
         approach  to  appeals  involving  both  Article  8  and   the   new
         Immigration Rules.   It stated that after applying the requirements
         of the Rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."


   14. At paragraph [26] the Judge stated:


         "I am afraid that even taking her case as its highest, there are no
         good grounds for granting leave outside of  the  Immigration  Rules
         and therefore it is not necessary for this Tribunal  to  go  on  to
         consider   whether   there   are   compelling   circumstances   not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules."


   15. The approach adopted by the judge discloses a material error of  law.
       The Judge states at paragraph [25] that the  appellant's  application
       cannot succeed under the rules and  that  "..only  if  there  may  be
       arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is it
       necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider  whether  there
       are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised   under
       them.".  It was not open  to  the  Judge  to  determine  whether  the
       decision of the ECO made under the immigration rules was  a  decision
       made in accordance with the law.  That  much  appears  to  have  been
       recognised by the Judge at paragraph [22] in which  the  Judge  notes
       "... this Tribunal is not entitled to  assess  the  veracity  of  the
       entry clearance officer and entry  clearance  manager's  decision  in
       respect of the objections that have been raised in  consideration  of
       the application under the Immigration Rules.".


   16. The task of the judge was to determine whether the  decision  of  the
       respondent was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   That
       is, whether  the  decision  was  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
       Article 8 Convention rights.  As set out in the decision of the Upper
       Tribunal in Adeji (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  261  (IAC),
       the first question to be addressed in an appeal against a refusal  to
       grant entry clearance as a visitor where only  human  rights  grounds
       are available, is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is  engaged  at  all.
       If it is not, the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to  embark  upon  an
       assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules and should  not
       do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the
       extent to which the appellant is said to  have  failed  to  meet  the
       requirements of the rule because that may inform the  proportionality
       balancing exercise that must follow.


   17. In considering the appeal on Article 8 grounds, the Judge  failed  to
       deal with the appeal on the basis of the  five  tests  identified  by
       Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R -v- SSHD ex parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
       27.  In failing to do so, the Judge erred in law and the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


Re-making the decision


   18.  In entry clearance cases, the Tribunal  is  concerned  with  whether
       there has been an unjustified lack of respect for private and  family
       life.  Decisions of this sort are  entirely  fact  specific  and  the
       Judge accepted that in the particular  circumstances  of  this  case,
       there was a family life between the applicant and  her  son.  At  the
       hearing before me, it was not in issue that the  decision  to  refuse
       the appellant entry clearance  interferes  with  her  and  her  son's
       family life and that the interference is  of  sufficient  gravity  as
       potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  The  issue  before
       me is whether the refusal of entry clearance  for  the  specific  and
       limited  purpose  sought,  interferes  disproportionately  with   the
       private and family lives of the appellant and her son.


   19. I remind myself that  section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  applies,  and
       although  the  Tribunal  can  consider  evidence  that  was  not   in
       existence, or not produced, at the date  of  decision,  it  can  only
       consider additional evidence of "circumstances  appertaining  at  the
       time of the decision".


   20. In refusing the application for entry clearance the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer was not satisfied that the appellant's social,  economic  and
       financial circumstances are such that the appellant will leave the UK
       at the end of the visit.  On  review,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
       maintained that the appellant had failed to  provide  any  supporting
       documents with regards to her own personal and or  economic  ties  to
       Ukraine.


   21. To that end, having noted that the right  of  appeal  is  limited  to
       human  rights  grounds  only,  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that   the
       substantive requirements of the immigration rules appear to  be  met.
       Importantly,  insofar  as  any  assessment  of   proportionality   is
       concerned, the Judge found:


         "20. Having had sight of the documentation, I am prepared to accept
         that this is a genuine trip.   I also note that the entry clearance
         manager  accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  able  to  maintain  and
         accommodate the appellant during any visit.


         23.  ...I note that the current situation in Ukraine  may  make  it
         difficult for the appellant's son to visit her...


   22. Mr Andriy Strepetilova stated that his  mother  has  previously  been
       granted entry clearance in 2005 and that she had visited the  UK  for
       11 days or so. To the best of his recollection, she arrived in United
       Kingdom on 22 October 2005 and returned to the Ukraine on 5  November
       2005.  Mr Walker did not dispute that.  I find that the appellant has
       previously travelled to the UK in 2005 and that she has not acted  in
       any way that undermines the system of immigration control.


   23. Whilst not the question before the Tribunal, the underlying merits of
       the application and the ability  of  the  appellant  to  satisfy  the
       substantive requirements of the  immigration  rules,  is  capable  of
       being a weighty factor in an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.   I
       accept that it is not determinative, but the fact that the  appellant
       appears,  on  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge,  to  satisfy   the
       requirements of the immigration rules, combined with the finding that
       the current situation in  Ukraine  may  make  it  difficult  for  the
       appellant's son to visit her, as her has regularly done in the  past,
       in my judgment tips the balance in favour of  the  appellant  in  the
       particular facts and circumstances of this case.  The appellant's son
       has travelled back to the Ukraine about three times each year to  see
       his parents and did so every year until 2014.


   24. In my  judgment  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  in  the
       particular circumstances of this case,  is  disproportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


NOTICE OF DECISION


   25. I allow the appellant's appeal to the extent that the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal  discloses  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
       decision is set aside.


   26. I remake the decision, and allow the appellants  appeal  against  the
       decision of the Entry Clearance Officer under Article 8 ECHR.


FEE AWARD


   27. I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
