
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 20th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                rakhmat bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The sponsor, Asmat Naveed
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Caswell
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 15th April 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant applied to come to the UK for eight  weeks  as  a  family
    visitor to see her sister and was refused on 30th July 2014.

 3. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor whom  she  found  to  be
    credible.  She said that the sponsor's evidence was consistent with the
    evidence in the  papers  as  to  the  appellant's  intentions  and  her
    circumstances in Pakistan.

 4. However the appellant's right of appeal against the refusal is  limited
    to a challenge that the decision breaches  her  right  to  family  life
    under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence that there was a greater than  usual  dependency  between  the
    sisters, who were both adults, and therefore that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged.  Accordingly the appeal had to be dismissed.

 5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    sponsor guarantees that her sister will be returning  to  Pakistan  and
    she  was  willing  for  the  court  to  keep  any  passports  or  other
    documentation to prove it.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  Grimmett  on  19th
    June 2015 but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 7th
    August 2015.

 7. I carefully explained to the sponsor that the judge  had  no  power  to
    decide whether the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse a visit
    visa was correct or not.  The only decision before her was whether  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 would be breached by the refusal.

 8. The judge was plainly entitled to find that  there  would  be  no  such
    breach.  Accordingly, there was no error of law in her  decision.   The
    correct course is for the appellant to make another application, and to
    show the judge's determination to the Entry Clearance Officer, so  that
    a fresh decision on whether a visa should be issued can be made, in the
    light of the judge's findings.

Notice of Decision

 9. The judge did not err in law.  The appeal is dismissed.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

