
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/04617/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham (ET)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2015                   |On 4 December 2015                   |
|Prepared 20 October 2015             |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                ECO- Nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Husein Badru Mawejje
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Ssemwogerere, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of  Uganda,  date  of  birth  27  March  1962,
    appealed against the ECO's decision dated 21 July 2014 to refuse  entry
    clearance as a family visitor with reference to paragraphs 41 and 42 of
    the Immigration Rules HC 395 as  amended.   The  Claimant  had  limited
    rights to appeal as derived from Section 84(1)(c) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Malley (the judge) who on 17 February 2015 allowed  an
    appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  with  reference   to   somewhat
    confusingly Article 8 ECHR.  The purpose  of  the  visit  had  been  to
    support the Appellant's niece and her three children after the death of
    her husband, their father, and to  say  prayers  at  a  service  during
    Ramadan.

3.   I do not know what, if any, the evidence was  as  to  any  family  life
    that had previously been held and there was nothing  before  the  judge
    concerning any former private life rights being  exercised  as  between
    the Claimant and his niece or to what extent  there had been length  of
    hiatus in any such relationship.

4.   Whilst the judge found that the Claimant was a genuine visitor and  was
    coming for the purposes of supporting [his] niece, the judge found that
    he would be returning at the conclusion of his stay.

5.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge De Haney on 23 April 2015.

6.   From the information before the judge, the  Sponsor  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom it seems in 1991. She had married here in 1993  and  her
    husband had died on 1 March 2014. The visa application was  made  on  8
    July 2014 and the decision was, as I have indicated, on 21  July  2014.
    The delay between his death and the application was  explained  by  the
    turmoil and upset caused by  the  Sponsor's  husband's  death  and  the
    making of consequential arrangements.

7.   In considering whether or not the judge made an error  of  law  it  was
    plain that there needed to be a consideration  of  whether  there  have
    been Article 8 rights previously exercised  between  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor, any hiatus in the exercise  of  those  rights,  why  that  has
    happened and how long the gap has been. Plainly in cases of bereavement
    it will be relevant  what  was  the  family  relationship  between  the
    deceased and the would-be visitor.

8.   The judge  had  no  information  about  any  previous  relationship  or
    whether Article 8 was engaged in terms of the purposes of mourning  the
    deceased.  Those are fact-sensitive matters as illustrated  in  such  a
    case as Kochieva v Sweden [2012] ECHR 549.  I find that there  was  not
    the proper or adequate fact basis for  concluding  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the Sponsor and  the  Claimant  or  the  Sponsor's
    deceased husband and the Claimant justified entry to the UK to exercise
    such rights and thus I conclude that the judge made an error of law  in
    failing to deal with those matters.

9.   Accordingly I find that the original Tribunal's decision was  in  error
    of law and cannot stand.

10.  In remaking the matter as I have been  invited  to  do  on  submissions
    made I took into account the cases of  Abbasi  [2005]  UKUT  463  which
    relates to matters concerning the  death  of  a  relative  and  Mostafa
    [2015] UKUT 112, Adjei [2015] UKUT 261 and Kaur [2015] UKUT 00487.

11.  Kaur identified that there was no material difference  between  Mostafa
    and Adjei in considering the ambit of  Article  8  in  the  visit  visa
    context.  There is a material difference between two regimes under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR: The fact that a person meets  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the  Rules  does  not  necessarily
    establish they can succeed under Article 8 or  vice  versa.   Thus  the
    refusal of a visit visa with limited appeal rights the burden  is  upon
    the applicant to show that the denial of a visit has a material  impact
    on their Article 8(1) rights.  Clearly before the Judge  it  was  dealt
    with on the papers and there was therefore no opportunity for the judge
    to test the reliability of the claim.

12.  The judge decided that  the  Claimant  did  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal under  the
    immigration rules when there was no right did so.

13.  The judge made no findings upon what had been any  family  life  rights
    exercised between the Sponsor and Claimant,  or  the  deceased  or  how
    close the relationship had been or when and what had been the character
    of their relationship since the Sponsor had been in the UK or with  the
    niece's husband which, in the circumstances of the case, appears to  be
    unlikely for the husband was not a relative e.g. a cousin.  As a matter
    of approach the judge concluded that because the Claimant was a genuine
    visitor who intended to leave it was disproportionate to  refuse  entry
    clearance. The judge's decision  at paragraphs 17-20,  22-25  conflates
    the issues and whilst the purpose of the visit was legitimate that does
    not of itself show the ECO's decision was disproportionate to  the  aim
    of enforcing immigration control. Similarly it needed to be  considered
    what private/family  rights  were  being  sought  to  maintain  or  re-
    establish.

14.  It seems to me particularly regrettable  that  relevant  matters  which
    could have been put forward but were not. It is  no  criticism  of  the
    Sponsor that she did not appreciate nor have the necessary expertise to
    address the evidential needs to establish Article 8  ECHR  rights  were
    engaged.  Ultimately her stance was to leave the matter to me  to  sort
    out.

15.   In  the  circumstances  I  do  not  find  there  was   the   necessary
    family/private life relationship or seeking to  re-establish  any  such
    connections arising from or because of  the  Sponsor's  and  children's
    bereavement. On the evidence, I find that Article 8(1) ECHR rights were
    not engaged and the appeal on human rights grounds fails.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order is necessary.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal by the ECO is allowed.  The  original  Tribunal  decision  cannot
stand. The following decision is substituted.

The appeal by the Claimant is dismissed.

Signed   Dated 2 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the Claimant's appeal and therefore there  can  be  no  fee
award.

Signed   Date2 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation due to the typing being delayed  and
the case file being miss-located.
