

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/04259/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 May 2015                        |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MANSUKH VIRJI CHHANYA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of Designated
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baird dated  27  January  2015  in
         which the respondent's appeal against a decision dated 23 June 2014
         to refuse him entry clearance as a visitor was  allowed  under  the
         Immigration Rules.





Issues arising

      2. The issue raised in this appeal relates to the jurisdiction of  the
         Tribunal in visitor appeals.   The position of the SSHD is set  out
         in the grounds of appeal against the Judge's decision.  In summary,
         the SSHD submits that all applications for  entry  clearance  as  a
         visitor on or after 25 June 2013 only attract a right of appeal  on
         human rights and race relations  grounds.   The  SSHD  relies  upon
         section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 ('the 2013 Act').

Approach of the First-tier Tribunal

      3. Unfortunately Judge Baird did not have  the  advantage  of  a  SSHD
         representative at the hearing before  her.   In  finding  that  the
         respondent had an appeal under the Immigration Rules  [3]  she  has
         erred in law.  It is clear that  with  effect  from  25  June  2013
         section 52 of the 2013 Act amended section 88A of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so that there is no right of appeal
         against refusal of entry clearance in a family visitor case save on
         race discrimination or human rights grounds - see Mostafa  (Article
         8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) at [6, 11 and 13].

      4. It follows that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  erred  in  law  in
         considering and then allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules and the decision must be set aside.

Re-making decision

      5. Mr Harrison submitted  and  I  accept  that  I  should  remake  the
         decision but that I only need to address Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
         The grounds  of  appeal  against  the  SSHD's  decision  limit  its
         submissions to the interference  with  family  life  that  will  be
         caused by the respondent not attending his niece's wedding.

      6. I note the Judge's  clear  findings  of  fact.   She  accepted  the
         evidence from the sponsor and  his  wife,  and  accepted  that  the
         respondent intends to leave  the  UK  at  the  end  of  his  visit.
         Although the sponsor and his wife did not appear before me there is
         no reason to  go  behind  the  Judge's  factual  findings,  and  Mr
         Harrison did not invite me to do so.

      7. I accept that a claimant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules is
         capable of being a weighty, though not determinative,  factor  when
         deciding whether such a refusal is proportionate to the  legitimate
         aim of enforcing immigration control - see Mostafa (supra).

      8. I also accept that I must consider the five step Razgar [2014] UKHL
         27 approach.  I do not consider  that  any  interference  with  the
         family and private life of the respondent or  his  relevant  family
         members in the  UK  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  to
         potentially engage the operation of Article  8.   There  is  simply
         insufficient evidence  before  me  to  support  this.   Indeed  the
         evidence is sparse.  This is not a very close  family  relationship
         like that of husband and wife as in Mostafa (supra) at [24].  There
         is  also  very  little  evidence  about  the   closeness   of   the
         relationship between the family members and all evidence points  to
         a visit for a wedding without more.  I am not  satisfied  that  the
         relationship and  its  circumstances  are  such  as  to  merit  the
         protection of Article 8(1).

Decision

      9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.
         I set it aside  and  I  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
         respondent's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

FEE AWARD

     10. As I have dismissed the appeal the respondent is  not  entitled  to
         any fee award.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
8 May 2015

