
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: va/04358/2014
     va/05132/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2016                     |On 4 January 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR LIAQUAT HUSSAIN KHAN
                               MRS AKHTAR JAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Hussain of Counsel instructed by KJ & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The subject of this appeal is a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Keane sent on 6 June 2016 allowing on Article 8 grounds an appeal
    by the respondents (hereafter the claimants) against a decision made on
    23 June 2014 refusing to grant them entry clearance  for  a  period  of
    three months as visitors.  At para 10 the judge concluded:

         "The paramount issue which I was to resolve in deciding  the  human
         rights appeal concerned the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
         decisions to refuse entry clearance to the  appellants.   I  should
         carry out that balancing exercise enjoined by many decisions of the
         European Court of Human Rights.   I  acknowledge  the  respondent's
         laudable  determination  to  achieve  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
         maintenance of an effective immigration control  by  means  of  her
         immigration policy.  Her determination is in the  interest  of  the
         wider United  Kingdom  community  and  is  not  easily  overridden.
         However, I strike the balance in favour of  the  appellants  and  I
         find that the decisions to refuse entry clearance to the appellants
         did not accord adequate respect with the appellants' and Mr and Mrs
         Khan's right to private life for reasons which I now give.   First,
         although I was not prepared to characterise the family life which I
         found to have been established as family life under  Article  8  of
         the Human Rights Convention  I  nevertheless  find  that  a  strong
         family life exists between the appellants  and  Mr  and  Mrs  Khan.
         That family life has been fortified over the years by  conventional
         means and by visits.  Second, I have had regard to  the  particular
         facts as I have found those facts to be.  For ease of  reference  I
         recite that part of the appellants' contentions which  I  mentioned
         earlier in this decision and as to which I have made  unequivocally
         favourable findings of fact.   Mr  Khan  is  unable  to  visit  the
         appellants  on  account  of  his  poor  health.   He  suffers  from
         metabolic disorder in the form of glycogen storage disease type 1B.
          His most recent journey to Pakistan was cut short after three days
         because he  was  admitted  to  hospital  suffering  from  a  severe
         infection brought on by the climate and hygiene standard prevailing
         in Pakistan.  His own father, Mr Shafait Khan, aged seventy  years,
         is no longer able to travel  to  Pakistan  in  order  to  visit  Mr
         Liaquat Khan, his brother, the family  as  a  whole  are  extremely
         close and as a matter of practicality family links and  connections
         may only be continued if the appellants are allowed  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom for the purpose of making  a  family  visit.   I  am
         driven to find that the inevitable consequence of the decisions  to
         refuse entry clearance would be to sever that family life which has
         existed between the appellants, Mr and Mrs Khan and Mr Shafait Khan
         which has been manifested in  visits  and  accordingly  pleasurable
         face to face meetings  and  social  connections.   In  short,  that
         aspect of the appellants', Mr and Mrs Khan's and Mr Shafait Khan's,
         family life which had been manifested  in  visits  and  pleasurable
         face to face meetings and social connections could only  have  been
         continued at the date when the respondent  made  the  decisions  to
         refuse entry clearance if the appellants were allowed to enter  the
         United Kingdom.  The appeals on human rights  (Article  8)  grounds
         are allowed."

2.   The grounds of challenge relied on  by  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
    Entry Clearance Officer or ECO) were:

    (i)  that the FtT erred in propounding that a refusal  of  a  visitor's
         entry clearance to enter the UK for a short period  of  time  could
         be/was an interference with Article 8 in a case where there  is  no
         family life.  It was submitted that there is no right to enter  the
         UK for the purposes of visiting extended family members;


    (ii) that pursuant  to  SS  (Malaysia)  [2004]  UKIAT  00091  (Starred)
         private life, as distinct from family life, is  not  a  basis  upon
         which an ECHR right of entry can be based.

3.   It is notable that the grounds contain  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings of fact in  the  appeal.   That  is  important  because  those
    findings included an acceptance  that  "a  strong  family  life  exists
    between the[claimants] and [the sponsors] Mr and Mrs  Khan"  (para  10)
    and acceptance that Mr Khan was prevented by ill-health  from  visiting
    his (claimant) brother in Pakistan as he had been able to do  in  2008,
    2009, 2010, 2011 and 2013.

4.   It is also clear from the judge's findings of fact that the  claimants'
    intentions in relation to the proposed visit were accepted as  genuine.
    The ECO has not sought in the grounds to re-assert the  ECO's  contrary
    finding regarding intentions.

5.   I am grateful for the submissions I heard from both parties.

6.   Given the very limited scope of the challenge raised in the grounds,  I
    have decided that the ECO's challenge  to  the  FtT's  decision  fails.
    That is for essentially two reasons.

7.   First, to the extent that the grounds seek to contend that  an  Article
    8 claim in visit cases can only succeed  in  family  life  cases,  that
    contention is contrary to established case law  which  recognises  that
    Article 8(1) can be engaged in the context of entry clearance/admission
    cases: see e.g. SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.   The  recent  reported
    case of the Upper Tribunal, Abbasi & Another (visits  -  bereavement  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) which recognises that  private  life
    can be a valid basis for an Article 8 claim in  a  family  visit  case,
    reflects  a  correct  legal  interpretation.   SS  (Malaysia)  is   not
    authority to the contrary and even if it were,  I  have  to  apply  the
    doctrine of judicial precedent and  give  precedence  to  higher  court
    authority.

8.   Second, the established case law makes clear that there  is  no  binary
    distinction between private life and family life and that where private
    life ties include (as here) close relationships between family members,
    they must be given due  weight  when  assessing  the  strength  of  the
    Article  8(1)  relationships  relied   upon:   see   e.g.   AA   &   UK
    app.no.8000/08, 20 September 2011.





Notice of Decision

For the above reasons, the appeal brought by the ECO  against  the  decision
of the FtT judge cannot succeed  and  the  decision  of  the  FtT  judge  is
upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                       Date


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

