
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/04344/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19 May 2015                                |On 2 June 2015                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Mrs asma saeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mrs Nuzhat Ahmed, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals to the Upper Tribunal on behalf  of
    an Entry Clearance Officer (post reference ABU DHABI\1234870) from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Butler sitting at Birmingham
    on 2 January 2015) allowing the claimant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules against the decision by the Entry Clearance  Officer  made  on  8
    July 2014 to refuse her entry clearance as a visitor for  a  period  of
    one  month.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an   anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the claimant should  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 24 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson  granted  the
    Entry Clearance Officer permission to appeal for the following reasons:



         The grounds argue that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider
         the appeal under the Rules, by virtue of the amendment of the  2002
         Act  brought  about  by  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act,  and   that,
         additionally, there is no reasoning in relation to  the  Article  8
         element of the decision.  Both grounds are arguable and  permission
         is granted accordingly.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

 3. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Hodgkinson  observed  that  the
    judge had allowed the claimant's visit visa appeal under the Rules,  or
    in the alternative under Article 8 ECHR.  In fact,  Judge  Butler  only
    allowed the appeal under the Rules.  He had no jurisdiction to  do  so,
    as the claimant had restricted  appeal  rights.   The  only  ground  of
    appeal upon which she could succeed was on the ground that the  refusal
    to issue her with a visa breached her  rights  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by  a
    material error of law, such that it should be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

 4. For the purposes of remaking the decision,  I  received  oral  evidence
    from the sponsor about her relationship with the  claimant,  and  about
    the reasons for the proposed visit.  Both she and Mr Smart relied,  for
    different reasons, on Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC).

 5. The headnote of this case states that in the case  of  appeals  brought
    against refusal of entry clearance under Article 8 ECHR, the claimant's
    ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules is  not  the  question  to  be
    determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a  weighty,  though
    not  determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal  is
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.

 6. Mr Smart directed my attention to paragraph [24} where the Presidential
    panel said as follows:

         It  would  therefore  be  extremely  foolish  to  attempt   to   be
         prescriptive,  given   the   intensely   factual   and   contextual
         sensitivity of every case.  Thus we refrain from  suggesting  that,
         in this type of case, any particular  kind  of  relationship  would
         always attract the protection of Article 8(1) or that  other  kinds
         of relationship  would  never  come  within  its  scope.   We  are,
         however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very  unusual
         circumstances that a person other than a  close  relative  will  be
         able to show that refusal of entry clearance comes within the scope
         of Article 8(1).  In practical terms it is likely to be limited  to
         cases where the relationship is that of husband and wife  or  other
         close life partners or a parent and minor child and  even  then  it
         will not necessarily be extended to cases where, for  example,  the
         proposed visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly  to
         the time that the people involved spend together.  In  the  limited
         class of cases where Article 8(1) ECHR is engaged  the  refusal  of
         entry  clearance  must  be  in  accordance   with   the   law   and
         proportionate.

 7. Mr Smart relied on this passage in support of the submission  that  the
    sponsor, who is related to the appellant as  a  sister,  did  not  come
    within  the  scope  of  Article  8(1),   and   so   the   question   of
    proportionality did not arise.  Questions one and  two  of  the  Razgar
    test had to be answered against the claimant.

 8. But the sponsor in reply insisted that she was a close relative of  the
    claimant, and therefore the decision should be remade in the her favour
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 9. The original purpose of the visit was for the claimant and her  husband
    to attend the wedding of a niece.  Only the claimant  appealed  against
    the refusal decision, as her husband decided he could not make the same
    arrangements again for his elderly parents to be cared for  while  they
    were both away.  She told the judge below that her  voluntary  work  in
    Pakistan was very important to her, and she also had  her  own  parents
    and five siblings in Pakistan whom she did not wish to abandon.   Since
    the original purpose of the visit had now gone,  she  wished  to  spend
    time with her family in the UK, and to do some sightseeing.

10. The sponsor told me that the claimant was one of her  younger  sisters.
    She had been born in 1966, and the claimant  had  been  born  in  1972.
    Altogether, she had four sisters and four brothers living in  Pakistan.
    All of them were married.  She had come to the UK in 1988 as the spouse
    of a person present and settled here.

11. In cross-examination by Mr Smart, she said she  had  been  to  Pakistan
    quite a few times.  The last time she had gone was  in  December  2011,
    returning in January 2012.  She always saw the claimant on her  visits.
    When she went back to Pakistan,  she  stayed  with  her  parents.   Her
    sister lived with her husband and his parents in a house which  was  40
    to 45 miles away.  But she would then visit her sister  in  her  house,
    and her sister would also come to  visit  her.   She  kept  in  regular
    contact with her family in Pakistan by speaking to them on Skype.   But
    technology could not replicate meeting in person.

12. I accept that there is a  strong  bond  between  the  sponsor  and  her
    sister, but they do not enjoy family life for the purposes  of  Article
    8(1).  The ties between them do not go beyond the normal emotional ties
    to be expected between adult siblings.  There is not a relationship  of
    dependency, with the sponsor being emotionally dependent on her sister,
    or vice versa.  So I answer questions one and two of the Razgar test in
    favour of the Entry Clearance Officer.  The interference  consequential
    upon the refusal decision is not of  such  gravity  as  to  potentially
    engage the operation of Article 8 ECHR,  either  by  reference  to  the
    family lives of the claimant and the sponsor, or by reference to  their
    private lives.  Accordingly, the question of proportionality  does  not
    arise.

13. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  merits  of  the
    refusal are nonetheless of potential value to the claimant, in that she
    can rely on the positive credibility findings  made  by  the  judge  in
    support of any future application for  entry  clearance  to  visit  the
    sponsor which she may choose to  make.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    refused the application on the ground that he  was  not  satisfied  the
    claimant was genuinely seeking entry for a visit, and  that  she  would
    leave the United Kingdom at the end of her trip.   Judge  Butler  found
    that the claimant had  strong  cultural,  social  and  family  ties  to
    Pakistan which suggested she would return at the end of her  stay,  and
    the evidence which I received from the sponsor reinforces that finding.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to allow the  claimant's  appeal
under the Rules, and accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
set aside and the following decision is substituted: the  claimant's  appeal
under Article 8 ECHR is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
















