
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/04994/2014
                                                               VA/04996/2014
                                                               VA/04999/2014
                                                               VA/05001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MINGBU WANG
                                HUIFANG WANG
                                CHANGJUH WANG
                                YINQING WANG
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr. S. Vokes of Counsel, instructed by Lin & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal promulgated on 16  January  2015  in
    which she allowed the appeals against the decisions to refuse to  grant
    entry clearance as visitors.

 2. For the purposes of this  decision  I  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the Respondent and to Mingbu Wang,  Huifang  Wang,  Changjuh
    Wang and Yinqing Wang as the Appellants, reflecting their positions  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The decision of the Judge and the reasons  for  that  decision  at
         [15] are compassionate.  However, the decision to some extent flies
         in the face of the Judge's findings set out at [11].   Furthermore,
         all the appellants are  adults.   In  that  context,  there  is  no
         assessment of what "family life" meant in the context  of  each  of
         the members of this family.  Consequently, it is at least  arguable
         that   the   judge   conducted   an   inadequate   assessment    of
         proportionality which amounts to an arguable error of law."

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Mills submitted that the hearing had taken place in January 2015 on
    the papers.  At the time, the First-tier Tribunal was to an extent  "in
    the dark" regarding how to deal with visit visa appeals under Article 8
    ECHR.  There had since been caselaw which outlined the approach.  I was
    referred to the cases of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC), Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement - Article 8)
    [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC), Kaur (visit appeals: Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
    487 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 361.

 6. He submitted that on the facts of the case it was difficult to see  how
    Article 8 was engaged.  They were adult relatives who had not seen each
    other for some time and the visit was for the purposes of the  funeral.
    Following the case of Abbasi which held that  a  visit  for  a  funeral
    could engage Article 8, he submitted that while he could not pursue the
    ground that Article 8 could  not  be  engaged,  the  reasoning  in  the
    decision for finding that Article 8 was engaged was sparse.  Article  8
    would not be engaged absent compelling circumstances.

 7. In paragraph [11] the judge made express findings that  the  Appellants
    did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  They  had  not
    provided evidence of employment or study.  Whether or not an  Appellant
    meets the rules is a significant factor in relation to Article  8.   He
    submitted that the consideration of proportionality was inadequate  and
    there had been no proper balance of  the  public  interest  versus  the
    compelling circumstances.

 8. Mr. Vokes submitted that the proportionality exercise  carried  out  by
    the judge was on all fours with that in Abbasi.  The judge  dealt  with
    the immigration rules then went on in paragraph  [12]  to  address  the
    five questions under Razgar.

 9. In paragraph [13] she found that there was a close relationship between
    the Appellants and the relative whose funeral they  wished  to  attend.
    The threshold for finding an interference in family life was not  high.
    In paragraph [14] the judge  addressed  the  third  and  fourth  Razgar
    questions.  The proportionality assessment in paragraph  [15]  mirrored
    that  in  paragraph  [15]  of   Abbasi.    There   were   compassionate
    circumstances which meant  that  entry  clearance  was  reasonable  and
    appropriate.

10. It could not be said that the  judge  had  forgotten  the  findings  in
    paragraph [11] when  considering  Article  8  outside  the  immigration
    rules.  She found that there were compassionate circumstances such that
    entry clearance should be granted for  a  short  period  of  time.   He
    submitted  that  the  Appellants  would  probably  have  been   granted
    temporary  admission  had  they  just  turned  up  without  visas.   He
    submitted that there were compelling reasons.

11. Regarding the finding that there was family life, it  was  an  oxymoron
    that there would not be family life, given that the Appellants were the
    children and the siblings of the  man  whose  funeral  they  wished  to
    attend.  The burden was on the Respondent to show that  there  was  not
    family life.  There had been a temporary loss of  contact  between  the
    Appellants and their dead relative.  The judge proceeded on  the  basis
    that they had enjoyed  family  life  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  There was sufficient reasoning, although he accepted that  it
    was a "sparse decision".

12. In response Mr. Mills  submitted  that  the  consideration  of  whether
    Article 8 was engaged  was  inadequate.   It  was  surprising  that  no
    evidence had been produced to indicate how long ago  the  relative  had
    come to the United Kingdom, and for how long  he  had  lived  with  the
    Appellants in China.  He had come as an asylum seeker, but it  was  not
    clear when he had come to the United Kingdom.  He  submitted  that  the
    losing party in an appeal had the right to know why they had lost,  and
    was not possible to know this from the decision.

13. To state that Article 8 could be presumed to be engaged  when  children
    and parents were involved was far from absolute.   When  a  father  had
    left the family to  claim  asylum,  it  could  be  that  there  was  no
    relationship  with  the  family.   In  the  balancing   exercise,   the
    Respondent's reasons for refusing entry clearance had to be  considered
    but these had been left to one side.  The findings  in  paragraph  [11]
    were not considered as part of the balancing exercise and it could  not
    be assumed that the judge had considered them.  In the period  of  time
    after this decision was made, the law on how to approach Article  8  in
    visit visa appeals had been clarified.  The decision contained a  clear
    error of law.

Error of law

14. In paragraph [11] of the decision the judge finds that  the  Appellants
    have failed to address the Respondent's concerns  in  relation  to  the
    immigration rules.  She gives reasons for this which include  the  fact
    that she cannot be satisfied that the first Appellant  is  employed  as
    claimed as no evidence has been provided.   Further,  no  evidence  has
    been provided  to  show  that  the  second  and  third  Appellants  are
    students.  The judge doubted whether the money in  their  accounts  was
    genuinely available for the purpose of the visit.  The fourth Appellant
    had stated she was self-employed but had produced  nothing  to  confirm
    it.  Further she had  concerns  about  the  sponsor  and  the  lack  of
    evidence he had provided.  At the end of the paragraph she  states:  "I
    find the refusal was  correctly  made  under  paragraph  41  given  the
    paucity of information about the ties to China and  the  financial  and
    economical position of each Appellant and the sponsor in the UK."

15. In paragraph  [12]  the  judge  turns  to  Article  8  outside  of  the
    immigration rules following the five steps set out in Razgar.

16. The headnote to Adjei states as follows:

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
         UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition."

17. Paragraph [13] states:

         "I accept that the Appellants as the  children  and  siblings  have
         enjoyed a family life with their family member before  he  came  to
         the UK.  Given the threshold is not especially  high  I  find  that
         there is an interference with their family life  if  they  are  not
         granted entry clearance, in accordance with the case of AG  Eritrea
         v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801."

18. The judge finds that they enjoyed family life and  that  Article  8  is
    engaged but, given that the Appellants are  all  adults,  even  if  the
    second and third Appellants are the  children  of  the  relative  whose
    funeral they wished to attend, in order  to  ascertain  whether  family
    life existed between them for the purposes of  Article  8,  they  would
    need to show that the ties between  them  went  above  and  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties to be found between adult relatives.  There is no
    assessment of their circumstances here, but only simple statement  that
    the Appellants enjoyed family life with their relative before  he  came
    to the United Kingdom.  There is no finding that the bonds  which  they
    had with their father and brother went  above  and  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties.

19. There is no indication in paragraph [13] as  to  when  the  Appellants'
    relative came to the United Kingdom.  There is no indication as to whom
    he had been living with prior to coming to the United  Kingdom.   There
    is no indication that he was living with either  his  children  or  his
    siblings prior to coming to the United Kingdom.  It is  not  enough  to
    assume that the Appellants had  family  life  with  their  father  just
    because he was their father, without knowing the family circumstances.

20. The Appellants' relative died in January 2014.  In paragraph  [15]  the
    judge finds that the family learnt of his death in June 2014, some five
    months later.  She states that they did  not  know  how  sick  he  was.
    Given this, it is not clear that the  Appellants  were  in  touch  with
    their relative for some period of time.

21. The judge states that she has considered the documents submitted by the
    Appellants in connection with the appeal [2].  I  have  considered  the
    witness statements.  There is no information in these about when  their
    relative came to the United Kingdom.  There is no information about his
    life in China prior to arriving in the  United  Kingdom,  for  example,
    with whom he was living.  In the statement of Huifang Wang,  which  was
    also adopted by her brother Changjun Wang, it states that she loved her
    father very much and "we all looked forward to reuniting one  day.   He
    was a good man and a good  father.   He  always  had  good  advice  and
    although he was living in the UK he looked after us" [6].  She gives no
    further information, for example of how  long  they  have  been  living
    apart, or how he looked after them in China.  There is  no  explanation
    as to why she did not know that he was so ill, and  why  they  did  not
    discover that he had died until some five months after his death.

22. I find that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did not address
    the existence of family life between  the  Appellants  and  their  dead
    relative.  There was no evidence of their life together in China  prior
    to his coming to the United Kingdom.

23. The headnote to Abbasi states as follows:

         "1. The refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking to enter the
         United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose of mourning with
         family members the recent death of a close  relative  and  visiting
         the  grave  of  the  deceased  is   capable   of   constituting   a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  rights  of  the  persons
         concerned under Article 8 ECHR.

         2. The question of  whether  Article  8  applies  and,  if  so,  is
         breached will  depend  upon  the  fact  sensitive  context  of  the
         particular case.

         3. The Tribunal should adopt a structured and  sequential  approach
         to the Article 8 issues."

24. While therefore it  is  clear  that  the  refusal  of  a  visa  to  the
    Appellants is capable of constituting a  disproportionate  interference
    with their Article 8 rights, Abbasi also makes clear that the  question
    of whether Article 8 applies is fact sensitive.   It  is  necessary  to
    establish first that Article 8 applies.  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    failed to give reasons for why Article 8  applies  given  the  lack  of
    evidence about the family circumstances of  the  Appellants  and  their
    relative.

25. Further, in relation to  the  proportionality  exercise,  Mostafa  held
    that:

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control."

26. The judge found in paragraph [11] that the Appellants failed to address
    the  Respondent's  concerns  in  relation  to  the  refusal  under  the
    immigration rules, but there is no mention of this failure to meet  the
    immigration rules in the  proportionality  assessment.   The  judge  is
    clear that the Appellants had failed to provide any evidence  of  their
    circumstances in  China.   The  findings  in  paragraph  [11]  are  not
    mentioned  at  all  in  paragraph  [15]  which  contains   the   entire
    proportionality balancing exercise.  I find that this is an  inadequate
    proportionality assessment.

Notice of decision

    The decision involves the making of an error on a point of  law  and  I
    set it aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 27 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
