

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
VA/05437/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Birmingham                                             Decision
and Reasons Promulgated
On 5 August 2015                                                     On 24
August 2017




                                   Before



                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA



                                   Between



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                            MISS JENNIFER AYELEY

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation



For the Appellant:     No appearance

For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  the
   respondent is a citizen of Ghana born on 17 October  1989.  However,  for
   convenience, I refer below to  Ayeley  as  "the  appellant"  and  to  the
   Secretary of State as "the respondent" which are  the  designations  they
   had before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision
   of the respondent to refuse her application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
   visitor pursuant to paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge McAteer allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8  of
   the European Convention on Human Rights.

3. On 16 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Haynes granted  the  Secretary
   of State permission to appeal saying that it is arguable that the  First-
   tier Tribunal erred in allowing the appellant's appeal and therefore made
   a flawed assessment of proportionality.

4. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance from the sponsor  or  a
   representative although the notice of the hearing date was served to  the
   sponsor at his address. At the hearing before Judge McAtter,  the  appeal
   was decided on the papers and the sponsor did not attend the hearing.

5. The appellant's application was to enter the United Kingdom to live  with
   her husband for two years although she had applied for entry clearance as
   a visitor pursuant to paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights.

6. Under paragraph 41, the maximum  time  limit  to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom as a visitor is six months. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
   in his approach to the appeal because he failed to  appreciate  that  the
   appellant wanted to  live  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  two  years  and
   therefore was not seeking entry clearance as a visitor. It  is  therefore
   clear that  the  appellant  has  made  an  application  under  the  wrong
   immigration rule.

7. The Judge noted that the appellant's right of appeal is limited to  human
   rights and race discrimination grounds virtue of s88A of the 2002 Act and
   has no right of appeal against the immigration decision. No  such  ground
   was raised in this appeal and therefore there was no valid appeal  before
   him to determine. He had no jurisdiction to allow the appellant's  appeal
   under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Right.



   8. I find that there is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal and I set it aside. The appellant  has  no  right  of  appeal
      under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules. It follows that there  is
      no valid appeal before me. That disposes of the appeal.



DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed as she has no right of appeal



Signed by

Mrs S Chana

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                   Dated this 23rd day  of
August 2017







