
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05143/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th August 2014                             |On 1st September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                              SOUMEYA KAIS IDIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency  and  avoidance  of  confusion  I
    shall continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. On  18th  June  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Petherbridge who  allowed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse entry clearance  as  a
    visitor in accordance with  the  provisions  of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The determination also covers the interests of  the
    appellant's three children who were referred to as  appellants  because
    their visitor applications had been refused  by  the  respondent  under
    paragraph 46A of the Immigration  Rules  in  line  with  their  mother.
    However, as the judge indicates in paragraph 18 of  the  determination,
    all three children had been granted  British  citizenship  and  so  any
    appeal by them would be redundant as they could  come  and  go  to  the
    United Kingdom from their home in Algeria as they pleased.

 3. In granting permission Judge Foudy noted that the respondent's  grounds
    argued that the judge had given insufficient reasons for  finding  that
    the appellant intended to leave the United Kingdom after a short visit.
     Judge  Foudy  noted  that  the  judge  had  referred  to  the  British
    citizenship of the appellant's children and their ability to enter  the
    United Kingdom as they wished but had not explained why he  found  that
    the appellant met the Immigration Rules.

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  me  I  heard  brief  submissions  from  both
    representatives.  A copy of the appellant's statement, submitted to the
    judge at the First-tier hearing, was  provided  to  Mr  Kandola  as  it
    appeared that this  had  not  been  seen  by  the  respondent  who  was
    unrepresented at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   In  this
    statement (paragraphs 4 and 5) the appellant explains  in  some  detail
    why she had no interest in remaining permanently in the United Kingdom.
     That is because her husband, the  sponsor,  also  lived  with  her  in
    Algeria where he has business interests which provided  money  for  the
    appellant and her children as needed.  The  statement  also  emphasises
    that the children, although British citizens, are  settled  in  Algeria
    where they  attend  school  and  the  appellant  and  sponsor  have  no
    intention of uprooting them from Algeria.

 5. After reading the statement Mr Kandola conceded that  the  respondent's
    grounds of application were wrong to suggest that the judge's  findings
    were based on speculation when there had been the appellant's statement
    before him.  Nevertheless, he indicated that it could  be  argued  that
    the appellant had no incentive to  return  because  she  had  no  other
    family members in Algeria.

 6. Mr Miah submitted that the judge had given  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusion that the appellant would return to Algeria after  her  visit
    because the judge's conclusion was clearly not based on speculation but
    the statement evidence of the appellant, herself.

 7. After considering the matter for a few moments I indicated that  I  was
    not satisfied that the determination showed an error on a point of  law
    and could stand.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

 8. Whilst the determination is relatively brief it is clear that the judge
    heard submissions from the appellant's representative who attended  the
    hearing and also read the witness statements which  had  been  provided
    including  that  of  the  appellant  (paragraph  17).   The  judge  was
    therefore entitled to reach the conclusion set out in paragraph 19 that
    the appellant had  brought  up  her  children  in  Algeria  where  they
    attended school and she  did  not  wish  to  disturb  them  from  their
    education taking into account that they would be entitled to visit  the
    United  Kingdom  whenever  they  needed  because   of   their   British
    nationality.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  judge  took  into
    consideration that the sponsor spent as much time in Algeria as he  did
    in the United Kingdom because of  his  business  interests  in  Algeria
    (paragraph 17).  The determination does not, therefore, show  an  error
    as the conclusions about incentive to return are adequately reasoned.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order nor  do  I  consider
one to be appropriate in this appeal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


