
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2016                    |On 02 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs ILKAY DELER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Miya
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul appeals with  permission  against
    a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole who in  a
    determination promulgated on 26 January 2016 allowed the appeal of  Mrs
    Ilkay Deler against a decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer   to
    refuse her entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 320 (7) A  on the basis that he believed that  the  appellant
    had exercised deception in her application.

2.    In this case I will refer to Mrs Ilkay Deler as the appellant  as  she
    was the appellant before the First-tier Judge.  Similarly I will  refer
    to the Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul as the respondent  as  he  was
    the respondent in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born  on  1  February  1964.   She
    applied for entry clearance stating that she wished to visit her son in
    Britain.  She was interviewed by the Entry Clearance  Officer  and  the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  stated  that  she  should  be  refused  under
    paragraph 320 on the basis that she had not made any reference  to  her
    daughter here and also because of the address which she had  given  for
    the place where she would stay during her visit. It  follows  from  the
    allegation that deception has been used that the appellant would not be
    able to enter Britain for ten years on the basis that  she  had  fallen
    foul of paragraph 320(7A) and (7B) of the Immigration Rules.

4.   Judge Wellesley-Cole  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  son  and
    daughter, and took into account evidence from the appellant by way of a
    witness statement and the grounds of appeal.  It was the view of  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole that no deception had been exercised, that  this  was  a
    genuine visit and that the Entry Clearance Officer had  been  wrong  to
    state that deception had been used.

5.   The judge allowed the appeal substantively.   She did  not  go  further
    to deal with the issue of human rights.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    appealed and made it quite clear when appealing that the issue  of  the
    judge's findings in relation to paragraph 320(7A) were  not  in  issue:
    the Entry Clearance Officer accepted that the judge had been correct to
    find that no deception had been used.  However, the grounds  of  appeal
    went to on to refer to Section 52 of The Crimes  and  Courts  Act  2013
    which had restricted the rights of appeal for visitors coming to  visit
    family  members  in  Britain.   Those  restrictions  applied   to   any
    application made on or after 25 June 2013.  This  application  was,  of
    course, made after that date.

6.   The Crimes  and  Courts  Act  2013  had  amended  Section  88A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to  remove  the  right  of
    appeal for persons visiting specified family members but it  did  leave
    in place the residual grounds in  respect  of  human  rights  and  race
    relations.

7.   There is an error of law in the determination of  Judge  Wellesley-Cole
    in that she erred in considering that she had jurisdiction in this case
    in respect of the  substantive  refusal.  I  therefore  set  aside  her
    decision.  Nevertheless, her findings that there had been no  deception
    have not been challenged.  Those findings make it  clear  that  if  the
    decision under Section 320(7A) is left in place the effect of my merely
    overturning Judge Wellesley-Cole's decision  there  would  be  a  clear
    injustice.

8.   It therefore falls to me to remake  the  decision.  It  has  been  very
    properly accepted by Mr Walker as indeed he accepted before the  First-
    tier Judge that human rights come into play.  There  is  a  clear  case
    that Article 8 is engaged in this case and that a decision to stop  the
    appellant coming to Britain under the provisions of paragraph 320  when
    it has been accepted that that paragraph had been  wrongly  invoked  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer would be entirely disproportionate.

9.   For that reason, and I accept that this is a somewhat unusual  case,  I
    having set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Wellesley-Cole,  remake  the
    decision and having dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction under
    the substantive grounds, make a decision on human rights  grounds  that
    this appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


