
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 December 2015                       |On 7 January 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - Abuja
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MRS CHIOMA GOODNESS ONUORAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr P Saini, Counsel instructed by Gans & Co
                             Solicitors LLP
For the Entry Clearance Officer:    Mr L Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team brings an appeal  on  behalf  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer (Abuja) from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  sitting  at  Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 21 April 2015) allowing on Article 8 grounds  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse  her  entry  clearance
    for the purposes of visiting her brother and his family in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction,
    and I do not  consider  that  the  claimant  requires  to  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 29 June 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Deans sitting as a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal refused permission as the judge had made a specific
    finding at paragraph [12] as to interference with family life,  and  he
    had  given  adequate  and  viable  reasons  for  this  decision.    The
    application indicated disagreement with the decision, but  the  grounds
    did not disclose an arguable error of law.

 3. On a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey took a different view.  On 13 August 2015 he granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred  in  concluding  that  Article
         8(1) was engaged or (if  it  was)  in  failing  when  conducting  a
         proportionality assessment to have regard to the relative  strength
         of the Article 8(1) ties."

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing before Judge Manuell the  claimant  was  represented  by
    Counsel, and there was no appearance by a Presenting Officer on  behalf
    of the Entry Clearance Officer.  The judge received oral evidence  from
    the sponsor, Mr Franklin Onuorah.  He  adopted  his  witness  statement
    dated 9 April 2015.  He  said  in  summary  that  the  purpose  of  his
    sister's visit was to keep up the family connection.   His  sister  had
    recently married but it was inconvenient for her husband to travel  and
    he was happy for her to make the trip alone.  Mr Onuorah had  lived  in
    the UK for eleven years and none of his family had  ever  been  to  see
    him.  He was  married  with  two  young  children.   The  claimant  was
    employed, and would be returning to work after her visit.

 5. In his subsequent decision, Judge  Manuell  set  out  his  findings  at
    paragraphs [10] onwards which I reproduce below:

         "10. The tribunal was satisfied  that  Mr  Onuorah  was  an  honest
             witness.  The tribunal  accepts  his  evidence  in  full.   In
             particular, the tribunal is  satisfied  that  his  sister  has
             strong ties Nigeria in  the  form  of  her  marriage  and  her
             employment.  The tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the  Appellant
             intends to return to Nigeria at the conclusion  of  her  brief
             visit to the United Kingdom.  Had there been a right of appeal
             against the decision under the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph
             41, the tribunal would have had no hesitation in allowing  it.



         11.  There is, however, only a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal under Article 8 ECHR.  The Appellant lives in Nigeria
             and so has no family life in the United Kingdom, or  at  least
             once which is maintained at a distance and which  the  refusal
             decision was argued not to interfere with.  There is, however,
             rather more to the appeal than that.

         12.  Beoku-Betts v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2008] UKHL 39 shows that in Article 8 ECHR family life  cases
             the family life of all persons affected by the  decision  must
             be taken into account.  The evidence showed that at least  one
             British Citizen is directly affected by  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer's decision, namely the Appellant's brother Mr Onuorah,
             as well as his British Citizen children.  The particular  form
             of family life which the Appellant enjoys with her brother  is
             necessarily limited as they are both  adults  with  their  own
             families but nonetheless the connection between them is  real.
             The tribunal finds on the facts of the appeal that the refusal
             decision is an interference with the family life of persons in
             the United Kingdom.  The fact that it is also an  interference
             with the Appellant's family life is not relevant as she is not
             present in the United Kingdom.

         13.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision is in  accordance  with
             the law, in the sense that there was power to  make  it.   The
             key issue in the  Razgar  [2004]  ULHL  27  analysis  for  the
             tribunal is proportionality; see Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry
             clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC).  While there  was  power  to
             make the decision, the tribunal finds that  the  decision  was
             incorrect and that the  Appellant's  application  should  have
             been  allowed.   That   must   have   a   major   bearing   on
             proportionality, in that the tribunal finds that the Appellant
             would have complied and will comply with her visa  conditions.
             The public  interest  under  Article  8.2  ECHR  is  satisfied
             because there was no evidence to show that  the  Appellant  is
             likely to breach her visa  conditions  or  otherwise  infringe
             United Kingdom law if she is permitted  to  visit  the  United
             Kingdom for a brief period as she declared she intended."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Tarlow adopted the line of reasoning contained in  the  renewed
    application for permission to appeal.  It is established case law  that
    family life within the meaning of Article 8 would  not  normally  exist
    between adult siblings, parents and adult children.  Where family  life
    does not exist, generally Article 8 will not  be  engaged.  Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 said at paragraph [25] that because there is no
    presumption of family life, family life is not established  between  an
    adult and his surviving parent or other siblings "unless something more
    exists than  normal  emotional  ties".   Reference  was  also  made  to
    paragraph [20] of Kugathas where the following was said:

         "Most of us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond  and
         whom we visit, or who visit us, from time to time; but none  of  us
         would say on these grounds alone that we share a family  life  with
         them in any sense capable of coming within the meaning and  purpose
         of Article 8."

 7. None of  the  criteria  identified  in  authorities  such  as  Kugathas
    appeared to be met in the present case, because the claimant was  found
    to have strong ties to Nigeria in the form of marriage.  Therefore  the
    claimant did not have family life with her family in the UK, such as to
    engage Article 8.

 8. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Saini adopted and developed the extensive
    Rule 24 response which had been settled by Mr Michael Biggs of Counsel.
     Contrary to the argument made in the grounds of appeal, whether family
    life exists for the purpose of Article 8 ECHR is a question of fact and
    degree, and there are no firm rules or presumptions applicable  when  a
    court is required to determine whether such family life exists: see for
    example Gissing (family life - adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT
    00160  (IAC)  at  paragraphs  [50]  to  [62],  affirmed  on  appeal  at
    paragraphs [45] and [46] (in Gissing [2013] 1WLR 24546).  In  assessing
    whether family life exists, it must be recalled that  the  family  life
    interests of others must be considered where appropriate: Beoku-Betts v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to conclude that  there  was
    family life which engaged Article 8 ECHR in all  the  circumstances  of
    the case.  The First-tier Tribunal was entitled the deference  afforded
    to any judicial finding of fact or exercise of discretion on appeal.

10. In the alternative, it was clear that the claimant's and the  sponsor's
    respective private life rights were interfered  with  by  the  decision
    appealed against in these proceedings, and therefore Article 8 ECHR was
    engaged on the basis of an interference  with  relevant  private  life.
    The settled threshold for engaging Article 8 ECHR private life  is  not
    difficult to surpass: AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 80 per Sedley LJ at paragraph 28.

11. Mr Saini referred me to the following passage in Mostafa (Article 8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) at paragraph [16]:

         "We regard it as  settled  law  that  in  an  Article  8  balancing
         exercise the rights of all those closely affected, not  only  those
         of the claimant, have to be considered.  It is our  view  that  the
         decision in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 is  to  be  followed  and
         that the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote  the  family
         life of those affected by the decision.  Undoubtedly  the  paradigm
         Article 8 entry clearance case concerns applicants seeking to  join
         close family members for the purposes of  settlement.   However  it
         cannot be excluded that where one party to a marriage  is  entitled
         to be in the United Kingdom a qualified  obligation  to  facilitate
         spousal unification for the limited purpose of a  short  visit  and
         sojourn may arise and does arise here.   Mrs  El-Shiekh  wanted  to
         return to her country of nationality (United Kingdom)  for  a  time
         and her husband  wanted  to  be  with  her,  not  with  a  view  to
         settlement but so that he could share her life and relationships in
         the United Kingdom.  The refusal decision had a material impact  on
         their right to enjoy family life.  He did not want to settle but to
         visit her, subject to  permissible  qualifications,  he  should  be
         entitled  to  do  that.   Whilst  it  would  almost  certainly   be
         proportionate to refuse him entry clearance if he  did  not  comply
         with the Rules his, and his wife's, desire to be  together  in  her
         home area, albeit for purposes of  a  visit,  are  very  human  and
         understandable.  Preventing that  would  not  be  a  'technical  or
         consequential interference' (see Sedley LJ in  VW  (Uganda)  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 5) and should be permitted, subject to  the  proportionate
         requirements of immigration control."

12. Mr Saini submitted that, on the  facts  found  by  Judge  Manuell,  the
    interference consequential upon the unmeritorious refusal  of  a  visit
    visa to the claimant was not technical or inconsequential.

13. Mr Saini also  drew  my  attention  to  Abasi  and  another  (visits  -
    bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT  463  (IAC),  a  decision  of  the
    President sitting with Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Doyle  in  Glasgow.
    Paragraph 1 of the head note reads as follows:

         "The refusal of a visa to foreign nationals seeking  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose of mourning with
         family members the recent death of a close  relative  and  visiting
         the  grave  of  the  deceased  is   capable   of   constituting   a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  rights  of  the  persons
         concerned under Article 8 ECHR."

14. The appellants were  nationals  of  Pakistan,  aged  29  and  21  years
    respectively.  They applied for entry clearance for a visa to enter the
    United Kingdom for a period of four weeks to visit their  grandfather's
    grave and to mourn with family members here.  Their appeals on  Article
    8 grounds were dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal as  the  effect  of
    the refusals was not to amount to a breach of the right to family  life
    under Article 8.  The appellant's close family members, including their
    parents, were in Pakistan, and that  was  where  they  had  established
    family life.  They had family members who had chosen to settle  in  the
    UK, including  three  uncles,  but  the  appellants  did  not  have  an
    established family life in the UK.

15. After reviewing a number of Strasbourg authorities, the Upper  Tribunal
    reached the following conclusion at paragraph [11];

         "As the decided cases of the EctHR make clear, the  FTT's  decision
         that the appellants' appeals did  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of
         Article 8 ECHR is unsustainable.  The judge's error was  driven  by
         an  impermissibly  narrow  approach  to  the  scope  of  Article  8
         protection and a concentration on the appellants'  family  life  in
         Pakistan, to the exclusion of both their family ties in the  United
         Kingdom and the central  purpose  of  their  proposed  visit.   The
         essence of the error was a failure to recognise that the particular
         aspect of private and family life invoked  by  the  appellants  was
         capable of being encompassed by Article 8 ECHR.  The protection, or
         benefit, which they were  asserting  had  the  potential  of  being
         protected by Article 8 ECHR."

16. The Tribunal continued in paragraph [12]:

         "The first question for the Tribunal is  whether  the  benefit,  or
         facility which the Secretary of State is requested to confer  -  in
         this case, an entry visa for the specific and time limited  purpose
         advanced  -  is  protected  by  Article  8.   If  this  yields   an
         affirmative answer, the second question  is  whether  the  impugned
         decision interferes with the claimant's right to respect to private
         and/or  family  life.   If   this   question   also   is   answered
         affirmatively, the enquiry then shifts to the territory of  Article
         8(2)  raising  the  third  question,  namely  whether  any  of  the
         specified legitimate aims is engaged.  If this produces a  negative
         answer a breach of Article 8 is thereby established."

17. In one of the authorities considered by the Tribunal, a mother asserted
    a failure by the  domestic  authorities  to  discharge  their  positive
    obligation to ensure effective respect for her private and family life,
    invoking the principle that:

         "[B]iological and social reality prevail over a  legal  presumption
         which ... flies in the face  of  both  established  facts  and  the
         wishes of those concerned without actually benefitting  anyone  (my
         emphasis)."

18. On the particular facts, the Tribunal  found  at  paragraph  [13]  that
    applying the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  to  the  factual  matrix,  the
    benefit or facility which the appellants were seeking of the  Secretary
    of State constituted a matter of private and family life  protected  by
    Article 8 ECHR,  and  that  the  decisions  of  the  ECO  refusing  the
    appellants' visas plainly interfered with the family and  private  life
    rights of the appellants and other family members in the UK:

         "In this context, we consider it appropriate to take  into  account
         the several members of  the  family  unit  affected  by  the  ECO's
         decisions."

19. Mr Saini submitted that the significance of this decision  is  that  it
    shows it is not  necessary  for  the  foreign  national  seeking  entry
    clearance for the  purposes  of  a  visit  to  have  more  than  normal
    emotional ties with family members here in order for Article  8  to  be
    engaged.

Discussion

20. Two different themes are  discernible  in  the  domestic  jurisprudence
    relating to Article  8  claims  in  the  context  of  family  visitors.
    Support for the restrictive approach taken by  the  Specialist  Appeals
    Team in the instant appeal is to be found in another passage of Mostafa
    and also in the decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  in  Adjei
    (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)

21. At paragraph [17] of Adjei, which was promulgated on 6 May 2015,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Southern said:

         "It is a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,  of  course,  whether
         relationships between adult relatives disclose sufficiently  strong
         ties such as to fall within the scope of Article 8.   Ties  between
         young adults who have  yet  to  establish  their  own  family  life
         separate from their parents may constitute family life: see Nasri v
         France 21 EHRR 458.  But this  claimant  has  established  her  own
         family life in Ghana with her partner and their daughter and  while
         her adult siblings in the United Kingdom have not yet done  so,  it
         is established by Advic v United Kingdom (1995) 20 EHRR CD125  that
         the protection of Article 8 does not extend to links between  adult
         siblings living apart  for  a  long  period  where  they  were  not
         dependent upon each other.  There is no evidence of such dependence
         between these  siblings  or  step-siblings.   Finally  it  is  well
         established that there must be more than the normal emotional  ties
         between adult relatives for family life to exist for  the  purposes
         of Article 8 of the ECHR: Kugathas v IAT [2003] EWCA Civ 31"

22. At the beginning of paragraph [24] of Mostafa  the  Presidential  panel
    said:

         "It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope.  We are, however, prepared to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope of  Article  8(1).   In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together."

23. But support for  a  more  elastic  approach  is  discernible  in  other
    passages from the authorities relied on by Mr Biggs  and  Mr  Saini  on
    behalf of the claimant.

24.  Where  a  person  is  seeking  entry  clearance  for  the  purpose  of
    settlement,  and  he  cannot  bring   himself   within   the   relevant
    requirements of the applicable rules, there is no good reason to depart
    from the orthodox requirement that for such  a  person  to  maintain  a
    family life claim outside the Rules, the Kugathas  dependency  criteria
    must be met.

25. However, where a person is only seeking entry clearance for  a  limited
    purpose such as a short visit, satisfaction of the Kugathas  dependency
    criteria  is  wholly  antithetical  to  such  a  person  being  granted
    admission under the Rules, as the incentive for him to  return  to  his
    home country is objectively much weaker than is the incentive  for  him
    to remain in this  country  with  the  family  member  on  whom  he  is
    emotionally  dependent.   In  addition,  provided  that  the  applicant
    complies with the requirements of a visit visa, there is  no  potential
    downside from an immigration  control  perspective,  whereas  a  person
    admitted for the purposes of settlement is potentially a future  burden
    on the taxpayer.

26. In conclusion, I am not persuaded that on the current state of the  law
    Judge Manuell misdirected himself in finding that Article 8(1) ECHR was
    engaged (on family and/or private life grounds), and in thus  answering
    questions one and two of the Razgar test in  favour  of  the  claimant.
    There was sufficient evidence before him to find that  the  prospective
    interference was more than technical or inconsequential.  The  claimant
    did not have an established family life with the sponsor and his family
    in the United Kingdom, as the judge acknowledged. But this was  not  an
    essential requirement, contrary to what is asserted in the  grounds  of
    appeal.

27. Once the judge found that Article 8(1) was engaged, as it was  open  to
    him to do, there was no error in him failing to balance the strength of
    the claim under Article 8(1) against the public interest  consideration
    arising under Article 8(2).

28. It is true that, as stated by the  Tribunal  in  Mostafa  at  paragraph
    [23], a finding  by  the  Tribunal  that  an  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements of the Rules would not necessarily lead to a finding  that
    the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  is  disproportionate  to  the
    proper purpose of enforcing immigration control.

29. But on the facts found by  the  judge,  neither  of  the  two  negative
    considerations discussed by that Tribunal in Mostafa at paragraph  [21]
    was in play.  The claimant had not contributed to the application being
    refused by presenting inaccurate information or by  omitting  something
    material or committing some comparable misdemeanour.

30. Another relevant consideration identified by the Tribunal in Mostafa at
    paragraph [21] is the impact of a refusal on relationships  that  "have
    to be promoted".  The Tribunal observed that refusal of entry clearance
    will not always interfere disproportionately with such a  relationship.



31. Judge Manuell was not clearly wrong to proceed on the premise that  the
    relationship between British national children and their Nigerian  aunt
    should be promoted, and similarly that the sibling relationship between
    the adult claimant and the adult sponsor should also be promoted.

32. Given that the claimant satisfied the requirements  of  the  Rules  for
    entry clearance as a visitor, the refusal decision thwarted the  wishes
    of those concerned without actually benefitting any one, including  the
    general public.  Although the family ties between the claimant and  the
    sponsor  were  weak  (having  regard  to  the  fact  that  neither  was
    emotionally dependent on the other), there was no countervailing public
    interest  in  maintaining  the  claimant's  exclusion  as  a  temporary
    visitor.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

