
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: VA/05392/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On October 6, 2015                   |On October 8, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MR ARAFA ABDELRASOUL ELADY AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Ms Patel (Sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  The background to this  case  is
    that the appellant and sponsor are friends. The appellant applied for a
    visit visa to come to the United Kingdom for  six  weeks  on  July  14,
    2014.

 3. The respondent refused the application finding the  appellant  did  not
    satisfy the relevant requirements of the Rules and appeal  rights  were
    limited under section 84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on September 4, 2014.

 5. The matter was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Young on April
    23, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on May  12,  2015  the  Tribunal
    allowed his appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The respondent applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  May  14,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred by considering the appeal  under  the
    Rules in circumstances where there was no right of appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Grimmett on July 8, 2015 on the basis that the Tribunal  had  erred  in
    allowing the appeal under the Rules.

 8. Ms Patel, on behalf of the appellant, filed a Rule 24 response on  July
    29, 2015 and I have had had regard to this document.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

10. Having read the papers in this appeal and in particular the  Tribunal's
    decision I am satisfied that the Tribunal  made  an  error  in  law  by
    allowing this appeal under the Immigration Rules.

11. Section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act limits the right of  appeal  in  entry
    clearance cases to human rights grounds or race discrimination  issues.
    Race discrimination was never raised in the original grounds or at  the
    hearing. This was a private visit in the sense  that  the  sponsor  and
    appellant were friends but were not related. They are  not  family  for
    the purposes of the Rules.

12. The Tribunal erred in allowing the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
    because it had no power to make that finding. The Tribunal was entitled
    to consider the matter under ECHR legislation, as that had been  raised
    in the grounds of appeal, and should have either allowed  or  dismissed
    the appeal only on that basis.

13. I indicated to Ms Patel that although I had considered despite her Rule
    24 statement there was an error in law and I  set  aside  the  decision
    under the Immigration Rules.

14. I raised with Mr Bramble what his approach to human rights would be and
    he referred me to a raft of decisions including Mostafa (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC), Adjei (visit  visas-article  8)
    [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC) and Kaur (visit visa appeals; article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 487 (IAC).

15. At paragraph [24] of Mostafa the Tribunal stated-

         "...We are, however, prepared to say but it will only  be  in  very
         unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
         will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
         within the scope of article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely
         to be limited to cases where the relationship is  that  of  husband
         and wife or other close life partners or a parent and  minor  child
         and even then it will not necessarily be extended to  cases  where,
         for example, the proposed visit is based  on  a  whim  or  not  add
         significantly  to  the  time  that  the   people   involved   spent
         together...."

16. It is clear from this decision that very few  cases  will  satisfy  the
    test that would enable a successful appeal under article 8.

17. Moreover, it is common ground that the government removed any rights of
    appeal for visitors many years ago  by  bringing  in  legislation  that
    restricted appeals to certain categories of family members.  Whilst  Ms
    Patel sought to persuade me that she was a family member I am satisfied
    that she is not  a  family  member  for  the  purposes  of  either  the
    Immigration Rules or article 8.

18. There is nothing raised in her grounds that would engage article 8  for
    private life purposes. There is  no  reason  for  private  life  to  be
    engaged in circumstances where both parties are unrelated and  live  in
    separate countries and their only contact has been when the sponsor has
    met them outside the United Kingdom and can continue to do so.

19. Whilst I sympathise with the sponsor at her frustration  of  the  legal
    system there is no basis to consider granting this appeal under article
    8.

20. In her Rule 24 response Ms Patel referred to the case  of  Moon  (Human
    rights, Entry clearance, Proportionality) [2005] UKIAT 112 in which the
    Tribunal confirmed that the only article invoked in an entry  clearance
    appeal under article 8 was family life.

21. Accordingly, I find that any appeal under ECHR legislation is doomed to
    failure and I dismiss of this appeal.

    DECISION

22. There was a material error.  I set  aside  the  original  decision  and
    remake the decision and dismiss the appeal under ECHR legislation.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
