
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
VA/25395/2012
                                                               VA/29443/2012
                                                               VA/29449/2012
                                                               VA/29451/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 June 2013                             |On 5 June 2013             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MRS SHAHIDA NASREEN
                               MISS IRSA AMNA
                             MISS ALISHAH FARJA
                              MR CHEEMA SARMAD
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellants: Ms E Daykin of
           counsel instructed by Longfellow solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr C Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born respectively on 1 January
      1966, 24 February 1998, 20 July 2000 and 19 January  2009.  The  first
      appellant is the mother of the other appellants. I will refer  to  her
      as the appellant and to them as the appellants. They have  been  given
      permission to appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Goodrich  who  dismissed  their  appeals  against   the   respondent's
      decisions of 10 July 2012 to refuse to grant them entry  clearance  to
      the United Kingdom as family visitors. The applications  were  refused
      under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  320(7B),  41  and  46  of   the
      Immigration Rules.  Their  sponsor  is  the  appellant's  mother,  Mrs
      Khursheed Bibi.


   2. The first reason for refusal was the respondent's conclusion that  the
      appellant had used deception in connection with an application made on
      16 July 2008. She had submitted a false bank  statement  and  had  not
      challenged this conclusion or the decision. Therefore, under paragraph
      320(7B) of the  Immigration  Rules  any  subsequent  application  made
      before 16 July 2018 would be automatically refused. The second  reason
      was that the evidence submitted did not provide an accurate picture of
      the appellant's and her  husband's  financial  circumstances.  If  the
      appellant was to travel to the UK with her children  but  without  her
      husband,  leaving  him  in  Pakistan,   then   his   whereabouts   and
      circumstances were  not  clear.  The  respondent  concluded  that  the
      appellants had not shown that they had sufficient ties to Pakistan  or
      that there was a sufficient incentive to leave the United  Kingdom  at
      the end of the proposed visit. Her application was also refused  under
      the provisions of paragraph 41 (i) and  (ii).  The  other  appellants'
      applications were refused under the provisions of paragraph 46.


   3. The appellants appealed and  the  judge  heard  their  appeals  on  28
      February 2013. Both parties were represented. The sponsor and her  son
      attended the hearing. Because the  interpreter  "was  not  immediately
      available" the sponsor's written evidence  was  admitted  without  her
      being cross-examined. Her son gave oral evidence based on his  written
      witness statement prepared that day.


   4. The judge found that it was for the respondent to prove the allegation
      which formed the basis of the refusal under paragraph 320(7B) and that
      she had failed to do so. However, the judge went on to say  that  this
      did not amount to a finding that the bank statements submitted in July
      2008 were genuine.


   5. In relation to the appeals under paragraph 41 and 46 and after  making
      detailed findings between paragraphs 27 and 37,  the  judge  said,  in
      paragraph 37; "the subsistence of the marriage is a  matter  on  which
      the appellant has placed emphasis as providing an incentive to  return
      but no evidence has been adduced from  the  husband  even  though  his
      whereabouts and circumstances were placed in issue. I am not satisfied
      as  to  the  appellant's  marital  circumstances  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities and in my view this is a material factor in relation  to
      her incentive to return." She concluded that  the  appellant  had  not
      shown, to the standard of the balance of probabilities, that  she  met
      the requirements of paragraph 41(i)  and  (i).  The  other  appellants
      failed in line with their mother. It had not been argued that they met
      the requirements for independent travel without their mother.


   6. The judge went on to consider the  Article  8  human  rights  grounds,
      concluding  that  the  refusal  would  not   be   a   disproportionate
      interference with the appellants'  human  rights.  She  dismissed  the
      appeals under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   7. There are a number of grounds of appeal. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge
      granted permission to appeal in relation to all of them, whilst of the
      view that there were  only  two  grounds  with  identifiable  arguable
      merit. They were firstly, that the judge may  have  erred  in  law  by
      failing to put to the sponsor what she found to be inconsistencies  in
      relation  to  the  husband's  earnings  and  the  deposits  into   the
      appellant's bank account. Secondly, by failing to put to  the  sponsor
      the inconsistency on which she relied as to the husband's address.


   8. Ms Daykin informed me that the appellants only wished to rely  on  the
      grounds which related to the husband's circumstances, status,  address
      and employment. The other grounds were not pursued.


   9. Ms Daykin submitted that there was a wealth of documentation  to  show
      that the appellant and her husband were married to each other and that
      they were the parents of the three children. For example her  passport
      at page 6 of the bundle, the family  certificate  (page  27)  and  the
      medical letter (page 64). In her witness statement the  sponsor  said;
      "my all three daughters are happily married in living in Pakistan with
      their families". Whilst it  was  the  case  that  the  husband's  bank
      statements showed a different address to that given by the  appellant,
      the judge recorded a plausible explanation in paragraph 34  where  she
      referred to evidence of two homes owned by the family.  If  the  judge
      had a concern about the different addresses then she should  have  put
      the point to the witness.


  10. Ms Daykin said that the bank statements referred to by  the  judge  in
      paragraph 36; "that arrived so late that  no  opportunity  existed  to
      verify their contents" were in fact the originals of  documents  which
      had already been submitted as  copies.  The  judge's  comments  as  to
      inconsistencies should have been addressed in the light of the  number
      of positive findings and the evidence  of  the  children's  continuing
      schooling in Pakistan.


  11. Ms Daykin said that the judge's conclusions as to the husband's salary
      (paragraph 33 of the  determination)  should  have  been  put  to  the
      witness, as a matter of common law fairness. I asked Ms Daykin whether
      the appellants had been put on notice as to the respondent's doubts by
      the statement in the refusal letter  that  "the  whereabouts  of  your
      husband, and his circumstances, are not clear". She said that this was
      no more than a very broad allegation.


  12. Mr Avery accepted that the grounds  were  now  narrowed  down  to  the
      circumstances of  the  appellant's  husband.  He  submitted  that  the
      judge's findings in paragraph 35 to 37 were sound. The refusal  letter
      had put the appellant's on clear notice as to the points  relating  to
      the husband which they needed to address. He  emphasised  that  at  no
      stage had any statement from the husband been provided. If, as was now
      suggested, the reason why  there  was  a  different  address  for  the
      husband on his bank statements was because the family owned two  homes
      then there was no statement from anyone, in particular  the  appellant
      or the husband, to say that this was the case.


  13. Ms Daykin did not reply. I reserved my determination.


  14. I find that the refusal letter made it clear that the  respondent  did
      not accept  the  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellants  as  to  the
      husband's employment and income, his whereabouts or circumstances. The
      appellants  have  been  legally  represented  throughout  the   appeal
      process, by the same solicitors, and were represented at  the  hearing
      by competent counsel. They would have been well aware of the  need  to
      try and fill  the  gaps  in  the  evidence  as  well  as  the  obvious
      inconsistencies or unexplained factors referred to  by  the  judge.  I
      agree with the judge who said, (in  paragraph  36)  "the  reasons  for
      refusal very clearly placed in issue the whereabouts and circumstances
      of the appellant's husband". It was not unfair for the  judge  not  to
      put these points to anyone at the  hearing,  whether  the  appellants'
      counsel or the one witness who gave oral evidence, the sponsor's  son.
      In any event he was not the person obviously best qualified to  answer
      these questions. Those best qualified to answer were the appellant and
      her husband. The appellant had  sufficient  notice  of  the  gaps  and
      inconsistencies in the evidence and could have addressed them  by  way
      of a witness statement in advance of the  hearing.  However,  what  is
      most remarkable is the total lack of any witness  statement  from  the
      husband. The judge took this into account, in paragraph  34,  and  was
      entitled to do so. It is a significant factor, the more so because  of
      the lack of any explanation for his failure to provide evidence if, as
      is suggested, he lived with the appellant in domestic harmony and this
      provided a strong incentive for the appellants to return and live with
      him in Pakistan.


  15. The judge  did  not  simply  follow  the  respondent's  reasoning  and
      conclusions. She made her own independent assessment  in  the  process
      reaching some different conclusions from the respondent, favourable to
      the appellants. However, she made a proper assessment of the  evidence
      in the round including the factors favourable to the appellants before
      reaching conclusions open to her on all  the  evidence.  There  is  no
      error of law and I uphold her decision.









      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 4 June
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

