
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05343/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 26th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                          mr Imran Ul Hassan Abbasi
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Abbasi (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  brought  by  the  Appellant  in
    respect  of  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Cox)
    promulgated on  19th  May  2015,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 23rd July 2014 refusing  to  grant  him  entry
    clearance to come to the UK as a visitor.

 2. The Appellant had applied for entry clearance in  order  to  visit  his
    brother (the Sponsor) and his sister in the UK.  It appeared  that  his
    main concern was to see his brother and do some sightseeing because  in
    completing his entry clearance application form he said;

         "I intend to meet my real elder brother and his family as  well  as
         to see Great Britain - beauty and historical places".

 3. The application was refused without the  Appellant  being  interviewed.
    According to the refusal notice, it was concluded that he did not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration  Rules  because  he
    had failed to show that he intended to leave the UK at the end  of  the
    proposed visit.  Detailed grounds of appeal were lodged in which it was
    contended that the relevant requirements of Rule 41 were met  and  that
    the decision amounted to a  breach  of  the  Appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 4. The appeal was listed for an oral hearing.  Of  course,  the  Appellant
    being out of the country  was  unable  to  attend.   His  Sponsor  (his
    brother) did  not  attend  and  the  Appellant  was  unrepresented.   A
    Presenting Officer attended on behalf of the Respondent.  Judge Cox, in
    the circumstances, decided to proceed.  He noted that the appeal  could
    only be pursued on human rights grounds, which was clearly correct, but
    said that there was no evidence before him to  demonstrate  that  there
    was family life within the meaning of Article 8 between  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor.  He  concluded,  therefore,  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to show any human rights breach such that the appeal had  to  be
    dismissed.

 5. There followed an application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The basis of it was that there had been  unfairness  because
    the Sponsor  had  contacted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  request  an
    adjournment but no such adjournment  had  been  given.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis
    that it was possible that an adjournment request had  been  overlooked.
    What was clear  was  that  no  such  request  had  reached  Judge  Cox.
    Permission having  been  granted  the  matter  came  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 6. At the hearing before me the Sponsor told me that he  had  sent  an  e-
    mail, via his mobile telephone, to the First-tier Tribunal  seeking  an
    adjournment.  He had done so because his  grandmother  had  fallen  ill
    which necessitated him having to travel to Pakistan to  see  her.   The
    First-tier Tribunal  had  sent  an  e-mailed  reply  in  which  it  was
    indicated that they would "sort things out".

 7. In response to some questions put by  me  the  Sponsor  said  that  the
    Appellant is his younger brother.  He  is  married.   The  Sponsor  has
    lived in the UK for some eighteen years.  He last saw the Appellant  in
    Pakistan around the time of the appeal hearing before  Judge  Cox  (the
    appeal was heard on 7th May 2015) and that, prior  to  that,  they  had
    seen each other in either 2012 or 2013.  The family are very close.  It
    is not necessary for the Appellant to visit the Sponsor but the Sponsor
    would like the Appellant to see his house.  They are brothers  and  are
    close but no more than that.  The visit is not really needed.

 8. I did not find it necessary to hear anything further from  the  Sponsor
    or anything from Mr Diwnycz.

 9. I found the Sponsor to be entirely straightforward and credible.  There
    is no record of his having made an e-mail adjournment request  but,  my
    having found him to be credible, I am quite happy to accept that he did
    so.  It appears, then, that that request was not  acted  upon  so  that
    there was unfairness in the hearing proceeding in his absence although,
    of course, that was not the fault of  Judge  Cox.   However,  as  noted
    above, an appeal against a  refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor can now only be brought and can only succeed  on  human  rights
    grounds.  On the facts of this case the only article of the ECHR  which
    can conceivably have relevance is Article 8 which affords  a  qualified
    protection to the right to respect for family life.  There  is,  as  is
    well-established, a five stage process involved in a  consideration  of
    article 8 arguments.  Those five stages encompass, the asking of  these
    questions;

      a) Is there any interference with family life  brought  about  by  the
         decision under challenge?

      b) If so, is that interference of such gravity as to engage Article 8?

      c) Is any such interference lawful?

      d) Is any such interference proportionate?

      e) Is any such interference in pursuance of a legitimate aim?

10. This is a relationship between two adult brothers.   I  appreciate  the
    Appellant also has a sister in the UK but I did not hear  any  evidence
    from her (she was not present at the hearing) and,  as  indicated,  the
    Appellant said the main purpose was to see his brother  (the  Sponsor).
    I accept that they are a close family but the Sponsor was not  able  to
    identify any factors which would  point  to  their  relationship  being
    anything other than  a  normal  relationship  between  adult  brothers.
    There  is,  for  example,  no  indication  of  any  unusual   emotional
    dependency.  The two brothers live in separate countries.  The evidence
    of the Sponsor shows that he is able to visit the Appellant in Pakistan
    so that the refusal of the visit visa has not  prevented  the  periodic
    ongoing contact which they have, continuing.

11. I appreciate there is authority to say that a consideration of  whether
    the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  are  met  is  an  important
    component of an  Article  8  consideration.   However,  there  is  also
    authority pointing to the fact that the first sorts of questions to  be
    asked will be whether Article 8 is engaged and, if so, whether there is
    any interference with Article 8 rights.  On the basis of the  Sponsor's
    very frank evidence I would conclude that, in fact, there is  no  basis
    to concluded that the decision under appeal does interfere with Article
    8 rights.  Further, even if does, there is nothing to  show  that  that
    interference is of such gravity as to engage Article 8.

12. In all of the above circumstances whilst  I  am  prepared  to  set  the
    decision of Judge Cox aside on the basis of procedural unfairness I  go
    on to make the, in my view, inevitable decision that the appeal must be
    dismissed because Article 8 is not engaged.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve an  error  of  law.
    It is set aside.

14. I re-make the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

15. No anonymity order is made


Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

