
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        VA/05055/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 11 June 2014        On 12 June 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                    Lagos
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                       Symphorosa Otunuya Otike-Odibe
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                                incorporating
                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

   1. The Respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  23  August  1967.  An
      application for entry clearance as a visitor was refused  for  reasons
      set out in a Notice of Immigration Decision  dated  19  February  2013
      with reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.


   2. The Respondent appealed this decision. His appeal was allowed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge after consideration without a hearing
      - 'on the papers' - for reasons set out in a determination promulgated
      on 11 April 2014.


   3. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal on the ground that  the  First  tier  Tribunal  had  no
      jurisdiction to consider the appeal because the  immigration  decision
      under appeal had been withdrawn by an Entry  Clearance  Manager  on  3
      December 2013, and the Tribunal duly notified.  Permission  to  appeal
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 6 May 2014.


   4. There was no appearance by or on behalf of Mr Otike-Odibi today. I  am
      satisfied that due notice of the hearing was given. No explanation for
      non-attendance has been received by the Tribunal. It is  to  be  noted
      that Mr Otike-Odibi had requested a 'paper' hearing before the  First-
      tier Tribunal. In any event I am satisfied  that  Mr  Otike-Odibi  has
      been afforded an opportunity  to  attend  the  hearing  by  way  of  a
      representative or his nominated sponsor, and in  any  event  has  been
      afforded an opportunity to forward to the Tribunal any representations
      he might wish to make in the appeal. In all  the  circumstances  I  am
      satisfied that it is appropriate to proceed with  the  appeal  in  his
      absence.


   5. The Appellant herein - the Entry Clearance Officer  -  challenges  the
      decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  for  want  of  jurisdiction.  In
      support of the application for permission to appeal an email  exchange
      between the Appellant and the 'ECO Contact' of the First-tier Tribunal
      was produced, together with a document headed 'Withdrawal of Decision'
      and sub-headed 'Rule 17 - Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)
      Rules 2005 for the First-tier Tribunal'.


   6. The Withdrawal of Decision includes  the  Respondent's  name  and  the
      appeal reference, and is in the following terms:

"The decision to refuse the above named entry clearance as a FAMILY  VISITOR
      has now been overturned by the Entry Clearance Manager/Entry Clearance
      Officer on review. I am notifying the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration
      and Asylum Chamber) that the decision to which this appeal relates has
      been withdrawn. Consequently, there is no valid  immigration  decision
      for the applicant to appeal."


   7. The Withdrawal of Decision is dated 3 December 2013, and it is evident
      that it was forwarded to the Tribunal by email  on  4  December  2013.
      There is an email response from the Tribunal stating  "Thank  you  for
      your email. Please be advised that our records have now  been  updated
      accordingly."


   8. For reasons that are  unclear  the  Withdrawal  of  Decision  and  the
      exchange of emails had not been copied into  the  court  file  at  the
      relevant time, and the file was not otherwise marked to  indicate  the
      withdrawal of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision. It follows  that
      because of this administrative error Judge Petherbridge  proceeded  to
      determine the appeal in ignorance of the fact of the withdrawal of the
      underlying decision.


   9. In my judgement the Withdrawal of Decision dated 3 December  2013  was
      sufficient notification such that the appeal  was  to  be  treated  as
      withdrawn, pursuant to  rule  17(2)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. Pursuant to section 104(1)(b) of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 there was then no  longer
      a  pending  appeal.  It  follows  that  Judge  Petherbridge   had   no
      jurisdiction to consider and determine the appeal.


  10. In such circumstances I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is flawed for error of law and requires to be set aside.


  11. In circumstances where the underlying decision has been  withdrawn  it
      is not necessary to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal.  However,
      pursuant to rule 17(3) it is appropriate that the Tribunal  now  serve
      on the parties a notice that the appeal has been  recorded  as  having
      been withdrawn - which should have been done in December 2013.


  12. Accordingly this document is to be treated as such a notice.


Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.


  14. Pursuant  to  rule  17(3)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 notice is  hereby  given  that  the  appeal  is
      recorded as having been withdrawn by reason  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer having notified the Tribunal that the decision  to  which  the
      appeal relates has been withdrawn.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 June 2014
