
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/05309/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 7 July 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr TAHIR ABBAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Asfaw, Counsel (instructed by M-R Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 4 June 2015  against
         the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Iain Ross who
         had allowed the Respondent's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
         against refusal of  his  entry  clearance  application  made  under
         paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules to visit his uncle and  other
         relatives in the United Kingdom.   The  decision  and  reasons  was
         promulgated on 13 February 2015.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Pakistan, born  on  15  December
         1983.  His entry clearance application was refused under  paragraph
         41 and also  under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         because of a previous application which was  deemed  by  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer to have relied in  part  on  a  false  employer's
         letter.  As the judge correctly noted, the  Respondent's  right  of
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  restricted  (for  practical
         purposes) to human rights grounds.  The judge found that the  Entry
         Clearance Officer's decision interfered with the development of the
         Respondent's private life rights but not his family life rights. As
         part of the proportionality assessment, the judge  found  that  the
         refusal under paragraph 320(7B) was not sustainable.  He found that
         the Respondent was a genuine visitor and that  the  refusal  was  a
         disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.

    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had erred in law when finding that although
         there was no family life between the  Appellant  and  his  sponsors
         (his uncle and grandmother), the  concept  of  private  life  could
         include the development  of  relationships  of  that  nature  under
         Article 8 ECHR.  It was arguable that the judge erred when  finding
         that the refusal decision constituted an interference.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error of  law
         were found.

    Submissions - error of law

    5.     Mr Bramble for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  There was a  finding
         of no family life which was not challenged. Mostafa (Article  8  in
         entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  112  (IAC)  and  Adjei  (visit  visas
         -Article 8) were the key authorities.  They showed that only family
         life  between  the  first  degree  of  relationship  could  be   of
         sufficient importance to justify a proportionality  finding  in  an
         appellant's favour.  The Appellant  had  no  private  life  in  the
         United Kingdom.  The decision and reasons should be set  aside  and
         the appeal remade and dismissed.

    6.     Ms Asfaw submitted that the Upper Tribunal authorities were  not
         of great assistance.  It should be noted that in Mostafa (Article 8
         in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) the  Appellant  had  been
         unrepresented and the value of such a decision as a  precedent  was
         limited.  There were obiter remarks.   Private  life  was  a  broad
         concept.  Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 approved Pretty  v  United  Kingdom
         (2002) 35 EHRR 1, paragraph 61, where the court held the expression
         covered "the physical and psychological integrity of a person"  and
         went on to observe  that  "Article  8  also  protects  a  right  to
         personal development,  and  the  right  to  establish  and  develop
         relationships with other human beings and the outside world."  What
         was the meaning and purpose of the intended visit?   Was  there  an
         alternative?  What was proposed by the Respondent  was  a  stay  of
         short  duration  which  was   relevant   to   the   proportionality
         assessment.  The contrast with settlement was obvious.  Indeed,  an
         argument often deployed by the Secretary  of  State  when  refusing
         settlement claims based on Article 8  ECHR  family  life  was  that
         family could be maintained by means of modern communication and  by
         visits.

    7.     Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630 was a recent review  of  the  relevant
         family life authorities. Family life between adult relatives was  a
         question of fact.  It was not confined to family life in the United
         Kingdom in an immigration law context.   The  judge's  findings  on
         family life were correct.  In practical terms, the judge had  noted
         that the Respondent's grandmother was 85 years old and  was  unable
         to travel to Pakistan alone.  The Respondent had travelled  to  the
         United Kingdom and returned to Pakistan no less  than  four  times.
         He denied the use of false documents and the judge had found in the
         Respondent's favour when conducting the  proportionality  exercise.
         The tribunal should not interfere with his decision.

    8.     In reply, Mr Bramble indicated that the Secretary of  State  had
         not specifically challenged the judge's  paragraph  320(7)  of  the
         Immigration Rules finding in the  Respondent's  favour.   The  real
         issue was the judge's approach to private life.

    9.     The tribunal reserved its determination which now follows.

    No material error of law finding

    10.    The Upper Tribunal's attention to the limited right of appeal in
         visit visa appeals reflects the difficulties which that  limitation
         has presented in practice.  The idea of seeking a  judicial  review
         of an adverse visit visa decision where an appellant contends  that
         the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules  have  in
         fact been met calls to mind sledgehammers and nuts. It is  also  of
         some significance that entry clearance  applications  attract  fees
         which an aggrieved applicant will not wish to  pay  a  second  time
         unnecessarily.  Hence the Upper Tribunal has endeavoured to explain
         how compliance with the Immigration Rules may be factored into  the
         proportionality assessment, provided of course that Article 8  ECHR
         is engaged at all.  As Miss Asfaw pointed out in the course of  her
         well prepared submissions, the value of Mostafa (above) is  however
         limited by the fact that legal argument was  heard  only  from  the
         Secretary of State in that appeal.  The value  and  extent  of  the
         argument in Adjei (above) may also have been  limited:  see,  e.g.,
         [9]  of  the  determination.   Both  decisions,  were,  of   course
         promulgated after Judge Ross's decision.   Adjei  may  be  seen  as
         vindicating his approach.

    11.    Singh (above), also decided after Judge Ross had promulgated his
         decision  and  reasons,  reiterates   from   a   survey   of   ECHR
         jurisprudence that Article 8 ECHR in both its  private  and  family
         life aspects is not territorially confined to persons in the United
         Kingdom.  Family life between adults is a question of  fact  to  be
         determined in each case.

    12.    The judge's treatment of the evidence was thorough  and  he  set
         out his essential findings with care.  Neither party has challenged
         his finding that there was no family life in Article 8  ECHR  terms
         between the sponsors and the Respondent.  Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ
         31 which the judge cited was approved in Singh (above).  The  judge
         gave sustainable reasons for finding that the relationship  between
         the sponsors and the Respondent amounted to a form of private  life
         life; see, e.g., [7]  of  the  decision  and  reasons.   The  judge
         explained why he found Article 8 ECHR was  engaged.   At  [11]  the
         judge accurately and succinctly summarised the key  authorities  to
         which Ms Asfaw referred: see [6], above of this determination.   He
         found that there was a real connection between  the  parties  which
         the Respondent had good reason to wish to sustain and develop.   In
         the case of the grandmother in particular there  was  no  realistic
         alternative to his visiting her because of her age and infirmity.

    13.    Consideration of paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules  was
         a vital element of  the  proportionality  assessment.   Mr  Bramble
         rightly accepted that the judge's findings at [8] of  his  decision
         and reasons were open to him.

    14.    There was  no  sense  in  which  the  judge  was  following  the
         impermissible approach identified in Patel v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
         741 of seeking to use Article 8 ECHR as a general  remedial  power.
         The public interest was adequately  considered  by  the  judge  who
         examined the immigration control aspect in detail  and  found  that
         the restrictions on the visa would be observed,  as  shown  by  the
         travel history of the Respondent and his  current  strong  ties  to
         Pakistan.  It was not a settlement  situation  when  other  matters
         would have arisen.  There was here no suggestion of  any  resulting
         expense to the public purse.

    15.    There would have been no point  in  parliament's  provision  for
         continuing Article 8 ECHR appeals in  visit  visas  despite  ending
         full appeals under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules unless  it
         was accepted that  not  every  situation  can  be  covered  by  the
         Immigration Rules: see SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  for  the
         latest authority in this field.  Successful appeals  will  be  rare
         but the present appeal provides an  example.   The  judge  properly
         found that the interference with the Respondent's private life  was
         neither justified nor proportionate.

    16.    The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
         of law in the decision and  reasons  and  there  is  no  basis  for
         interfering with the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
