
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/05472/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st October 2015             |On the 3rd November 2015              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MR KWABENA ADU GYAMFI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant  (the  Secretary  of  State):   Mr  Wilding  (Home  Office
                                        Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent/Claimant Mr Gyamfi:  Mr Ngwuosha (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade promulgated on the 2nd
    June 2015. Throughout this decision, the Appellant will be referred  to
    as the as "the Secretary of State" and Mr Gyamfi will be referred to as
    "the Claimant", for the purposes of clarity.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana who was born on the 30th  December
    1969. On the 5th August 2014 he applied  for  Entry  Clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a tourist visitor, intending to enter the UK  on  the
    26th August 2014 in order to rest for 7 days  and  to  take  time  off,
    before travelling onward to New York.  On  the  12th  August  2014  his
    application for Entry Clearance as a tourist visitor was  refused,  and
    he appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade  at  Harmondsworth
    on the 28th May 2015, on the papers. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found within his decision that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a
    private or family  life  which  was  subject  to  interference  by  the
    decision, nor the gravity which engaged Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  and
    therefore dismissed the appeal on the basis  of  the  ECHR,  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,  specifically  under
    paragraph 320 (7A) and 320 (7B) to the extent  of  remitting  the  case
    back to the Respondent for  reconsideration.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at [27] found that on the evidence  the  Appellant  was  married,
    having married in 1990 and that his application form had been completed
    by administrators, and that although it had been put on the  form  that
    the Appellant was single, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  that
    no deception had been exercised and there was no dishonesty on part  of
    the Appellant in that the UKBA form, unlike the previous Canadian  form
    that he had filled in, did not lend itself to  being  able  to  specify
    that the Appellant had been married by means of a  customary  marriage.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered as the Appellant  had  in  his
    Grounds of Appeal asserted that the decision was not in accordance with
    the  Immigration  Rules,  he  was  entitled  to  appeal   against   the
    application of Rule 320 (7A) and 320 (7B) which  affected  his  current
    and possible future entry into the UK and as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had misrepresented his marital status in 2009  and  2014  and
    whether or not this amounted to deception. It was against this decision
    that the Secretary of State has appealed.

 3. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially misdirected himself in law, in that it is argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
    appeal beyond the residual grounds specified by section 84 (1) (b)  and
    (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  namely,  an
    appeal on human rights and race relations grounds and that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not have jurisdiction to  consider  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules as to  whether  or  not  the  decision  was
    "otherwise not in accordance with the law". It is argued  that  changes
    were made by the Crime and Courts Act 2013, and that section 52 of  the
    Act commenced on the 25th June 2013, so as to amend section 88A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to  remove  the  right  of
    appeal for persons visiting specified family members and that the  only
    residual appeal right thereafter related to the appeal on human  rights
    and race relations grounds under section 84 (1) (b) and (c) of the 2002
    Act.

 4. It was further argued within the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Judge
    failed to have regard to statutory public interest  considerations  set
    out by section 117 B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, and that  proportionality  exercise  has  not  been  carried  out
    following the decision in Razgar.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andrew on the 19th August 2015, when he found that "It is arguable that
    there is an error of law in the Judge making the decision that  he  did
    in view of the fact that there  is  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision made by the Respondent other than,  in  this  case,  on  human
    rights grounds and this was dismissed by the Judge". This is  the  only
    reason stated within the grounds before  appeal  for  permission  being
    granted. It was on this basis that the appeal came  before  me  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

 6. Mr Ngwuosha on behalf of the  Claimant  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in law and got it wrong by allowing the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules. He accepted that the Judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction, but argued that if the decision was set aside and  remade
    the Claimant would then have the right to advance  the  argument  again
    that he did have a private life in the UK and that he was  an  ordained
    Pastor who had a significant reputation and that he did have a  private
    life in going to shops in the UK which were of  a  better  quality  and
    that it was a breach of his private life to make a finding as a  result
    of deception having been utilised for the purpose of paragraph 320 (7b)
    that such deception maybe utilised as a reason for not allowing him  to
    come to the UK for the next 10  years  and  that  a  10  year  ban  was
    disproportionate and should be reconsidered. He argued that even though
    there had been no cross appeal on behalf of the Claimant regarding  the
    Judge's findings that there was no private life,  he  argued  that  the
    case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, in order  that
    the Article 8 private  life  could  be  reconsidered,  given  that  the
    Claimant was a regular traveller and a man of god. He argued  that  the
    Claimant had been to the UK several times and visited  shops  and  that
    there was a higher duty when considering whether or not to prevent  him
    coming again. He argued that if private life exists, then the threshold
    for engagement is extremely low. He sought to rely  upon  the  case  of
    Adjei [2015] UKUT 251, in that  if  Article  8  is  engaged,  then  the
    Tribunal may to need to look at the extent to  which  the  Claimant  is
    said to have failed to meet the requirements of the Rule, because  that
    may inform the proportionality balance in exercise.

 7. In his submissions on behalf of the Appellant Mr  Wilding  relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal. He argued that the Judge should not have allowed
    the appeal in the way that she did and that even before the changes  to
    Section 88 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  as  a
    result a Section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013,  the  right  of
    appeal in Entry Clearance cases for visitors was  restricted  to  those
    who met the requirements of the requisite Family  Visitor  Regulations,
    other than on human rights or race relations grounds and that there  is
    no general right of appeal. He argued that following the instruction of
    amendment to Section 88A, there was now no general right of appeal even
    for those visitors seeking to visit members of the family,  other  than
    on human rights and race relations grounds.

 8. Mr Wilding further argued that there was no cross appeal on  behalf  of
    the Claimant and no Rule 24 notice had been filed by the  Claimant  and
    that there was no authority to  say  that  the  whole  case  should  be
    reconsidered upon the First-tier Tribunal decision being set aside as a
    result of an error of law and that it was  nonsense  to  say  that  the
    question of Article 8 needed to be considered afresh.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

 9. The original decision of the Secretary of State in this case which  was
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal was made on the 12th  August  2014.
    Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2003 was commenced on  the  25th
    June 2013 and amended Section 88A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 by removing the right of appeal  for  persons  visiting
    specified family members under the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)
    Regulations 2012. As a result of that change, a person could not appeal
    under Section 82 against refusal of Entry Clearance as a visitor, other
    than on the grounds referred to in Section 84 (1) (b) and  (c),  namely
    in respect of race relations and human rights grounds as to whether  or
    not the decision was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998 as being incompatible with the Appellant's Convention rights.  The
    Claimant did not have a right of appeal under Section 84 (1)  (e)  that
    the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the Law.

10. Therefore, as was properly conceded by Mr Nqwuosha  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant, the Judge did materially err in law. Nor did he have a  right
    of appeal under Section 84 (1) (a) the decision was not  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules. Therefore, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did materially err in allowing the appeal to the extent that  she  did,
    based upon the assertion that buried within the Claimant's  Grounds  of
    Appeal is an assertion that the decision was not in accordance with the
    Immigration Rules [25]. The Judge did not have power to consider  under
    the rules whether or not paragraph 320 (7A) or 320 (7B) applied.

11. Although the extent to which a Claimant does meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules may well be a factor in  considering  whether  or
    not the proportionality balancing exercise is met under Article 8,  the
    Judge did not have power  simply  to  consider  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. However, this is not a case where  the  Judge  found
    that there was any private or family life in the UK, such as to  enable
    her to consider the extent to which the Rules might have been  met  for
    the purpose of determining proportionality. Having found that there was
    no family or private life in the  UK,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    should simply have dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

12. I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oxlade
    to the extent that she has allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (320 7A) and (7B) to the extent of remitting the case back to the
    Respondent for reconsideration.

13. Although it has been argued by Mr Nqwuosha on behalf  of  the  Claimant
    that if the decision is set aside, and the Appellant  should  have  the
    opportunity of rearguing the Article 8 issue, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings in respect of whether or not the Claimant did  have  a
    family or private life in the UK are not infected by her error  of  law
    in determining whether or not the case should be remitted back  to  the
    Respondent for further consideration under the Immigration Rules,  such
    that I do not set aside her  findings  in  respect  of  Article  8  and
    whether or not the decision amounted to  a  breach  of  the  Claimant's
    rights under the ECHR. I maintain her findings that in this  case  that
    the Claimant intended to come to the UK for-in essence a "stopover"- in
    order to rest, to shop and then intended to go on to New York and  that
    he did not have an existing private life in the UK and that all of  his
    family are in Ghana. I also maintained her finding  at  [23]  that  the
    Claimant had not satisfied her that there was a family or private  life
    which is subject to interference by the decision nor the gravity  which
    engaged Article 8 of the ECHR and that the  dismissing  of  the  appeal
    would not breach the Claimant's right to a private or  family  life  in
    the UK.

14. However, even if I am wrong in maintaining her findings in this regard,
    although it is argued on behalf of the Claimant that he is an  ordained
    Pastor who has a significant reputation, this does not in  itself  give
    rise to any private life in the UK, and even though the  threshold  for
    the engagement of Article 8 is low, in any event  I  would  have  found
    that the Claimant simply having come to the UK on  holiday  on  several
    occasions previously for  periods  of  less  than  one  week,  did  not
    actually  establish  a  private  life  within  the  UK  or   that   the
    interference  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  so   as   to
    potentially engage the operation of Article 8.

15. I therefore remake the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oxlade,
    dismissing the Claimant Mr Gyamfi's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated  the  12th  August  2014.   I  find  that  there  is  no
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    that the Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed for the
    reasons set out above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oxlade  did  contain  a  material
error of law and I set (paragraph 320 (7A) and (7B)) by remitting  the  case
back to the Respondent for reconsideration;

I remake the decision finding that there is no jurisdiction to consider  the
appeal under the Immigration Rules and dismissing the appeal  of  Mr  Gyamfi
on human rights grounds;

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any order pursuant to Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.


Signed      Dated 22nd October 2015

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
