
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: VA/05444/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2016                            |On 4 February 2016            |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              rubacca aziz gill
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Walter (Appellant's sister and sponsor)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie promulgated on 6 August 2015  ("the
    Decision"). For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they
    were in the First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of  State  is
    technically the Appellant in this particular  appeal.    Permission  to
    appeal was granted to the Secretary of State on  20  November  2015  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes.  The Secretary of State's decision is
    in fact that of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 30 July 2014 refusing
    the Appellant entry clearance as a visitor from Pakistan.

 2. The Appellant intended to come to the  UK  to  visit  her  sister,  Mrs
    Walter.  At the time of the application her sister was pregnant and was
    encountering complications.  Since then and prior to the appeal hearing
    her  sister  gave  birth.  However  there  are  further   compassionate
    circumstances noted by the Judge and in relation to which I have  heard
    from the Appellant's sister, Mrs Walter  at  the  hearing  today.   The
    Appellant's brother-in-law is on a waiting  list  for  a  heart  bypass
    operation. That is an urgent waiting list and it  appears  that  he  is
    quite ill.  I am told that his consultant supports the Appellant coming
    to the UK on the basis it would be of assistance to her sister who  has
    three children all under the age of eight, who does not drive  and  who
    will have some  difficulties  in  dealing  with  the  children  in  her
    husband's absence whilst he is in hospital  and  some  difficulties  in
    visiting her husband when he is admitted for his operation.

 3. This is not a judicial review of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision
    but an appeal.  As such the Appellant  had  only  a  limited  right  of
    appeal and could appeal  only  on  human  rights  grounds.   The  Judge
    therefore considered the appeal on Article 8 grounds and concluded that
    the appeal should be allowed on that basis.

 4. The Secretary of State appeals on one  ground  only,  namely  that  the
    Judge misdirected himself in law because he failed to  have  regard  to
    the case law concerning the engagement of Article 8 in cases  involving
    adult siblings.  He made no reference to the relevant  case  law.   The
    Secretary of State relies on the case of M S (Article 8 - Family Life -
    Dependency - Proportionality) Uganda  [2004  UKIAT  00064,  Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and  Ghising  and  others   [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC). Since those decisions there has been  a  further  judgment  from
    the Court of Appeal in Singh and Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  630  to
    which I will return.

 5. The Secretary of State  also  says  that  the  Judge  erred  in  moving
    directly to finding an interference with Article 8 arisng from the fact
    that he found that the Appellant satisfies the requirements of Rule  41
    of the Immigration Rules without first considering whether family  life
    exists at all.  She relies in that regard on the case of  Adjei  (visit
    visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) .

 6. The basis for the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal was that he did not
    consider that the Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan were such  that
    she had any incentive to return.  In relation  to  that  decision,  the
    Judge says this at [3] of the Decision:

         "The only requirements placed in issue by the respondent were those
         relating to the genuineness of the intentions of the appellant as a
         visitor,  namely  Rules  41(1)  and  41(2).   In   particular   the
         respondent is not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  enjoys  settled
         circumstances in Pakistan such that she has any incentive to return
         and intends to enter the United Kingdom solely for the purpose of a
         family visit."

 7. Having recited the evidence given to him by the Appellant's sister  the
    Judge concludes at [6] as follows:

         "On these facts supported by the evidence  given,  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant did in fact meet all the  requirements  for  the
         grant of entry clearance and  that  she  did  so  at  the  time  of
         decision."

 8. I make that point because it was suggested to me by  Mr  Kotas,  and  I
    agree, that having found that the  appellant  was  a  genuine  visitor,
    certainly at  the time   of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  previous
    decision,  and  those  findings  not  having  been  challenged  it   is
    appropriate for me to set out that fact so  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer can be asked to take note of those findings  if  the  Appellant
    makes any further application.

 9. However the error which is asserted by the Secretary of  State  in  the
    Decision does not relate to that finding but the allowing of the appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.   In that regard, what the Judge has done  is  to
    transpose the finding that the Appellant could satisfy the requirements
    of the Rules to the issue of whether Article 8 is  engaged.   The  fact
    that the Appellant could satisfy the Rule may be material to the  issue
    of proportionality of the refusal if Article 8 is engaged but it is not
    the starting point for the finding that Article 8 is engaged.

10. That question has to be answered  by  consideration  of  whether  there
    exists family life between the Appellant and her  sister,  Mrs  Walter.
    The cases on which the Secretary of State relies suggest that  what  is
    required is an emotional dependency. As the case  of  Singh  and  Singh
    makes clear, that will depend on the  individual  facts  of  the  case.
    Singh and Singh was itself a case involving  an  adult  child  and  his
    parents and it is perhaps easy to see why the Court of  Appeal  reached
    the decision that it did on the facts of that particular case. However,
    having reviewed the  previous case law such as Kugathas and a number of
    ECtHR authorities, the crux of the Court of Appeal's  reasoning  is  as
    follows:

         "[24] I do not think that the judgments to which  I  have  referred
         lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the  correct  approach  to
         Article 8 in cases involving adult children. In the case of  adults
         in the context of immigration control there is no legal or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
         European Commission for Hunan Rights cited approvingly in  Kugathas
         did not include  any requirement of exceptionality.  It all depends
         on the facts. The love and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his
         parents or siblings will not of  itself  justify  a  finding  of  a
         family life. There has to be something more......"

    I pause there because  the  rest  of  that  paragraph  deals  with  the
    relationship between a young adult and his or her parents which is  not
    relevant here.

11. Turning then firstly to the question of whether there is  an  error  of
    law in the Decision, the Judge did not consider at all the question  of
    whether there existed an element of dependency  between  the  Appellant
    and Mrs Walter and whether the relationship was  such  as  to  found  a
    family life.  As sisters, they are  clearly  family  but  that  is  not
    enough to justify a finding of family life.  There is  no  presumption;
    it all depends on the facts. The Judge has failed to refer  to  any  of
    the relevant case law in this regard and  in  the  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that there is an error of law in the Decision.  It  therefore
    falls to me to remake the Decision.

12. I have listened carefully to everything which Mrs Walter has said to me
    today.  I sympathise greatly with her circumstances, with  the  illness
    of her husband and the difficulties she may have  in  coping  with  the
    children in the absence of her sister or other family support to assist
    her.  However  those  difficulties  cannot  form  the  basis   of   the
    interdependency such as to engage Article  8.   They  may  reflect  the
    level of interference but they cannot  create  the  engagement  in  the
    first place. There is no evidence that the Appellant and her sister are
    particularly close or have remained in particularly  close  contact  or
    that one supports the other on a regular basis which might or might not
    lead to a finding that Article 8 is engaged.  In this  case,  there  is
    not enough evidence to even get that issue off the ground.

13. On the evidence before the Judge, therefore, I am quite unable to  find
    that Article 8 is engaged in this case.  That disposes  of  the  appeal
    before me which therefore stands dismissed.  As I have  already  noted,
    the Judge found (and there is no challenge to these findings) that,  at
    the time of the ECO's decision under challenge, the Appellant satisfied
    the Immigration Rules because the Judge found that she  was  a  genuine
    visitor. It is open to the Appellant  to make a further application  on
    that basis to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  to  rely  on  those
    findings.

14. Mrs Walter suggested to me at one point in  her  submissions  that  the
    Appellant is not entitled to make a further application within a period
    of six months if she has had an appeal dismissed.  Mr Kotas was unaware
    of such  a  provision  and  I  cannot  find  any  foundation  for  that
    submission in any of the papers which I have seen.  However,   assuming
    that to be right, I make plain that there are changed circumstances  in
    this case both in the fact that Mrs Walter's husband is quite  ill  and
    in the fact that Mrs Walter requires her sister to come and provide her
    with support during the period when her husband is  in  hospital.   The
    fact that the findings in this appeal are that the Appellant is (or was
    at the time of the decision)  a  genuine  visitor  is  also  a  changed
    circumstance which the Entry Clearance Officer may well  need  to  take
    into account when considering any further application.



Notice of Decision
I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Decision  contains  a  material
error of law.  I set it aside.  I re-make the  Decision  by  dismissing  the
Appellant's appeal.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
Date  2 February 2016
