
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/05064/2014
                                                               VA/05066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            nazar ahmad chaudhry
                           saeeda nazar choudhary
                          (no ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr N Bajwa, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1  January  1959.
    The second respondent is his wife, born on 14  October  1966.  In  this
    decision I will refer to the respondents as "the claimants".

 2. In a decision promulgated on 18 May 2015, First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    Judge Wyman allowed the claimants' appeals against the decision of  the
    appellant (hereinafter "the ECO") to refuse  their  application  for  a
    visa to visit the United Kingdom for 40 days.

 3. The reason the claimants wanted to visit to the UK, as  represented  to
    the ECO, was that on 27 May 2014 the second claimant's grandmother died
    and they wished to participate in the prayers following her  death.  In
    refusing the claimants' application, the ECO gave multiple  reasons  as
    to  why  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  claimants   satisfied   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules. The ECO was  not
    satisfied that the claimants were genuinely seeking entry  as  visitors
    and intended to leave (paragraphs 41(i) and (ii)); that they  would  be
    able to accommodated  themselves  without  employment  or  resource  to
    public funds (paragraph 41(vi)); or that they could meet the cost of an
    onward journey (paragraph 41(vii)).

 4. The claimants appealed and their appeal was heard by FtT  Judge  Wyman.
    The  FtT  considered  the  evidence  before  it   pertaining   to   the
    circumstances of the claimants and concluded  that  they  were  genuine
    visitors who would return to Pakistan  after  the  proposed  visit  and
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 5. Having made a finding with respect to the Immigration  Rules,  the  FtT
    gave only brief consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR. The entirety of
    its analysis is contained in paragraph [43], which I set out in full:

         "43. Turning briefly to Article 8, I note the appellant  wished  to
         come to the UK for a family funeral. However  I  am  not  satisfied
         that the  refusal  of  leave  is  justified  for  the  purposes  of
         maintaining effective immigration control or is proportionate"

 6. The FtT then allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. Under Section 52 of the Crime and  Courts  Act  2013,  appeals  against
    refusal of a family visit visa applied for on or after 25 June 2013 may
    be brought only on human rights grounds.  The  FtT  was  not  therefore
    entitled to decide the appeal under the Immigration Rules and to do  so
    was an error of law. That error was not material, however, as  the  FtT
    also allowed the appeal under Article 8, which it was entitled  to  do.
    The issue before me at the error of law hearing  was  whether  the  FtT
    made an error of law in respect of its assessment under Article 8.

 8. The ECO's argument, as set out in the grounds of appeal and made by  Mr
    Staunton at  the  hearing,  was  that  the  FtT  failed  to  take  into
    consideration that the claimed family life was between adults and  that
    family life, within the meaning of Article 8, will not  normally  exist
    in such circumstances in the absence of dependency. In this case, there
    was no evidence of dependency or anything beyond normal emotional ties.
    Following MS (Article 8 - Family Life) Uganda [2004]  UKIAT  00064  and
    other established case law, the FtT should have recognised that Article
    8 was not engaged.

 9. The argument was also made that the FtT had erred by using Article 8 as
    a general dispensing power: having found the Rules  were  satisfied  it
    then, without any further analysis, concluded that Article  8  applied.
    However, as made clear in Adjei (visit visas - Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT
    0261 (IAC), a person who satisfies  the  Tribunal  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 does not succeed on that account and  must
    also  demonstrate  that  refusal  of  entry  represents   an   unlawful
    infringement of rights protected by Article 8.

10. Mr Bajwa argued that the brevity of the FtT's consideration of  Article
    8 did not mean it was not given proper consideration. He submitted that
    Adjei should be distinguished from the present  case.  It  concerned  a
    visit to living relatives whereas this appeal is about attendance at  a
    funeral. Mr Bajwa maintained that  a  funeral  is  a  matter  of  great
    importance in family life that engages Article 8.

11. Having heard submissions I invited the parties to comment on the recent
    Upper Tribunal decision Abbasi and  another  (visits  -  bereavement  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC). Both declined to do so.

Error of law

12. Failure to give reasons for a finding on a material matter is an  error
    of law and in this case the FtT allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8
    without giving any reasons for so doing. No reason is given as  to  why
    Article 8 was found to be engaged (indeed, there is no explicit finding
    that it is engaged - this just appears to be assumed). Nor is a  reason
    given as  to  why  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  the  UK  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the claimants' rights under  Article
    8.  Accordingly, I find that the FtT made a material error of law  such
    that the decision must be set aside and remade.

The FtT's Decision Remade

13. This is a case in which the claimants  wish  to  visit  the  UK  for  a
    relatively short period of time for the specific and defined purpose of
    saying prayers and participating in religious ceremonies following  the
    death of their grandmother.

14. The issue before me is whether  refusing  the  claimants  entry  is  in
    breach of the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   In
    considering Article 8  I  follow  the  structured  sequential  approach
    adopted in Razgar v SSHD.

15. The first question is whether an entry visa for the specific purpose of
    saying prayers for the claimants' grandmother for a time limited period
    of 40 days falls within the scope of, and is protected by,  Article  8.
    As was made clear in Adjei, many  visitor  visa  appeals,  particularly
    those involving adult relatives (other than a husband and  wife),  fall
    outside the scope of Article 8. The present case is not  however  about
    visiting an adult relative but about entering the UK for a specific and
    time limited purpose to engage in a  particular  activity  that  cannot
    reasonably be undertaken outside the  UK;  that  is,  participation  in
    prayers following the death of a  relative  in  the  location  of  that
    relative's death. This issue  was  recently  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Abbasi and another, which concerned  a  proposed  visit  by
    nationals of Pakistan to their grandfather's grave. Having considered a
    number of  decisions  by  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights,  the
    President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  McCloskey  J  concluded  that  the
    circumstances in that case fell within  the  ambit  of  Article  8.  At
    paragraph [11] he stated:

         "As the decided cases of the ECtHR make clear, the  FtT's  decision
         that the Appellants' appeals did  not  fall  within  the  ambit  of
         Article 8 ECHR is unsustainable. The Judge's error was driven by an
         impermissibly narrow approach to the scope of Article 8  protection
         and a concentration on the Appellants' family life in Pakistan,  to
         the exclusion of both their family ties in the United  Kingdom  and
         the central purpose of their proposed visit.  The  essence  of  the
         error was a failure to recognise  that  the  particular  aspect  of
         private and family life invoked by the Appellants  was  capable  of
         being encompassed by Article 8 ECHR. The  protection,  or  benefit,
         which they were asserting had the potential of being  protected  by
         Article 8 ECHR. The first question for the Judge should  have  been
         whether, having regard to all relevant facts and circumstances,  it
         was. The Judge's error was committed at this preliminary stage.  It
         consisted of a  failure  to  recognise  that  the  Appellants  were
         asserting a discrete facet of family and private life which Article
         8 is capable of protecting. In consequence of this error of law the
         Judge did not proceed to consider any of the succeeding  stages  of
         the   exercise,   namely   interference,   legitimate    aim    and
         proportionality."

16. Following the approach taken in Abbasi, I find that the  claimants  are
    asserting a facet of family life that Article 8(1) ECHR is  capable  of
    protecting and that this appeal falls within the ambit  of  Article  8.
    The decision of the ECO to  refuse  entry  to  the  claimants,  thereby
    preventing  them  from  attending  prayers   in   relation   to   their
    grandmother's death, constitutes an interference with their family  and
    private life  rights.  These  are  rights  that  cannot  reasonably  be
    realised in an alternative way (they necessarily require attendance  at
    the location of the deceased's death) and accordingly  the  gravity  of
    the interference with the  claimants'  rights  is  such  as  to  engage
    Article 8.

17.  In  assessing  whether  refusing  the  claimants  an  entry  visa   is
    proportionate, my starting point is to consider whether  the  claimants
    are able to satisfy the Immigration Rules. In Adjei, the Upper Tribunal
    stated that "for a person who does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 to succeed in an appeal there would have to be cogent  and
    compelling reasons."

18. I am  satisfied  that  the  claimants  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Under Paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of  the  Rules  the
    claimants must be genuinely seeking entry as general visitors for  less
    than 6 months and intend to leave the UK at  the  conclusion  of  their
    visit. I am satisfied  that,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  the
    evidence supports the  genuineness  of  their  application.  The  first
    claimant has provided documentary evidence showing a strong social  and
    economic tie to Pakistan  including  ownership  of  a  business,  land,
    shares and a  car.  There  is  also  evidence  of  savings  and  a  not
    insignificant income in  Pakistan.  Further,  the  claimants  have  two
    dependent children the youngest of which is April  2004.  There  is  no
    indication that they intend to abandon these  children.  Moreover,  the
    application was made shortly after their relative in the UK died, which
    reinforces that the purpose of the trip is as they have claimed.

19. Under paragraphs 41(vi) and (vii) of the Rules the  claimants  must  be
    able to accommodate and maintain themselves whilst in the UK  and  meet
    the cost of their onward  journey.  The  evidence  of  their  financial
    situation, along with that of their sponsor who proposes to accommodate
    them, satisfies me - as it did the FtT - that these requirements can be
    met.

20. I now turn to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and the mandatory factors to consider therein. Section 117B(1)
    stipulates that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
    the public interest. Given my  finding  that  the  claimants  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 41  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  public
    interest in effective  immigration  controls  under  paragraph  117B(1)
    cannot be said to be advanced by refusing them entry.  Section  117B(2)
    is of little significance in this appeal - the ability to speak English
    is not an important public interest with respect to a  visitor  staying
    in the UK for only 40 days.  Section  117B(3)  does  not  arise  as  my
    findings in relation  to  Paragraph  41  include  a  finding  that  the
    claimants will receive maintenance and accommodation during their visit
    from family.

21.  Having  found  that  the  claimants  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules there is no  (or  very  little)  public  interest  in
    denying them entry as visitors. Weighed against this is  that  refusing
    them entry will result in a substantial interference with their  rights
    under Article 8  in  the  form  of  denying  them  the  opportunity  to
    participate in an important family activity that  cannot  realistically
    take place outside of the UK. Balancing this interference  against  the
    public interest, it  is  clear  that  refusal  of  entry  represents  a
    disproportionate interference with the claimants' right to respect  for
    private and family life in breach of Article 8.

Decision

      a. The decision of the FtT is set aside.

      b. I remake the decision and allow the claimants' appeals.

      c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 23 November 2015              |

