
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: VA/05446/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On  25   September   2014                                            On   26
                                             September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  New Delhi
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                              Manjit Kaur Virk
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. B. Singh, nominated sponsor.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Martins promulgated on 19 June 2014, allowing Ms Virk's appeal against
      the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer ('ECO') dated 14  February
      2013 to refuse entry clearance as a visitor.


   2. Although  before  me  the  ECO  is  the  appellant  and  Ms  Virk  the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to  Ms  Virk  as  the
      Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.
Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of India born on 1 April 1976. By  way  of
      an on-line application form completed on 31 January 2013  she  applied
      for entry clearance as a visitor to see her brother Mr Balwinder Singh
      ('the sponsor') and his family. In support of the application, amongst
      other things, the Appellant submitted some crop receipts.



   4. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      Notice of Immigration Decision dated 14 February 2013  with  reference
      to  paragraphs  41(i),  (ii),  (vi)  and  (vii)  and  320(7A)  of  the
      Immigration Rules. In this latter regard the Respondent had  concluded
      that three crop receipts were false.


   5. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   her
      determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lever on 11 August 2014.


Error of Law

   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself as to the applicable
      standard of proof in respect of the Respondent's allegation  that  the
      Appellant had submitted false documents in support of her application.
      Whilst the Judge correctly identified that the burden of proof in this
      regard was upon the Respondent, at paragraph 22 of  the  determination
      she stated "it is for  him  to  prove  this  on  a  higher  degree  of
      probability". Similarly at paragraph 24 the  Judge  referred  to  "the
      high degree of probability standard".


   8. The applicable standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. This
      is not in any way 'heightened' by reason  of  the  subject  matter  at
      issue or the gravity of the consequences as the Judge  herein  appears
      to have thought. See Re B [2008]  UKHL  35,  in  particular  per  Lord
      Hoffman at paragraph 13.


   9. Plainly a misdirection as to the standard of proof is material, and in
      my judgement this misdirection is  sufficient  in  itself  to  warrant
      setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


  10. Nonetheless, and  for  completeness,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
      Respondent has contended that there are further errors.  I  agree.  In
      particular, in my judgement, the First-tier Tribunal Judge also  erred
      in her evaluation of the  Respondent's  Document  Verification  Report
      (DVR). I make the following observations:

(i) The absence of any apparent analysis by the Respondent of a fourth  crop
      receipt (which is of a different appearance from  the  three  receipts
      that the  Respondent  contended  were  false)  was  immaterial  to  an
      evaluation of the evidence relating to the three crop  receipts  which
      were subjected to a verification process.

(ii) The Judge is factually incorrect in stating at paragraph 23  "There  is
      no indication of the nature of the fax, whether it  was  to  make  the
      request or to fax the actual receipts for verification". There  is  on
      file a copy of the communication sent by the Respondent in response to
      the  enquiry  raised  by  the  Market  Committee,  together   with   a
      transmission verification report: it  is  stated  in  terms  that  the
      relevant crop receipts are being forwarded to the Market Committee "as
      requested by your office".


  11. On the face of it the process of verification  was  adequately  clear.
      The Appellant responded to the allegation  simply  by  bare  assertion
      that the documents were genuine: she advanced no reasoned criticism of
      the DVR,  and  provided  no  further  evidential  support  as  to  the
      genuineness of the documents in question. As regards the sponsor,  who
      gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the Judge recorded:  "As
      far as the ECO's conclusion that documents his  sister  had  submitted
      were not genuine, his sister has told him that she  submitted  genuine
      documents" (paragraph 16); and "The sponsor knows that they sell their
      crops, but as he is here he has no knowledge  of  the  intricacies  of
      receipts for the crops" (paragraph 19). It follows that the  sponsor's
      oral testimony did not address the specifics of the DVR  or  otherwise
      provide evidence to counter the contents of the DVR: clearly this  was
      because the relevant issues  related  to  matters  beyond  his  direct
      knowledge; he could only repeat in good faith the  assertion  made  by
      the Appellant.


  12. For completeness, I do not accept that a finding to  the  effect  that
      the Appellant and her family were engaged in agricultural work  is  in
      isolation a significant  indicator  of  the  likely  veracity  of  any
      supporting documents relating to the sale of agricultural produce,  or
      more particularly, provides an adequate response to the detail of  the
      DVR.


  13. In conclusion, the Judge's expressed concerns about  the  verification
      process were groundless and/or misconceived.  Further,  there  was  no
      sound  evidential  basis  for  undermining  the  conclusion   of   the
      verification process, whether by reference to that process itself,  or
      by reference to anything emanating from the Appellant or sponsor.  The
      conclusion that the Respondent had not discharged the burden of  proof
      was neither adequately reasoned,  nor  otherwise  sustainable  on  the
      basis of the available evidence - even by  erroneous  reference  to  a
      standard of 'higher probability'.


  14. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  15. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.


Re-making the Decision

  16. The sponsor confirmed that he did not have any  further  documents  to
      produce in respect of the disputed crop receipts. Moreover,  he  could
      do no more than repeat again the assertion of his sister to the effect
      that false documents had not been used in support of the application.


  17. In  all  of  the  circumstances  -  and  including  the  analysis  and
      observations I have made in respect of consideration of the  issue  of
      'error of law' above - I find that the Respondent has established on a
      balance of probabilities that the three crop  receipts  identified  in
      the Document Verification Report were  false.  It  is  clear  that  an
      enquiry was raised by the Respondent to the  purported  originator  of
      the receipts, copies of the receipts  were  forwarded  to  the  Market
      Committee accordingly, and upon checking  their  own  records  it  was
      reported back to the Respondent that  there  was  no  record  of  such
      receipts having been issued. The Appellant has, in my judgement,  done
      nothing  to  counter  the  allegation:  the  bare  assertion  of   the
      genuineness of the documents does not provide an adequate answer.


  18. I find that the Respondent has accordingly discharged  the  burden  of
      proof to the relevant civil standard in respect of the  engagement  of
      paragraph 320(7A). Paragraph 320(7A) requires a mandatory  refusal  of
      the application. To that  extent  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules.


  19. In such circumstances it is unnecessary  to  consider  the  appeal  by
      reference to paragraph 41 of the Rules. Were I to  undertake  such  an
      analysis, the adverse finding in respect of the use of false documents
      would necessarily provide a  substantial  obstacle  to  the  Appellant
      demonstrating  the  genuineness  of  the  intentions  underlying   the
      proposed visit.


  20. No human rights issues have been raised, and I am otherwise unable  to
      identify any basis for concluding that the Respondent's  decision  was
      not in accordance with the law.


Decision

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  22. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     25 September 2014
