
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05033/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House         |                             Decision&Reasons   |
|                             |Promulgated                                     |
|On 17 November 2015    |                                         On 2      |
|                       |February 2016                                      |
|                       |                                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KELVIN MARK LWANGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Thomas (step father)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make any order restricting  publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C M Phillips allowing the appeal of the  respondent,
    hereinafter "the claimant" against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    to refuse him entry clearance as a visitor.  I say immediately that  the
    Secretary of State's appeal succeeds.

 3. The grounds of appeal raised by the Secretary  of  State  are  addressed
    solely to whether or not the Tribunal was empowered to allow the appeal.
    The Tribunal had allowed the appeal on human rights grounds but  it  was
    the Secretary of State's contention that the appeal could not succeed on
    human rights grounds because the relationship between the  claimant  and
    his family in the United  Kingdom  was  not  within  the  protection  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. There was a suggestion in the grant of permission by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Parkes that there  might  be  room  to  criticise  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal on its facts.   That  point  was
    not in the grounds. It was not advanced before me and is not part of  my
    deliberations.  I make this clear because I had not read all of the vast
    amount of evidence produced before  me  because  there  is  no  need  to
    because it is not in contention that  the  claimant  has  satisfied  the
    requirements of the visitor Rules.  What matters is whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was right to decide that the  facts  came  within  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. I find it surprising that the First-tier Tribunal decided  the  case  in
    the way that she did because she referred in some detail to the case  of
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC)  but  she
    did not refer to the part of the decision where  the  Tribunal  made  it
    clear that it would only be  in  very  unusual  circumstances  that  the
    protection of Article 8 in an out of country case applied to cases  that
    did not involve husband and wife or life partners and parents and  minor
    children.

 6. The Tribunal said at paragraph 24:

         It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays  down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope. We are, however, prepared  to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope  of  Article  8(1).  In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together.  In  the  limited  class  of  cases  where
         Article 8 (1) ECHR is engaged the refusal of entry  clearance  must
         be in accordance with the law  and  proportionate.  If  a  person's
         circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and  they  have  not
         acted in a way that undermines the system of immigration control, a
         refusal of entry clearance is liable to infringe Article 8.

 7. This is not a case that comes within the scope of the Article.  This  is
    a case involving a young man 25 years old who  is  living  independently
    and, according to the evidence, responsibly  and  industriously  in  his
    native Uganda.

 8. It is not really clear why the First-tier Tribunal  was  persuaded  that
    Article 8 was engaged at all.

 9. The claimant was represented by his  stepfather  who  was  clearly  very
    familiar with the papers and was articulate and courteous, but he  could
    not refer to anything that showed that the Respondent had accepted  that
    this adult claimant's relationship with his family in the United Kingdom
    came within the protection of Article 8(1). There was merely a  standard
    reference in the refusal of visitor appeals acknowledging the importance
    of family visits.  It quite simply does not follow from that that  there
    is any sort of concession that the person seeking entry clearance  comes
    within the protection of Article 8(1).

10. There are many cases dealing with the  scope  of  Article  8.   This  is
    because Article 8 is essentially a fluid right offering protection in  a
    variety of circumstances, and as I have said on many  occasions,  it  is
    not really helpful to think of it in terms of protecting  "family  life"
    or "private life" but to think of it in protecting "private  and  family
    life" together as a whole. This is something sometimes  described  as  a
    person's physical and moral integrity.  "Private  and  family  life"  is
    protected with a person's home and correspondence. It is  about  keeping
    the state out of  a  person's  life  without  good  and  lawful  reason.
    Colloquial use of the word "family" is likely  to  lead  to  trouble  in
    understanding the proper application of Article 8 and  that  might  have
    happened here.

11. The best explanation of the extent  of  family  life  in  Article  8  is
    probably still to be found in the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 which is quoted  extensively  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds. In particularly there is no presumption of
    family life between adults.

12. There is an abundance of evidence  in  this  case  that  the  claimant's
    mother and stepfather are genuinely concerned about his development  and
    maturity.  There are letters, some of which are quite  tender  in  their
    content and there is evidence of visits. This is to be expected  and  is
    an exampled of normal emotional ties.  It does not come  near  to  being
    anything beyond those normal ties which is necessary before Article 8(1)
    can be said to be engaged.

13. I do not see any point in saying  any  more.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has not explained how she thought Article  8(1)  was  engaged  and
    there is nothing before me to suggest she was  entitled  to  reach  that
    conclusion.  In my judgement the evidence points in entirely  the  other
    direction.

14. It follows therefore that I must conclude that she  was  wrong  to  find
    that Article 8(1) was engaged and she was wrong to allow the appeal.

    Notice of Decision

15. I set aside her decision and I  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 January 2016                |

