
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/05568/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27 February 2014                           |on 4 March 2014              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MEREIA CANIVESI DELAITUBUNA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Lee - Sponsor.
For the Respondent: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Moore promulgated on the 16th  October  2013,  in  which  the
        Judge allowed Ms Delaitubuna's appeal against  the  refusal  of  an
        Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to grant entry clearance to allow her
        to enter the United Kingdom for the purposes of a family visit.






Background


     2. Ms Delaitubuna is a national of Fiji born on the 1 July  1984.   On
        14th January 2013 she made an application for a visit visa. In  the
        application form Ms Delaitubuna states she has  a  partner  by  the
        name of Christopher Lee, a British citizen  living  in  the  United
        Kingdom in Bristol. Mr Lee will pay her travel  costs  and  provide
        accommodation and food. She will stay with him for the duration  of
        the visit.  Ms Delaitubuna also states that Mr Lee will  travel  to
        the United Kingdom with her as it  was  his  intention  to  fly  to
        Manila and accompany her back. In Part  7  of  the  application  Ms
        Delaitubuna states she had no other family or friends in the United
        Kingdom.


     3. The application was  refused  as  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  Ms
        Delaitubuna is a genuine visitor under paragraphs 41 (i) (ii).  The
        refusal notice, dated 23rd January 2013, states that Ms Delaitubuna
        has a limited right of appeal on the grounds referred to in section
        84 (1) (c) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the
        '2002 Act'). This ground is limited to a claim that the decision is
        unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  as  being
        incompatible with Ms Delaitubuna's Convention rights.


     4. An appeal was lodged challenging the decision which was received by
        the First-tier Tribunal on 22nd February 2013. It was completed  by
        Mr Lee who describes Ms Delaitubuna in section D of the  fees  form
        as "a friend". The grounds of appeal are as follows:


              "The Immigration Officer acknowledges that the sponsor (myself
   - Christopher           Lee) will sponsor the visit  for  six  months  of
   Mercia Delaitubuna.  I will fly to Fiji            and return to  the  UK
   with  her.  I  will  return  to  Fiji  with  her  and  return  to  UK  on
   the expiry of the Visa.  For the Entry Clearance Officer  to  the  refuse
   her  UK  visa              on  her  socio-economic  background   is   not
   politically  correct,  unhelpful  and                   irrelevant.    My
   sponsor  letter  clearly  shows  my  name,  address,  my  intentions  and
   passport detail.  If the appeal tribunal is in any doubt, I hope that the
   fact I have             chosen to attend the hearing in person will count
   for us."


     5. Following the appeal being received it was referred to a Duty Judge
        as it was stated to be out of time with no reasons  being  provided
        and because a validity issue arose. On the 20th March 2013 the Duty
        Judge  considered  the  referral  and  made  the   following   case
        management decision:


              "Sponsor claims to be the applicant's  partner.......  finding
   of fact will need to be               made. Appeal to  proceed.  Validity
   for the IJ"


     6. The case was listed for hearing before Judge Moore. Mr Lee attended
        as did a representative of the ECO.  The Judge noted the nature  of
        the application,  the  relevant  immigration  rule,  and  the  case
        advanced by the parties, before setting out his findings of fact at
        paragraphs 17 to 24 of the determination. The Judge  accepted  that
        Ms Delaitubuna and Mr  Lee  are  in  a  genuine  relationship  that
        started approximately 18 months ago during the course of a visit to
        Fiji by Mr Lee. The evidence of subsequent visits was  accepted  as
        was the evidence  regarding  future  intentions  and  the  economic
        circumstances of the sponsor within the United Kingdom, leading  to
        a conclusion that Ms Delaitubuna was genuinely seeking entry  as  a
        visitor for a limited period not exceeding six months.  Accordingly
        it was found the decision of the ECO was not in accordance with the
        law and the appeal allowed.



Discussion



     7. What is missing from the determination is any consideration of  the
        two issues for which the appeal was referred  to  the  Duty  Judge;
        namely whether the appeal is out of time and,  if  so,  whether  it
        should be admitted and if there is a valid appeal in any event. The
        fact the Judge proceeded to deal with the appeal  can  be  read  as
        implying that, even if out of time, the appeal was admitted but  it
        is not possible from the determination to be able to infer that the
        Judge did consider the issue of jurisdiction.


     8. Those applying as family visitors before 25 June 2013 had  a  right
        of appeal under the Immigration Rules by virtue of Section  88A  of
        the 2002 Act, but only if he had applied for  entry  clearance  for
        the purposes  of  visiting  a  family  member  as  defined  by  the
        applicable regulations.


     9. For applications made between 9th July  2012  and  25th  June  2013
        those regulations were the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)
        Regulations 2012. Pursuant to Regulation 2, an applicant will be  a
        family member of the person he or she is applying to visit if he is
        either (i) spouse, civil partner, father,  mother,  son,  daughter,
        grandfather,  grandmother,  grandson,  granddaughter,  brother   or
        sister; (ii) father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-
        in-law; (iii) son-in-law or daughter-in-law;  or  (iv)  stepfather,
        stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother  or  stepsister;  of
        the family member he is applying to visit. He  will  also  be  that
        person's family member if he is that person's partner.


    10. Ms Delaitubuna in her application states that she has a partner but
        no other family member or friends in the United Kingdom.  Mr Lee in
        the appeal form described Ms Delaitubuna as a  friend.   The  Judge
        found they were in a genuine relationship  with  the  intention  of
        marrying  in  the  future.  As  stated  above,  however,  the  2012
        Regulations do specifically provided for a person who is a  partner
        of the person to be visited to be  included  within  the  class  of
        persons to  be  visited  such  as  to  confer  a  right  of  appeal
        [Regulation 2 (3)].  The term partner does however have a  specific
        meaning within the terms of the 2012 Regulations and  only  applies
        to an applicant for entry clearance and the person they  intend  to
        visit who have been in a relationship that is akin to a marriage or
        civil partnership for at least two years before the date  on  which
        the application for entry clearance was made [Regulation 2  (4)(a)]
        and that such a relationship is genuine and subsisting  [Regulation
        2 (4)(b)].  Whilst the Judge finds that Ms Delaitubuna and  Mr  Lee
        are in a relationship that is genuine and subsisting he also  finds
        that they have only known each other for  approximately  18  months
        and makes no finding that the nature of their relationship  is  one
        akin to a marriage or civil partnership. In that respect the  Judge
        has made a legal error by failing to  consider  the  correct  legal
        provisions and to properly direct himself in law as to the relevant
        matters upon which he was required to make a finding.


    11. I find the error to be material such that the determination must be
        set aside as it is clear from the facts, and  was  accepted  by  Mr
        Lee, that the nature of the friendship/relationship he has with  Ms
        Delaitubuna is not one that satisfies the definition of  a  partner
        within the  2012  Regulations.  As  no  other  category  of  person
        identified within the Regulations has been shown to  exist  who  Ms
        Delaitubuna was intending to visit, it has not been established  on
        the facts that there is a right of appeal against  the  substantive
        refusal.


    12. Section 88 A (3) provides  that  notwithstanding  an  inability  to
        appeal against the substantive  decision  a  person  refused  entry
        clearance to visit relatives in the  UK  will  be  able  to  appeal
        against that immigration decision on human rights grounds, although
        no such ground was raised in the appeal notice.


    13. In Virk v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
        Civ  652  it  was  said  that  "Statutory  jurisdiction  cannot  be
        conferred by waiver or agreement; or by the failure of the  parties
        or the tribunal to be alive to the point".


    14. I find it was not established on  the  facts  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had jurisdiction to hear this appeal.  That  determination
        has been set aside. It has not  been  established  that  the  Upper
        Tribunal has jurisdiction to remake the decision.


Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. As there is no valid right  of  appeal  there  is  nothing
        extant upon which the Upper Tribunal can, or is required, to make a
        decision.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order as no application for anonymity was made
        and the facts do not establish a need for the same.






   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    17. In the light of my decision to set aside the determination for want
        of jurisdiction, I have considered whether  to  make  a  fee  award
        (rule  23A  (costs)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
        (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
        Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make no fee award.


          Reasons: there was no jurisdiction for the  Tribunal  to  consider
   this appeal on          the grounds relied upon.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28th February 2014












