
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/06614/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DHAKA)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               MR EHSAN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge James, promulgated on  13  August  2015,  allowing  an
       appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to enter the
       United Kingdom as a visitor.

  Background

    2. On 16 September 2014, the respondent, aged 22, sought leave to  enter
       the United Kingdom, along with his parents, in  order  to  visit  his
       adult siblings who reside in the United Kingdom. His application  was
       refused on 24 September 2014 as the ECO was not satisfied that he was
       genuinely seeking entry only as a visitor  or  that  he  intended  to
       leave  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the  visit.  The   ECO
       particularly noted that  the  respondent  had  unsuccessfully  sought
       further leave to remain in the United Kingdom after his studies ended
       on the basis that his parents had  disowned  him;  he  suffered  from
       schizophrenia for which medical treatment was available in Bangladesh
       and the respondent was unemployed, unmarried  with  limited  familial
       links and no financial or economic links to Bangladesh.

    3. Detailed grounds of appeal were enclosed with the notice  of  appeal,
       which stressed that the respondent had left the United Kingdom  prior
       to his last period of leave elapsing.

    4. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)  reviewed  the  decision  to  refuse
       entry  on  8  December  2014.  The  decision  to  refuse  entry   was
       maintained. The ECM relied on the decision in Sun Myung  Moon  v  ECO
       Seoul (2005) UKIAT 112 and was of the view that the appellant did not
       have  any  family  life  with  the   United   Kingdom   sponsor,   or
       alternatively, the decision in question did not  interfere  with  any
       family life.

    5. The FTTJ found that the relationship the appellant has with  his  two
       sisters in the United Kingdom  was  over  and  above  that  of  adult
       siblings because of his dependency upon them when he was last  living
       in the United Kingdom. He concluded that  the  respondent's  decision
       was not in accordance with the law and Article 8 ECHR.

  Error of law

    6. The grounds of application argue that the FTTJ made a material  error
       of law in finding that there were additional elements  of  dependency
       between the respondent and his sisters at the date of  the  decision,
       when the respondent was living with and being cared by his parents in
       Bangladesh. Furthermore, it was said that the FTTJ's  proportionality
       assessment failed to consider that the respondent  and  sponsors  may
       maintain their relationship via modern methods of  communication  and
       that there was a lack of adequate reasons as to why the sponsors  may
       not visit the respondent in Bangladesh.

    7. FTTJ PJM Hollingworth granted permission to appeal, stating  that  it
       was arguable that the FTT failed to provide  sufficient  reasons  for
       finding there to  be  family  life;  that  he  made  an  insufficient
       assessment in relation to the issue of the genuineness of  the  visit
       and that it was arguably an error of law in relation to the  adequacy
       of the FTTJ's reasoning in relation to visits to Bangladesh.

    8. At the hearing before me, Mr  Tufan  relied  upon  the  decisions  in
       Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), Adjei
       (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  261  (IAC)  as  well  as  the
       judgment in SS (Congo). In essence, he argued that Article 8 was  not
       engaged at all and stressed that it would be rarely the case  that  a
       case other that involving partners or parents would come  within  the
       scope of Article 8(1).

    9. Mr Miah argued  that  the  FTTJ  had  found  dependency  between  the
       respondent and sponsor and he was entitled to make that  finding.  He
       further said that the FTTJ was empowered to make findings on  Article
       8; that the proposed visit was not based  on  a  whim  and  that  the
       decision should stand.

   10. In reply, Mr Tufan stressed that in relation to leave to enter cases,
       it had to be an exceptional  case  or  there  had  to  be  compelling
       circumstances justifying entry on Article 8 grounds.

  Decision on error of law

   11. The FTTJ erred in categorising the respondent's relationship with his
       sisters in the United  Kingdom  as  family  life  for  the  following
       reasons.

   12. The respondent sought entry to the United Kingdom with his parents in
       order to visit his sisters, a brother and do some shopping [VAF  73].
       Hitherto, he obtained 6-month visit visas in  2001,  2005,  2009,  as
       well as under Tier 4 in 2009 [VAF 26 & 28]. Thereafter the  appellant
       varied his leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  being  granted
       Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR) until 14 March  2014,  solely  in
       order to enable him  to  complete  his  studies.  Notwithstanding  an
       outstanding application for leave to remain, the respondent left  the
       United Kingdom prior to his DLR expiring. At the time  of  the  ECO's
       decision, the respondent  had  been  residing  with  his  parents  in
       Bangladesh for approximately seven months.

   13. The claim of family life was made because the respondent suffers from
       an enduring mental illness and  during  his  studies  in  the  United
       Kingdom, as found by the FTTJ at [15], the respondent's sisters  were
       taking responsibility for his welfare. However, at the  time  of  the
       ECO's decision the respondent was cared for by his parents  and  that
       had been the position for months. Indeed, the FTTJ  remarks  at  [23]
       "He resides with his parents due to his mental illness and is not  an
       independent  young  adult.  He  is  reliant  on   his   parents   for
       accommodation and maintenance, as well  as  care  for  his  illness."
       Furthermore, the respondent intended to travel to the United  Kingdom
       with his parents and return with them to Bangladesh. Therefore, while
       the relationship the respondent had with  his  sisters  when  he  was
       residing with them previously might have amounted to family  life  at
       the time, on account of his vulnerability, this was not the  position
       at the time of the ECO's decision. Accordingly,  the  FTTJ  erred  in
       finding that family life had been established between the  respondent
       and his sisters at the time of the decision.

   14. I accordingly, set the decision of the FTTJ aside, albeit I  did  not
       disturb his findings of fact.

  Decision on remaking

   15. I was able to immediately remake the decision in this case on account
       of Mr Miah's acceptance that there was  no  further  evidence  to  be
       adduced.  I therefore invited submissions from both  representatives.
       Mr Miah summarised the FTTJ's findings at [15] and  [16]  and  argued
       that Article 8 was engaged. He considered that  this  case  could  be
       distinguished from that in SS (Congo) and that  the  simple  question
       was whether it was proportionate for the  ECO  to  refuse  entry.  He
       argued that there were special features to this case and there was no
       issue of a poor immigration history.

   16. Mr Tufan repeated his earlier submissions and argued  that  if  there
       were to be an issue of dependency now, this  would  tend  to  suggest
       that the respondent was intending a longer stay than suggested in his
       visa application. Mr Miah responded, urging me not to  entertain  any
       unfounded suspicions as to the respondent's motivation.

   17. I have been guided by what was said in the headnote  in  Adjei;  "The
       first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to  grant
       entry clearance as a visitor where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
       available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If  it
       is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has  no
       jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the  ECO
       under the Rules and should not do so. If article 8  is  engaged,  the
       Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which the claimant is said
       to have failed to meet the requirements of the rule..."

   18. As indicated above, I conclude the respondent did not enjoy a  family
       life with his sisters in the United Kingdom  after  March  2014.  The
       application  for  entry  was  made  in  September   2014   when   the
       respondent's needs were being addressed by his parents, with whom  he
       was intending to travel.

   19. I have also been guided by  [24] of Mostafa where  comment  was  made
       that "it will only be in  very  unusual  circumstances  that  someone
       other than a close relative will be able to show that the refusal  of
       entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1). In  practical
       terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is
       that of husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and
       minor child and even then it will  not  be  necessarily  extended  to
       cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based on  a  whim  or
       will not add significantly to the time that the people involved spend
       together. "

   20. Evidently, the respondent's relationship with his  sisters  does  not
       amount to that of a close life partner or parent and child and  there
       was no element of dependency  in  place  at  the  time  of  the  visa
       application. Furthermore, the respondent was  intending  a  visit  of
       only two months and the evidence of his sisters  was  not  that  they
       could not visit the appellant in Bangladesh ([26]  and  [27]  of  the
       decision) but that their work and childcare issues  meant  that  such
       visits could not be carried out in term time or their limited  annual
       leave had to be used. Therefore, even had I found there to be  family
       life, it is the case that the relationship between the parties, as at
       the time of the decision, could continue by way of  short  visits  by
       the sisters to the respondent in Bangladesh.

   21. As family life has not been established, there is no need for  me  to
       embark on a proportionality assessment.

   22. I accordingly allow the ECO's appeal.

  Decision


    1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law

    2) The decision of the FTTJ to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR  is
       set aside.

    3) I substitute a fresh decision  to  dismiss  the  respondent's  appeal
       under Article 8 ECHR.

  No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason  to  make
  such a direction.




  Signed    Date: 30 January 2016


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


  -----------------------
Appeal Number: VA/06614/2014


5



