

                                              [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
VA/06617/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 January 2016                 |            On 4  February 2016      |
|Prepared 28 January 2016           |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. N.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Uganda,  born  on  29  August  2007,
           applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom for four weeks  as
           a family visitor to her brother, sister, and aunt.
        2. The Respondent first refused entry clearance to the Appellant by
           decision made on 23 April 2014 [E4], and the Appellant's renewed
           application was refused on 24 September  2014  by  reference  to
           paragraph 41 (vi) and (vii) of the Immigration Rules. The Notice
           of Decision informed the Appellant that her right of appeal  was
           limited to the grounds identified in s84(1)(c) of the 2002  Act.
           She appealed that decision,  although  she  requested  that  the
           appeal be determined upon the papers before the Tribunal without
           a hearing. The Respondent raised no objection to that.
        3.  The  grounds  of  appeal  made   no   reference   to   unlawful
           discrimination, but they can and should  be  read  as  asserting
           that the decision was unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights  Act
           1998. The ECM reviewed the decision to refuse entry clearance on
           that basis on 2 February 2015, but chose to uphold it.
        4. The appeal was heard on the papers, and allowed  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 1 July  2015  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  K
           Lester.
        5. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Nicholson  dated  29
           September 2015 the First Tier Tribunal  granted  the  Respondent
           permission to appeal on the basis  it  was  arguable  there  had
           been a failure by the Judge to dispose of the appeal pursuant to
           the restricted grounds permitted by s88A of  the  2002  Act  (as
           amended), because the  Judge  had  failed  to  ask  the  primary
           question of whether Article 8 was engaged  by  the  decision  at
           all; Adeji (visit visas) Article 8) [2015] UKUT  261,  and,  had
           failed to identify that this was at best a "private life"  entry
           clearance  appeal  which  could  not   therefore   succeed;   SS
           (Malaysia) [2004] UKAIT 91, and to the extent that the Judge had
           considered the appeal as a "family life" appeal  had  failed  to
           apply the appropriate test.
        6. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice. Thus the matter comes
           before me.


      Error of law?
        7. I remind myself that  s85A  of  the  2002  Act  applied  to  the
           evidence admissible upon the appeal, and of  the  guidance  upon
           the proper approach to Article 8  cases  involving  applications
           for leave to enter that is to be found in Mostafa (Article 8  in
           entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112, and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
           387.
        8. As the Upper Tribunal set out in Mostafa  [9]  and  Kaur  (visit
           appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487, the Judge  was  obliged  to
           assess the evidence to decide  whether  the  Appellant  met  the
           substance of the Immigration Rules at the date of  decision,  as
           she claimed she did, or whether she did not, as  the  Respondent
           had claimed. Although that question did not arise directly as  a
           result of the limited ground of appeal  available,  it  was  the
           context in which the decision upon the Article 8 appeal  was  to
           be made. Thus the Judge did not fall into the  error  identified
           in Virk & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 652, or Mostafa  [11],  because
           she did not purport to allow the appeal  under  the  Immigration
           Rules.
        9. As set out in Kaur, even if an appellant can establish that they
           met the requirements of paragraph 41,  it  does  not  mean  that
           their Article 8 appeal is strengthened to the point that it must
           be allowed. Article 8 must first be shown to be engaged. As  was
           said in Mostafa the appellant must show that the denial  of  the
           visit has a material impact on their Article  8  rights,  before
           there is any consideration of the balance between the  competing
           interests of the individual, and the  state's  interest  in  the
           maintenance of effective immigration  controls.  In  SS  (Congo)
           [2015] EWCA Civ 387 it was said that  unless  an  appellant  can
           show that she has individual interests at stake that are covered
           by Article 8, and that are of "a particularly  pressing  nature"
           so  as  to  give  rise  to  a  "strong  claim  that   compelling
           circumstances may exist to justify the grant of LTE outside  the
           rules" she is exceedingly unlikely to succeed in  an  Article  8
           appeal.
       10. Although the Judge did direct herself that the "facts  as  found
           constitute an interference with the Appellant's right to respect
           for her family life"[14] it is very far from clear what findings
           of fact she is referring to. None of the facts  recited  in  the
           course of the decision that "this is a  genuine  family  visit",
           and the finding that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
           paragraph 41, would justify such  a  conclusion.  There  appears
           therefore to be, at best, some confusion  in  the  Judge's  mind
           over whether  a  genuine  intention  to  visit  members  of  the
           extended family  constitutes  part  of  "family  life"  for  the
           purposes of Article 8, when plainly rather  more  than  that  is
           required.
       11. In my judgement what was required, but did  not  occur,  was  an
           analysis of the evidence to identify whether the ties  with  the
           individuals relied upon had the necessary quality  required,  or
           whether this was in truth  a  "private  life"  appeal,  and  the
           elements of that which were relied upon; Marckx v Belgium [1980]
           2EHRR 330 and Singh v ECO New Delhi [2004] EWCA  Civ  1075,  and
           Abbasi (visits - bereavement - Article 8 [2015] UKUT 463
       12. It follows that I must set aside the decision and remake  it.  I
           do so on the papers  filed  for  the  original  appeal,  as  the
           parties had requested the First Tier Tribunal to do, and as  the
           sponsor confirmed before me he was content that I should do.


      Decision remade
       13. I am not satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
           immigration decision under  appeal  did  engage  the  Article  8
           rights of the Appellant, because I am  not  satisfied  that  the
           documentary evidence she offered to the Judge  established  that
           she had a "family  life"  at  the  date  of  decision  with  the
           individuals she would be prevented from visiting as a result  of
           that  decision.  The  evidence  does  not  establish  that   the
           relationship she has with those relatives goes beyond the normal
           emotional ties between adult relatives of the type identified in
           the  evidence.   Whilst   her   desire   to   visit   them   was
           understandable and genuine, as  the  Judge  accepted,  and  thus
           could constitute a part of her  "private  life"  for  Article  8
           purposes, this was not a "discrete facet" situation of the  type
           rehearsed in Abbasi. Thus Article  8  was  not  engaged  by  the
           decision under appeal, and the Article 8 appeal  must  therefore
           be dismissed.


   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  1
      July 2015 did involve the making of an error of law in the decision to
      allow the appeal on human rights grounds that requires  that  decision
      to be set aside and remade.


      The appeal is dismissed.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  her.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated: 28 January 2016
