
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/06839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Given extempore                           |                                  |
|on 9th December, 2016                     |On 04th January, 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MS MST ANWARA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance by or on behalf of the respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  and  to  avoid
    confusion I shall refer to her as being the, "claimant".

2.   The respondent is a national of Bangladesh, aged 71, having  been  born
    on 4th February, 1945.  She made application  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in Dhaka for the grant of  a  family  visit  visa.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused the application on 1st  October,  2014.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had
    presented a clear and cogent picture of her overall  circumstances  and
    means of support in Bangladesh.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the respondent was seeking entry as a  visitor  for  the
    limited period stated by her and that she intended to leave at the  end
    of her visit.

3.   The  respondent  appealed  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P B Conrath at Taylor House on 29th January, 2016.   The
    judge considered the reasons for the Entry Clearance Officer's decision
    and concluded that the Entry Clearance Officer was wrong in deciding as
    he did.  The judge concluded, therefore, that that the Entry  Clearance
    Officer acted both unlawfully and unfairly.  At paragraph 24 the  judge
    said:

         "I therefore find that it has been  established  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities, that the Appellant is a 'genuine  visitor'  and  she
         intends to return to Bangladesh at the conclusion of her visit.   I
         find, therefore, that it has been established that  she  meets  the
         requirements of sub-sections (i) and (ii) of paragraph  41  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Following on from that, I find that  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer acted unlawfully and unfairly in  coming  to  the
         conclusions he did, and  that  those  were  incompatible  with  the
         Appellant's Convention rights, and amounted to a breach of  Section
         6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1988."


     In paragraph 25 of the determination the judge said this:

         "I find that it is a breach of both the  Appellant's  rights  under
         Article 6 and Article 8 of the ECHR in the circumstances."


4.   The judge went on to allow the appeal.

5.   The claimant, dissatisfied with the decision, sought  leave  to  appeal
    and in granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes said this:

         "2.  In is arguable that the Judge erred in addressing  himself  to
             Article 6 in an entry clearance appeal rather  than  confining
             himself to Article 8; Sun Myung Moon [2005] UKIAT 112.


         3.   It is also arguable that the Judge erred in  his  approach  to
             the  issue  of  whether  'family  life'  existed  between  the
             [Respondent], an adult, and those she declared an intention to
             visit, who were also adults.  On the evidence  offered  it  is
             arguable  that  'family  life'  could  not  exist   with   the
             {Respondent's] grandchildren.  Absent the existence of 'family
             life' at the date of decision then arguably Article 8 was  not
             engaged at all by the decision under appeal.   The  assumption
             appears to have been since there was some family  relationship
             with the individuals in  the  UK  then  they  necessarily  all
             enjoyed 'family life' together  and  thus  the  decision  must
             necessarily engage Article  8.   Arguably  that  approach  was
             incorrect and failed to apply the relevant jurisprudence.


         4.   In any event it is arguable that the Judge then erred  in  his
             approach to proportionality.  The  approach  appears  to  have
             been that since he had concluded this  was  as  he  put  it  a
             'genuine visit' it was necessarily disproportionate to  refuse
             it.  Again, arguably, that approach was flawed,  and  took  no
             account of the fact that  the  sponsor  and  his  family  were
             perfectly capable of visiting the [respondent]  in  Bangladesh
             so that either there  was  no  material  interference  in  the
             'private life' or 'family life' of either the [respondent]  or
             the sponsor or, that there was no adequate assessment  of  the
             proportionality of the decision under appeal in the  light  of
             s117A; Kaur [2015] UKUT 487."

 6.  At the hearing before me today Mr Wilding appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  There was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  respondent.
    Notice of the Hearing had been sent to both  the  sponsor  and  to  the
    respondent's solicitors by prepaid first class post on  23rd  November,
    2016.  The respondent's solicitors responded by letter to the  Tribunal
    on 7th December, 2016, indicating that they were  without  instructions
    and would not be attending the hearing.  I delayed starting the hearing
    until 11:10 but by 11:10 there was still no appearance by, or on behalf
    of the sponsor who, in the Notice of Hearing had been advised to attend
    fifteen minutes prior to the hearing which was listed at  10:00am.   In
    the circumstances, I concluded that I had been offered  no  explanation
    for the sponsor's non-appearance and concluded that I was  required  to
    proceed with the hearing of the appeal in the absence of the sponsor.

7.   Mr Wilding drew my attention to paragraphs 24 and  25  of  the  judge's
    determination and suggested that that was where the judge  appeared  to
    first get into difficulties.  He told me that he would  be  relying  on
    Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  0261.   I  reserved  my
    decision.

8.    I  have  concluded  that  the  judge  did  materially   err   in   his
    determination.  The  judge's  consideration  of  Article  8  starts  at
    paragraph 27of the determination.  I agree with Mr  Wilding,  that  the
    judge first started getting into difficulty at paragraphs  24  and  25.
    There is no appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Parliament  having
    decided to withdraw appeal rights in respect  of  visit  visa  appeals.
    The judge was wrong  therefore,  to  find  that  the  respondent  is  a
    "genuine visitor".  However, the Tribunal  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00122  found  that  in  cases  of  appeals
    brought against refusal of entry clearance under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    the respondent's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules  is  not  the
    question to be determined by the Tribunal.  It is capable  of  being  a
    weighty though not  determinative  factor  when  deciding  whether  the
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing control.  J
    makes it clear that the first  question  to  be  addressed  in  appeals
    against refusal of entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights
    grounds are available, is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is  engaged  at
    all.  Judge Conrath did not do that.

9.   The judge appears to have assumed that there was Article 8 family  life
    in existence.  The Tribunal pointed out in J that if Article 8  is  not
    engaged, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to embark on an assessment of the decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer under the Rules "and should not do so" [My emphasis].
     If Article 8 is engaged, then the Tribunal may need  to  look  at  the
    extent to which the claim is said to have met the requirements  of  the
    Rules, because they may inform the proportionality  balancing  exercise
    that may follow.

10.  It is clear that Judge Conrath did not first consider  whether  or  not
    there was family  life,  but  merely  assumed  that  it  existed.   The
    relationship between the respondent and her adult son  is  one  between
    adult relatives disclosing no aspect of any  dependency  or  being  any
    different from what one might expect to be the case  between  an  adult
    mother and her adult son.  There is no  evidence  of  any  particularly
    strong relationship between the respondent and her son over  and  above
    that relationship and no evidence of any financial  dependency.   There
    is no reason why those relationships between an  adult  respondent  and
    her adult son and infant grandchildren cannot be maintained  in  a  way
    that relatives who have chosen to live in different countries manage to
    do.  There is no good reason why UK based relatives  cannot  visit  the
    respondent in Bangladesh, although  I  accept  that  at  the  time  the
    respondent's reasons for coming to the United Kingdom were to  see  her
    eldest son and grandchild and  to  attend  her  eldest  granddaughter's
    birthday party which was due to take place on 15th November, 2014.

Notice of Decision

11.  Having concluded that Article 8 is not  engaged,  I  believe  that  the
    judge has materially erred in law since, on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge, the circumstances of  this  respondent  and  her  son  and  this
    respondent and her grandchildren did not give rise to family  life  for
    the purposes of Article 8.  I substitute a fresh  decision  to  dismiss
    the respondent's appeal against refusal to grant her entry clearance as
    a visitor.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the upper Tribunal
