

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 May 2014                                |On 2 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             MRS SHAHEEN AKHTAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A Raja, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen allowing the visit appeal of the
    appellant.  The judge also allowed the appeal of the appellant's
    daughter, Miss Arzoo Ibrar, who was born on 16 March 2008.  Miss
    Ibrar's appeal number is VA/06338/2013.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 January 1987.  On 1
    February 2013 she made an application, with her daughter as her
    dependant, to visit the UK.  At part 7, question 96 she named the
    relative she would be visiting as Mohammed Azam and said in answer to
    question 101 that he was her uncle.  In part 7 - other close family
    members in the UK, at question 115 she named a number of relatives
    including Muhammad "Nazir" Khan as her grandfather.  Counsel said
    "Nazir" should read "Wazir".

3.   The ECO refused the applications on 17 February 2013.  In respect of
    the appellant, the respondent stated that because the person she is
    visiting is her uncle, he is not a qualified family member as defined
    by the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012.
    Therefore the refusal of her entry clearance application attracts a
    limited right of appeal.  This was not repeated in the respondent's
    refusal of Arzoo Ibrar's application.  I note that in Arzoo Ibrar's
    application, it said that she would stay with Mohammed Azam, who is her
    grandparent.  Mohammed Azam is the uncle Shaheen Akhtar said in her
    application that she would be staying with.   The appellants appealed
    and their appeals were heard on 17 February 2014 by FtTJ Cohen and, as
    already stated, he allowed both appeals.  He found that the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law and
    Immigration Rules applicable.

4.   The respondent was not granted permission to appeal the decision in
    respect of Arzoo Ibrar because "The UK sponsor was her grandfather and
    the judge made no arguable error of law in allowing the appeal on the
    ground that the decision was not in accordance with the rules".  As to
    whether this was correct was another matter, given that Mohammed Azam
    could not be her grandfather, if he is the uncle of her mother.

5.   The respondent argued in respect of this appellant, that the judge
    erred in law by making a material misdirection of law on a material
    matter.  The appellant had only a limited right of appeal by reason of
    the effect of the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012
    and that the judge failed to make any findings on these grounds.
    Permission was granted by First-tier Judge Pooler who stated that the
    UK sponsor was the appellant's uncle.  The judge arguably erred in law
    since the appellant arguably had a right of appeal on limited grounds
    which did not include the ground that the decision was not in
    accordance with the rules.

6.   The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision in respect of
    Shaheen Akhtar on 16 September 2013.  He said as follows as paragraph
    3:

         ... I note that under the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)
         Regulations 2012, the appellant's uncle is not considered a
         qualified family member.  The sponsorship declaration and documents
         provided and passport copy provided states that they are related at
         uncle/niece, and the grandfather in which the appellant refers has
         never been demonstrated and his settled status has never been
         evidenced.  The appellant was correctly afforded a Limited Right of
         Appeal.

7.   In a letter sent to the Tribunal on behalf of the appellant on 5 May
    2014, it was said that on behalf of the Secretary of State, no
    representations were made as to jurisdiction at the hearing and there
    were no documents before the Tribunal (apart from the initial refusal
    letter) suggesting it initially was.  The Tribunal was asked to accept
    the letter as an application to adduce evidence of the grandfather's
    status.  The evidence was a copy of the grandfather's British passport.
     It was said that this evidence was in the possession of the sponsor at
    the hearing and that he would have produced it had he been asked for
    it.  In any event it was not before the ECO or the judge and did not
    feature in the respondent's appeal.  It was therefore evidence that I
    could take into account in deciding whether the judge erred in law.

8.   I find that jurisdiction was material in this appellant's appeal.  The
    appellant was granted a limited right of appeal because Mohammed Azam
    Khan was her uncle and therefore not a qualified family member.  In his
    undated witness statement, which was before me, Mr Khan confirmed that
    he is the appellant's uncle as he and the appellant's mother are
    brother and sister.  He said his father, Mohammed Wazir Khan is the
    appellant's grandfather.  I note that Wazir Khan was one of the "other"
    family members named in the appellant's visa application.

9.   I find that the judge did not make any findings on the grounds in
    relation to the appellant's limited appeal rights.   It follows that
    the judge's decision was materially flawed and should be set aside.  I
    do not, for the avoidance of doubt, uphold any of the findings made by
    the judge.

10.  Rather than dismissing the appeal, I have decided to remit the case
    back to the ECO for reconsideration of the appellant's application.
    This is because the Entry Clearance Manager's decision at paragraph 3
    seemed to imply that had there been evidence of the settled status of
    the appellant's grandfather, the appellant's application might have
    been considered differently.

11.  The appellant's case is remitted to the ECO.








Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
