
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
VA/06872/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                          |On 12 May 2016                |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                HEBA ABULELA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Not represented
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant, a national of Egypt was  born  on
   23 April 1991.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary  of  State  dated  13  October  2014  to  refuse  to  grant  an
   application for entry clearance as a family visitor to see her sister for
   6 months. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shamash  allowed  the  appeal  under
   Article 8  and  the  Respondent  now  appeals  with  permission  to  this
   Tribunal.
3. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was  he  represented  at  the
   appeal by the Sponsor. I am satisfied that due notice of the  appeal  was
   served upon the Appellant and Sponsor at the address that was given. I am
   therefore satisfied that having been served notice of the hearing and not
   attended it is in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in
   the Appellant's absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph  38
   of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
4. At the hearing before me Mr Harrison relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal
   arguing that the Judge had erred in failing to adequately address why  in
   this case family life existed between adult siblings.
Error of Law
5. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in his assessment of whether family life existed  in
   this case which involved two adult siblings.
6. I am satisfied that while the Judge corrected directed herself as to  the
   appropriate test to be applied under Article 8 in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27
   at paragraph 16. However I am satisfied that given  that  in  Kugathas  v
   SSHD (2003) INLR 170   the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that,  in  order  to
   establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a  real
   committed or effective support or relationship between the family members
   and the normal emotional ties between a mother and  an  adult  son  would
   not, without more, be enough and that  more  recently  in  a  visit  visa
   appeal case of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112
   (IAC) at paragraph 24 the court said:
   "We are, however, prepared to say that it will only be  in  very  unusual
   circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be  able  to
   show that the refusal of  entry  clearance  comes  within  the  scope  of
   Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely to be  limited  to  cases
   where the relationship is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life
   partners or  a  parent  and  minor  child  and  even  then  it  will  not
   necessarily be extended to cases where, for example, the  proposed  visit
   is based on a whim or will not add significantly to  the  time  that  the
   people involved spend together. "

7. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine  why  the
   relationship  between  these  adult  siblings  constituted  family   life
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise  the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply. I therefore
   set the decision aside.

Remaking the Decision

8. I have considered the evidence before me in order  to  determine  whether
   Article 8, the only ground of appeal in this refusal of  entry  clearance
   as a visitor, is engaged given that the 24 year old  Appellant  seeks  to
   visit the Sponsor her sister Iman Abulela who is 33 years old.

9. I note that the Appellant lives in Egypt and there is no evidence  before
   me of when they last  lived  together  as  a  family.  I  note  that  the
   Appellant has previously visited the Sponsor in the UK in the past as one
   would expect from adult siblings. There is no evidence of  any  emotional
   or financial dependency and the purpose of the visit was expressed to  be
   'sightseeing in North Wales Spend time with my sister and nephew help  my
   sister with childcare for  my  nephew.'  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
   relationship described in the documents before me goes beyond the  normal
   emotional ties of adult siblings who live entirely independent  lives  in
   different countries.

10. I therefore find that given that my answer to the first  question  posed
   in Razgar is 'No' that  Article  8  is  not  engaged  in  this  case  and
   therefore the appeal must fail.

Decision

11. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

12. I remake the appeal.

13. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds
Signed                                                              Date
9.5.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
